Title: Select English Works of John Wyclif, Vol. III (Miscellaneous
  Works)
Creator: John Wyclif (c. 1330-1384) (Thomas Arnold, Editor)
Publisher: Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1871
Rights: Public Domain
Rights basis: Published 1871; public domain by date. Archive.org item
  metadata carries no access-restricted-item flag, confirming open
  access, checked directly against the item's own metadata, 2026-09-25,
  this session.
Source: Internet Archive item afb3713.0003.001.umich.edu
  (archive.org/details/afb3713.0003.001.umich.edu), fetched directly
  (curl, raw bytes, direct datanode) from the item's own _djvu.txt
  full-text file, 2026-09-25, this session. University of Michigan's
  Corpus of Middle English Prose and Verse digitization.
Provenance note: Body text unaltered including its own OCR errors
  (Middle English orthography renders inconsistently through OCR); not
  independently spot-checked for OCR quality beyond the opening pages
  and a mid-document sample this session.

\l 


I 


1 7-  t 

*  t 

-  n 


ij' 


WYCLIF 


SELECT  ENGLISH  WORKS 


VOL,  III. 


MACMILLAN   AND   CO. 


PUBLISHERS  TO  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF 


h-r^  0 


SELECT    ENGLISH    WORKS 


OF 


JOHN    WYCLIF 


/,-     "N 


/   '      r,\ 


EDITED    FROM   ORIGINAL   MSS. 

BY 

THOMAS    ARNOLD,    M.A. 

OF   UNIVERSITY  COLLEGE,   OXFORD 


UNIVERSITY      LIBRARY 

QDDDD 


DS 


CAUTION  —  Please  handle  this  volume  with  care. 
The  paper  is  very  brittle. 


M  DCCC  LXXI 


\All  rights  reserved'] 


INTRODUCTION. 


Arrangement. — The  present  volume  of  Wyclif 's  works  consists  of 
a  selection  from  his  miscellaneous  English  writings.  Out  of  the  thirty- 
three  pieces  which  the  volume  contains,  only  eight  (Nos.  XV,  XXIII, 
XXIV,  XXVI,  and  XXX— XXXIV)  have  been  ever  printed  before; 
and  several  of  these  are  both  short  and  unimportant.  It  was  difficult 
to  find  a  convenient  principle  of  arrangement.  To  print  them  in  the 
order  of  composition  was  impossible,  there  being  no  means  of  fixing 
with  anything  like  certainty,  in  regard  to  a  large  proportion  of  them,* 
the  period  of  Wyclif's  life  to  which  they  should  be  referred.  On  the 
whole,  it  seemed  best  to  divide  them  into  three  portions, — one  con- 
sisting of  treatises  of  an  exegetical,  didactic,  or  devotional  character, 
commencing  with  the  longest.  Super  Cantica  Sacra,  and  arranging 
the  rest,  so  far  as  possible,  according  to  the  dignity  of  their  subject- 
matter  ; — the  second  consisting  of  Controversial  Tracts,  which  every 
effort  has  been  made  to  arrange  chronologically ; — the  third  containing 
the  few  English  documents  of  a  personal  character,  such  as  letters 
and  declaratory  statements,  which  time  and  persecution — though  the 
former  is  far  less  responsible  for  the  paucity  of  them  than  the  latter 
— have  spared  to  our  times. 

Grounds  of  Selection  and  Exclusion, — Something  must  now 
be  said  as  to  the  grounds  of  selection.  The  Catalogtie  published 
by  Dr.  Shirley  contains  sixty-five  English  works  ascribed  to  Wyclif. 
The  present  edition  contains  thirty-two  of  these,  and  portions  of 
another.  Thirty-two  remain  unprinted  on  one  or  other  of  the 
following  grounds, — either  that   they  are  certainly   not   by  Wyclif, 


vi  INTRODUCTION. 

or  that  their  authenticity  is  more  doubtful  than  that  of  those 
selected,  or  that  they  are  in  themselves  less  valuable,  or  that  they 
have  been  already  frequently  printed.  The  works  excluded  under 
each  of  these  heads  are  the  following  : — 

1.  No.  I  in  the  Catalogue,  ^'E^xly  English  Sermons,'  is  certainly 
no  work  of  Wyclif 's ;  see  vol.  i.  p.  iii.  No.  9,  the  '  Commentary 
on  the  Apocal}^se,'  may  be  excluded  no  less  positively ;  see  vol.  i. 
p.  vi.  No.  II,  entitled  'Speculum  Vitae  Christianae/  led  to  a  great 
amount  of  investigation,  in  which  I  was  much  assisted  by  Professor 
Stubbs.  It  was  at  last  clearly  established,  that  out  of  eight  pieces 
included  in  the  Catalogue  under  that  title,  Nos.  x  and  7  did  not 
belong  to  Wyclif,  but  were  a  little  '  Manual  of  Religious  Instruction,' 
compiled  in  English  by  the  direction  of  Thoresby,  Archbishop  of 
York,  in  the  year  1357,  and  circulated  among  the  clergy  and  laity 
of  his  province.     See  Fasti  Ehoracenses,  art.  '  Thoresby.' 

2.  On  the  more  than  doubtful  authenticity  of  the  three  Commen- 
taries on  the  Evangelists,  included  in  the  Catalogue,  Nos.  6,  7,  8, 
I  have  spoken  at  p.  iv  of  the  Introduction  to  vol.  i. 

A  large  body  of  tracts  has  to  be  considered  under  this  head,  all  of 
which  are  included  in  a  well-known  volume,  belonging  to  Corpus 
College,  Cambridge,  to  which  it,  along  with  other  valuable  MSS., 
was  bequeathed  by  Archbishop  Parker.  These  are  numbered  in 
Shirley's  Catalogue,  12—14,  16 — 20,  25 — 34,  and  37.  No  external 
evidence  helps  us  to  determine  the  authorship  of  these  tracts;  no 
clear  internal  allusions  to  current  events  enable  us  to  say  positively, 
either  that  they  were,  or  were  not,  written  by  Wyclif.  Even  the 
frequent  references  which  many  of  them  contain  to  *  brenning,'  and 
other  forms  of  persecution,  though  I  certainly  think  that  they  increase 
the  probability  of  their  having  been  composed  not  earlier  than  the 
fifteenth  century,  and  therefore  not  by  Wyclif,  do  not,  as  I  have 
shown  in  the  Introduction  to  vol.  i.  (pp.  viii — xii)  absolutely  preclude 
the  supposition  of  his  authorship.  The  ground  on  which  these  tracts 
were  excluded  was  simply  this, — ^that  after  carefully  reading  them 
through,  I  considered  that,  whether  from  the  absence  of  a  tone  of 
authority,  or  from  the  contractedness  and  poverty  of  the  style,  or 


INTRODUCTION,  vii 

from  peculiarities  of  diction,  or  from  the  multiplied  indications  of 
a  period  of  active  persecution,  it  was  more  probable  that  they  pro- 
ceeded from  some  Lollard  pen,  writing  from  ten  to  thirty  years  after 
the  reformer's  death,  than  from  Wyclif's. 

No.  47,  '  Tractatus  de  pseudo  Freris,'  I  found  to  be,  on  examining 
it  in  the  imique  copy  belonging  to  Trinity  College,  Dublin,  a  fierce 
indictment  in  many  counts  against  the  friars.  I  could  find  nothing 
to  throw  fight  on  its  date  or  authorship ;  and  if  I  exclude  it,  it  is 
rather  because  the  edition  contains  already  so  many  denunciations 
of  the  friars,  than  on  account  of  any  opinion  which  I  have  formed 
adverse  to  its  authenticity. 

No.  48  has  been  excluded  for  the  reasons  stated  in  vol.  i.  p.  vu. 
On  Nos.  61  and  62,  entitled  in  the  Catalogue  'De  Officio  Pastorafi' 
and  '  De  Papa,'  I  have  had  no  opportunity  of  forming  an  opinion. 
They  form  portions  of  an  unique  MS.  belonging  to  Lord  Ashburn- 
ham,  to  whom  appHcations  have  been  made,  both  by  private  persons, 
and  by  the  Vice-Chancellor  in  the  name  of  the  Delegates  of  the 
University  Press,  for  permission  to  inspect  the  MS.,  and  have  these 
tracts  transcribed  if  it  were  deemed  expedient.  To  these  applications 
no  answer  has  been  returned. 

3.  Nos.  51  and  58,  entitled  *  De  Confessione  et  Poenitentia'  and 
*De  Dominio  Divino,'  were  examined  by  me  on  the  visit  which  I 
made  to  DubHn  for  the  purposes  of  this  edition.  The  first  treats  of 
private  confession,  to  which  '  general  shrifte  and  opyn '  is  preferred. 
The  second  attacks  Church  endowments,  and  the  possession  of 
temporal  lordships  and  privileges  by  the  clergy.  It  is  quite  possible 
that  both  these  pieces  may  have  been  written  by  WycHf ;  but  as  the 
arguments  which  they  contain  are  repeated  in  various  passages  of  the 
Sermons  and  Tracts  now  printed,  and  as  they  present  no  features 
of  peculiar  interest,  I  decided  upon  excluding  them.  No.  41,  'Of 
Faith,  Hope,  and  Charity,'  a  copy  of  which  is  contained  in  a  MS. 
belonging  to  New  CoUege,  Oxford,  is  not  improbably  the  work  of 
WycHf;  but  as  I  found  it  to  be  a  remarkably  dull  composition,  and 
to  contain  not  a  single  new  idea,  I  deemed  it  unnecessary  to  print  it. 

4.  There   remain   the  compositions  entered  in  the   Catalogue  as 


viii  IN  TR  OD  UCTION. 

'  Single  Sermons/  (No.  3).  The  first  of  these,  '  Wyclyffe's  Wycket/ 
a  sermon  on  the  Eucharist,  has  been  so  often  printed  that  it  seems 
needless  to  add  it  to  this  selection,  more  especially  as  no  MS.  is 
known  to  exist,  so  that  the  means  of  establishing  a  correct  text  are 
wanting.  Moreover,  the  line  of  argument  adopted  in  the  ^  Wycket ' 
is  reproduced  in  more  than  one  passage  of  the  present  edition ;  see 
e.g.  vol.  iii.  pp.  403 — 410.  With  regard  to  the  other  ^  Single 
Sermons,'  there  is  no  evidence  of  any  kind  to  connect  any  of  them 
with  Wyclif,  except  perhaps  that  entitled  'De  Sacramento  Altaris,' 
which  is  found  in  the  best  MSS.  of  Wyclifs  Sermons,  inserted 
between  the  Vae  Oduplex  and  the  Sermons  for  the  Commune 
Sanctorum.  It  contains,  however,  nothing  on  the  subject  of  the 
Eucharist  that  is  not  repeatedly  advanced  in  different  places  of 
the  works  now  published. 

Such,  then,  have  been  the  grounds  of  exclusion.  The  grounds 
of  inclusion  are  stated  briefly  in  the  prefatory  notices  prefixed  to  the 
several  treatises. 

General  Eemarks. — The  reader  will  naturally  wish  to  know  at 
what  period  of  Wyclifs  life  the  various  works  composing  this  edition 
were  written.  So  far  as  the  means  of  answering  this  question  exist, 
the  evidence  points  with  singular  uniformity  to  the  last  six  or  seven 
years  of  Wyclifs  life,  as  the  period  within  which  all  the  literary 
activity  to  which  these  volumes  bear  witness  was  exhibited.  In  his 
earlier  years,  while  he  was  a  student,  and  then  a  doctor,  at  Oxford,  he 
naturally  wrote  in  Latin,  the  common  tongue  of  the  learned.  But  as 
he  grew  old,  many  circumstances  would  concur  in  leading  him  to 
employ  more  frequently  the  native  speech;  such  as  the  fame  of 
Chaucer,  the  example  of  Gower,  the  continual  advances  made  by 
English  upon  French  as  the  language  of  the  upper  classes,  the  interest 
which  his  great  enterprise  of  translating  the  Bible  into  English  must 
have  caused  him  to  take  in  his  mother  tongue,  and,  lastly,  the  neces- 
sity, as  the  contest  between  him  and  his  opponents  increased  in 
bitterness,  of  enlisting  support  for  his  opinions  among  the  laity.  He 
must  have  had  something  of  the  feeling  expressed  in  the  line  '  Flectere 
si  nequeo  superos,'  &c. ;  if  he  could  not  convince  the  bishops  or  the 


I N TROD  UCTION.  ix 

abbots,  he  would  arouse,  in  the  fresher  hearts  and  unwarped  under- 
standings of  the  common  people,  an  emotion  which  would  sooner  or 
later  be  fatal  to  the  strongholds  of  ecclesiastical  corruption. 

On  the  general  moral  bearing  of  the  works  contained  in  this 
edition, — much  less  on  their  theological  value, — it  is  not  my  intention 
to  enlarge.  But  any  one  who  looks  even  cursorily  through  these 
volumes  will  at  once  perceive  that  they  exhibit  everywhere  a  vehement 
and  uncompromising  spirit, — a  spirit  which  menaced  what  it  attacked, 
not  with  reform,  but  with  destruction.  The  feeling  of  Wyclif  towards 
the  friars  seems  to  have  amounted  to  positive  hatred,  of  which  Aristotle 
tells  us  that  one  characteristic  is  to  desire  the  annihilation  of  its  objects, 
— \ir\  €tj/ai^:  he  calls  upon  lords  and  gentlemen  to  unite  with  the 
reforming  clergy  in  suppressing  the  friars  altogether.  Not  one  redeem- 
ing feature  is  allowed  them ;  not  a  single  ray  of  light  relieves  the  awful 
shadows  of  the  portrait  which  he  draws  of  them.  The  superior  clergy, 
— bishops,  deans,  and  archdeacons, — the  various  orders  of  monks, 
and  the  canons  secular  and  regulai*,  of  whom  there  were  at  that  time 
numerous  communities  in  England,  are  all  denounced  with  nearly 
equal  bitterness,  and  with  as  little  allowance  for  any  good  qualities 
which  they  might  possess.  Now,  that  the  portrait  which  Wyclif 
draws  of  his  adversaries  is  an  entirely  fair  and  truthful  one,  cannot 
seem  probable  to  any  reasonable  man.  William  of  Wykeham,  the 
model  prelate  of  those  times,  was  not  a  saint,  but  he  certainly  was 
still  less  that  monster  of  simony,  hypocrisy,  pride,  and  sensuality, 
which  the  imagination  of  Wyclif  creates  as  the  normal  character  of 
an  English  bishop.  And  in  spite  of  abuses,  the  same  is  true  of  the 
monks  and  friars.  In  short,  the  maxim  ^  Audi  alteram  partem '  holds 
good,  as  much  with  regard  to  the  English  Church  in  the  fourteenth 
century,  as  it  does  with  regard  to  any  other  institution  in  any  other 
age.  The  writings  of  WycHf  and  the  Lollards  ought  to  be  taken  in 
connection  with  the  great  apologetic  reply  of  Thomas  of  Walden,  the 
Doctrinale  Fidei.  This  Carmelite  friar,  the  friend  and  confessor  of 
Henry  V,  the  correspondent  of  Pope  Martin  V,  the  trusted  emissary 

°  Rhet.  \\.  4. 
VOL.    III.  b 


X  INTRODUCTION. 

of  kings  and  prelates,  was  an  exceedingly  copious  and  able  writer ; 
and  it  cannot  be  doubted  that  justice  will  one  day  be  done  him,  by 
making  known  through  a  translation  portions  of  the  Doctrinale  to  the 
English  public.  But,  able  as  it  is,  this  work  is  equally  one-sided  and 
uncompromising  with  Wyclif's  tracts.  If  Wyclif  would  not  allow 
a  single  merit  to  the  friars,  Walden  cannot,  or  will  not,  discern  a 
single  defect.  The  judicial  temper  is  alike  alien  to  both.  Thus  pro- 
claiming war  to  the  knife,  the  conservative  and  reforming  parties  in 
the  English  Church,  finding  no  common  ground,  persecuted  and 
expelled  each  other  in  turn.  The  conservative  forces,  thanks  to  the 
statute  De  Haeretico  comburendo  and  the  organization  of  a  kind  of 
English  Inquisition  by  Archbishop  Chicheley,  completely  triumphed 
at  first,  and  Lollardism  was,  not  extinguished,  but  trampled  out  of 
sight.  The  court,  though  the  temptation  to  follow  Wyclif 's  advice, 
and  relieve  its  own  and  the  nation's  burdens  by  sequestrating  a  por- 
tion of  the  enormous  wealth  of  the  Church,  must  have  been  very 
great,  did  not  feel  strong  enough  as  yet  to  dispense  with  the  political 
support  of  the  hierarchy ;  nor  had  any  examples  of  successful  enter- 
prises of  the  kind  as  yet  been  given  on  the  continent.  Perhaps  too, 
the  scandals  and  abuses  were  not  then  quite  so  flagrant  as  the  Lol- 
lards painted  them.  When,  however,  in  the  sixteenth  century,  all 
these  circumstances  were  reversed,  and  the  movement  party,  standing 
to  a  great  extent  in  a  true  line  of  filiation  from  the  old  Lollards,  but 
much  moderated  owing  to  the  accession  of  bishops  and  other  dig- 
nitaries to  its  ranks,  obtained  liberty  of  action,  it  is  no  w^onder  if  no 
more  mercy  was  shown  to  the  monks  and  friars,  than  they  had  shown 
to  the  Lollards.  So  little  did  Englishmen,  till  the  civil  war  of  the 
seventeenth  century,  understand  that  spirit  of  compromise  and  gradual 
change,  which,  since  that  epoch,  has  been  the  main  preservative  of 
our  national  institutions. 

List  of  MSS.,  &e. — A  description  of  the  MSS.  from  which  the 
miscellaneous  works  have  been  transcribed,  in  continuation  of  the 
list  given  at  p.  xvii  of  vol.  i.,  is  here  inserted;  to  which  is  added 
a  list  of  the  chief  works  from  which  information  may  be  derived 
concerning  the  life  and  opinions  of  Wyclif.     A  complete  catalogue 


INTRODUCTION.  xi 

of  the  English  works  ascribed  to  Wyclif  has  been  also  compiled, 
based  on  that  prepared  by  Dr.  Shirley,  but  including  a  detailed  com- 
parison with,  and  reference  to,  the  lists  of  Bale  and  Lewis. 

In  conclusion,  it  becomes  my  duty, — a  duty  w^hich  I  have  the  greatest 
satisfaction  in  performing, — to  return  my  sincere  thanks  to  those 
from  whose  advice  and  assistance  I  have  benefited  in  the  preparation 
of  the  Miscellaneous  Works  for  the  press.  With  regard  to  these,  as 
before  in  the  case  of  the  Sermons,  I  have  received  from  Professor 
Stubbs  much  valuable  aid.  I  beg  also  to  thank  the  Rev.  H.  O.  Coxe, 
Bodley's  Librarian,  for  the  kind  promptitude  with  which  he  has  for- 
warded any  investigations  which  it  was  necessary  to  make.  To  Mr. 
Lewis,  Fellow  of  Corpus  Christi  College,  Cambridge,  I  am  greatly 
indebted  for  the  pains  which  he  took  to  render  the  task  of  consulting 
an  important  MS.  in  the  library  of  his  college  as  easy  for  me  as  pos- 
sible, notwithstanding  the  well-known  stringency  of  the  founder's 
regulations.  I  have  to  thank  my  friend  Mr.  Furnivall  for  his  unvary- 
ing sympathy,  and  for  many  a  well-timed  suggestion.  I  have  also  to 
thank  Mr.  W.  A.  Wright,  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge,  and  Mr. 
Hunt,  librarian  of  Trinity  College,  Dublin,  for  assistance  kindly 
rendered.  I  will  venture,  lastly,  to  add  the  name  of  my  daughter, 
Miss  Mary  Arnold,  whose  co-operation  has  been  of  great  service 
to  me  in  various  ways. 

It  only  remains  to  add,  with  reference  to  the  entire  edition,  that 
my  sincerest  acknowledgments  are  due  to  the  Delegates  of  the  Press, 
for  having,  after  the  lamented  death  of  Professor  Shurley  had  caused 
the  editorial  function  to  devolve  upon  one  of  so  far  inferior  qualifica- 
tions, extended  to  me  nevertheless,  through  the  whole  course  of  the 
undertaking,  the  kindest  consideration  and  encouragement. 

Oxford,  Jamia7y  J  187 1. 


b  2 


LIST  OF  MSS.  OF  THE   MISCELLANEOUS 

WORKS. 


Title  of  MS. 


Bodl.  288. 


Magd.  Coll. 
Oxford,  52. 

Bodl.  789. 


Distinguishing 
Letter. 


Description. 


Bodl.  647. 


W. 


C.  C.  C.  Camb. 
296. 


Lambeth  408. 


Y. 


A  fine  folio,  double  columned  and  well  orna- 
mented, containing,  besides  the  '  Super  Cantica 
Sacra,'  nothing  but  Hampole's  Psalter  and  Com- 
mentary, itic.  *  Grete  haboundance.' 

A  small  thick  volume,  containing  exactly  what  is 
contained  in  Bodl.  288,  of  which  I  am  inclined 
to  think  it  a  copy. 

This  is  a  beautiful  text,  written  in  clear  sharply 
cut  regular  characters  on  the  finest  vellum,  with 
elaborate  rubrics  and  illuminations ;  size  about 
that  of  an  octavo  volume.  It  is  a  collection  of 
devotional  and  hortatory  pieces,  made  probably 
for  some  person  of  rank.  Besides  II,  III,  and 
V  of  this  volume,  it  contains  Archbishop 
Thoresby's  '  Sixe  thingis,'  &c.,  and  several  me- 
ditations and  prayers,  taken  from  the  works  of 
St.  Bernard  and  St.  Bonaventure. 

A  curious  and  important  MS.,  written  in  the  West- 
Midland  dialect,  with  Northern  peculiarities. 
The  workmanship  is  rough  and  uncouth.  It 
contains  little  that  has  not  been  printed  in  the 
present  volume ;  the  text  of  Tracts  IX,  XIX, 
XX,  XXIV,  XXV,  XXXI,  and  XXXII,  being 
based  upon  it. 

A  small  folio,  full  of  clerical  inaccuracies,  and 
making  no  pretensions  to  textual  splendour,  but 
containing  many  treatises  not  found  elsewhere. 
See  Shirley's  Catalogue,  pp.  40-45.  The  hand 
is  of  the  end  of  the  fourteenth  or  beginning  of 
the  fifteenth  century.  Tracts  XIII,  XIV,  XVII, 
XVIII,  XXII,  and  XXIII,  of  the  present  edi- 
tion, are  taken  from  this  MS. 

This  MS.  I  have  not  seen ;  it  supplied  the  text  for 
Tracts  VI,  VII,  and  VIII. 


xiv       MSS.  OF  THE  MISCELLANEOUS  WORKS. 


Title  of  MS. 


Douce  274. 


Trin.  Coll. 

Dub.  cm.  1 2. 


Douce  373. 


Trin.  Coll. 
Dub.  C.  V.  6. 


Harl.  2398. 


Corser  MS. 


Laud  174. 


Harl.  2385. 


Distinguishing 
Letter. 


AA. 


BB. 


CC. 


DD. 


EE. 


FF. 


GG. 


Description. 


A  small  thin  volume,  with  beautiful  initial  letters 
in  gold;  writing  pale;  date,  late  fourteenth 
century.  This  is  one  of  the  MSS.  bequeathed 
by  Mr.  Douce  to  the  Bodleian  Library. 

A  volume  about  8  in.  by  6  in. ;  totally  without 
ornament ;  the  hand  passes  in  the  strangest  way 
from  the  clerkly  to  the  cursive,  and  back  again 
from  the  cursive  to  the  clerkly.  In  several 
places  there  are  lacunae.  Through  the  greater 
portion  of  its  contents  it  agrees  with  C.C.C.C. 
296 ;  yet  I  doubt  whether  either  MS.  be  a  copy 
of  the  other,  but  rather  suspect  that  both  were 
copied  from  some  earlier  text  now  lost.  Tracts 
XII  and  XXI  are  taken  from  this  MS. 

The  description  of  Z  applies  exactly  to  this  MS., 
except  that  it  makes  a  thicker  volume.  Besides 
IX  and  XXIX  of  this  volume,  it  contains  a 
piece  of  unknown  authorship  in  English,  entitled 
'  Tractatus  de  Regibus.' 

A  small  volume,  about  6  in.  by  4  in.,  in  a  cursive 
hand,  of,  I  should  say,  the  first  or  second 
decade  of  the  fifteenth  century.  As  it  contains 
but  little, — at  least  of  what  may  with  reason- 
able probability  be  assigned  to  Wyclif, — that  is 
not  found  also  in  Oxford  MSS.,  I  have  had  re- 
course to  it  for  the  text  of  one  tract  only, 
XXVL 

I  have  not  seen  this  MS.  The  text  of  IV  is  de- 
rived from  an  accurate  transcript  taken  from  it 
by  Mr.  Brock. 

Neither  have  I  seen  this  MS.,  which  is  the  pro- 
perty of  Mr.  Corser,  and  has  but  recently  come 
to  light ;  but  a  useful  collation  of  it  with  the 
Harleian  MS.  (DD)  was  obtained  for  me  by  my 
friend,  Mr.  Fumi vail.  .       •    

A  small  volume,  now  in  the  Bodleian  Library, 
containing  (besides  XV  of  this  volume,  for 
which  it  has  supplied  the  text),  portions  of  I, 
a  curious  poem  by  Richard  of  Maydenstoon, 
and  other  pieces. 

A  small  thin  quarto,  among  the  Harleian  MSS. 
at  the  Museum.  About  seven  leaves  of  it  belong 
to  Wyclif.     See  below,  pp.  93  and  44 T.- 


WFCLIF  LITERATURE. 


XV 


Title  of  MS. 

Distinguishing 
Letter. 

Description. 

Tiberius  C. 
VII. 

Claudius  E. 
III. 

HH. 
II. 

This  is  one  of  the  Cottonian  MSS.  at  the  British 
Museum ;  it  was  much  injured  by  the  fire  of 
1 731,  but  has  been  most  skilfully  and  effectually 
repaired.  It  is  a  copy  of  Knyghton^s  Chronicle, 
and,  I  am  disposed  to  think,  in  his  own  hand- 
writing. The  text  of  XXX  and  XXXI  is 
derived  from  it. 

Another  Cottonian  MS.  The  copy  of  Knyghton's 
Chrojiicle  which  it  contains  is  evidently  tran- 
scribed from  Tiberius  C.  VII. 

WYCLIF    LITERATURE, 


A  LIST  OF  THE  CHIEF  WORKS  WHICH  THROW  LIGHT  ON  THE 
LIFE  AND  OPINIONS  OF  JOHN  WYCLIF. 


Aeneas  Sylvius,  Historia  Bohe-mica,  Basle,  1551. 

Bale,  John,  Illustrium  Majoris  Brltafiniae  Scriptorum  Summarium^  1548  and  1559. 

British  Magazine,  vol.  vii.  1835. 

Capgrave,  John,  Chronicle  of  England  (Rolls  Series), 

Caxton,  William,  Chronicles  of  England,  1480. 

Cochlaeus,  Johannes,  Historia  Husdtarmn,  Mentz,  1549. 

Eulogium  Hiatoriarmn,  vol.  iii.  (Rolls  Series). 

Fasciculi  Zizaniorum ;  see  Walden. 

Fitz-Ralph,  Richard,  Archbishop  of  Armagh,  Defensorium  Curatorum  contra  Privi- 

legiatos,  1357  ;  in  Appendix  to  Brown's  Fasciculus. 
Foxe,  John,  Acts  and  Monuments,  1583. 
Gibson,  Edmund,  Codex  Juris  Ecchiiastici  Anglicani,  1713. 
Harpsfield,  Nicholas,  Historia  Wicleffiana,  Douay,  1622. 
Huss,  John,  Opera,  1558. 
James,  Thomas,  Bodley's  Librarian,  An  Apologie  for  John  Wickliffe,  shewing  his 

conformitie  with  the  now  Church  of  England,  Oxford,  1608. 
Knyghton,  Henry,  Compilatio  de  evenlihus  Angliae ;  in  Twysden's  Decern  Scriptores. 
Le  Bas,  C.  W.,  Life  of  Wyclif  Q^o.  1  of  Theological  Library),  1832. 


xvi  WYCLIF  LITERATURE. 

Leland,  John,  Commentarii  de  Scriptoribus  Britafinicis,  Oxford,  1709- 

„         „      Collectanea^  Oxford,  1 715. 
I^wis,  Rev.  John,  Minister  of  Margate,  Life  of  Dr.  John  Wyclif  Oxford,  1820. 
Life  and  Times  of  John  de  Wycliffe,  Religious  Tract  Society,  London,  1851. 
Lyndwood,  William,  Provinciale,  Oxford,  1663. 

Orthuinus  Gratius,  Fasciculus  rermn,  &c.,  1535  ;  re-edited  by  Brown,  1690- 
Otterboum,  Thomas,  Chronicle,  edited  by  T.  Heame,  1732. 
Raynaldus,  Annales  Ecclesiastici  (in  continuation  of  Baronius),  Lucca,  1738- 
Richard  of  Bury,  Philohihlion,  Paris,  1&56. 

Shirley,  Dr.  Walter  W.,  Catalogue  of  the  Original  Works  of  John  Wyclif,  1865. 
Tanner,  Bishop,  Bibliotheca  Brilannico-Hibernica,  1748- 
Vaughan,  Dr.  Robert,  Life  and  Opinions  ofWycliffe,  1828, 

„  „        Tracts  and  Treatises  of  John  de  Wycliffe,  \%^^, 

Walden,  Thomas  of,  Doctrinale  Fidei  Christianae,  Venice,  1571. 

„  „     Fascicidi  Zizaniorum  (Rolls  Series). 

Walsingham,  Historia  A?iglicana  (Rolls  Series). 
Willdns,  David,  Concilia  Magfiae  Britanniae,  1 736. 
kWood,  Anthony,  Athenae  Oxonienses. 

„  „         History   and  Antiquities   of  the  Utiiversity  of  Oxford,  edited  by 

Gutch,  1786. 
Woodford,  William,  Determinationes  contra  haereses  Wiclevi ;  in  Brovi^n's  Fasciculus, 
Wycliffite  Versions  of  the  Bible,  edited  by  Forshall  and  Madden,  Oxford,  1850. 


LIST   OF    ENGLISH    WORKS    ASCRIBED    TO    WYCLIF, 

Distinguishing  those  probably  genuine  from  doubtful  or  spurious  (works. 


No. 

Genuine  English 
Works  of  Wyclif. 

No.  or 

place  in  this 

edition. 

Title  in  Bale's 
Summarium. 

No.  in 

Lewis* 

list. 

i       No.  and  title  in 
Shirley's  Catalogue. 

I 

A   Petition    to    the 
King  and  Parlia- 
ment^ 

xxxin 

Ad  Regem  et  Parlia- 
mentum 

ijB 

1 

1  39,  Four  Articles. 

1 

2 

A  Short  Rule  of  Life^ 

XV 

III 

.  24,  same  title. 

3 

Church  Temporali- 

XVII 

Cogendos        sacer- 

57.  115, 

35,  For  >re   skilles 

ties 

dotes  ad  honesta- 
tem 

145 

lordis  &c. 

4 

Concerning  the  Eu- 
charist (i) 

XXX 

j  65,  On  the  Eucharist. 

5 

Concerning  the  Eu- 
charist (2) 

XXXI 

De  fide  Eucharistiae 

133 

54,  Of  the  Eucharist. 

j 

6 

De  Apostasia  Cleri^ 

XXVI 

De  Apostasia  (?) 

200 

'\  /^6,  same  title. 

7 

De  Blasphemia 

XXV 

De  Blasphemia  con- 
tra fratres 

88 

52,  same  title. 

1 
1 

8 

De    Confessione    et 
Poenitentia 

51,  same  title. 

9 

De  Dominio  Divino 

same  title 

59 

'■  58,  same  title. 

10 

De  Pontificum  Ro- 
manorum     schis- 
mate 

XXI 

De   Papa  Romano, 

and 
De  Pontificum  Ro- 

manoi-um     schis- 

mate 

63. 147 

:  59,  De  Schismate. 

II 

De       Precationibus 
Sacris 

xvm 

same  title 

90 

22,  same  title. 

1 

12 

De  Sacramento  Al- 
taris 

.. 

8 

i  3  (5),  same  title. 

n 

De  Stipendiis  Minis- 
trorum 

XIV 

same  title 

52,  142 

[21,  same  title. 

14 

Fifty  Heresies   and 
Errors  ^ 

XXIV 

De  fratnim  nequitiis 

72 

15,     Objections     of 
Freres. 

15 

Five   Questions    on 

XI 

Ad   quinque   quaes- 

J  59 

57,    Letter    on    the 

Love 

tiones 

Love  of  God. 

16 

Letter  to  Pope  Ur- 
ban* 

XXXII 

Excusationes  ad  Ur- 
banum 

i  55,  same  title. 

17 

Lincolniensis 

XIX 

]8 

Octo  in  quibus  sedu- 
cuntur 

xxvni 

De  episcoporum  er- 
roribus 

77 

1  23,  same  title. 

19 

Of  Faith,  Hope,  and 
Charity 

.. 

41,  same  title. 

Printed  by  Dr.  James  and  Dr.  Vaughan.  2  Printed  by  the  Religious  Tract  Society. 

^  Printed  by  Dr.  Todd.  *  Printed  by  Lewis,  Life  0/  Wyclif, 


xviii       ENGLISH  WORKS  ASCRIBED  TO  WFCLIF. 


No. 

Genuine  English 
Works  of  Wyclif. 

No,  or 

place  in  this 

edition. 

Title  in  Bale's 
Summarium. 

No.  in 
Lewis* 

list. 

No.  and  title  in 
Shirley's  Catalogue. 

20 

Of  Mynystris  in  the 
Chirche 

Vol.  n 

De  Christo  et  Anti- 
cristo 

5 

5,  same  title. 

21 

OfWeddidMen  and 
Wives 

XIII 

116 

36,  same  title. 

22 

On     the     Apostles' 
Creed 

VI 

In  symbolum  fidei 

152 

1 1  §  4,  Commentary 
on,  &c. 

23 

On  the  Five  Inner 
Wits 

VIII 

.. 

•• 

ii§6,0ftheFive,&c. 

24 

On  the  Five  Outer 
Wits 

VII 

•• 

ii§5,0ftheFive,&c. 

25 

On  the  Seven  Deadly 
Sins 

IX 

De     peccatis     fugi- 
endis 

131 

44,  Of  the  Seven,  &c. 

26 

On  the  Sufficiency  of 

XII 

De  Veritate    Scrip- 

80, 149 

60,      De      Veritate 

Holy  Scripture 

turae,  and, 
De    Sathanae    astu 
contra  fidem 

Scriptuiae. 

27 

On  the  Twenty-five 

XXIX 

Super  impositis  ar- 

176 

49»    5o»    63.    Super 

Articles 

ticulis  (?) 

impositis  articulis. 

28 

Sermons : — 

On     the     Sunday 

Vol.1 

In  Evangelia  Domi- 

12 

2,  Homilies  on  the 

Gospels 

nicalia 

Gospels  and  Epis- 

On the  Gospels  of 

, , 

In  Commune  Sanc- 

13 

tles. 

the     Commune 

torum 

SS 

On  the  Gospels  of 

„ 

In   Evangelia  festi- 

10 

thePropriumSS 

valia 

On  the  Ferial  Gos- 

Vol. II 

In  Evangelia  ferialia 

II 

pels 

On     the     Sunday 

„ 

Sermones    in   Epis- 

8 

Epistles 

tolas  (?) 

29 

Seven  Heresies 

XXVII 

De  seductione  sim- 
plicium  (?) 

M3 

II  §  8,  same  title. 

30 

Simonists  and  Apo- 
states 

XVI 

56,  De  duobus  gene- 
ribus  haereticorum. 

31 

The  Ave  Maria 

V 

Super  salutatione  an- 
gelica 

154 

II  §  3,  On  the  Ave 
Maria. 

32 

The  Church  and  her 
Members  ^ 

XXIII 

De  ecclesiaedominio 

58 

45,  De  Ecclesia  et 
Membris. 

33 

The  Great  Sentence 
'of  Curse 

XXII 

.. 

119 

38,  same  title. 

'34 

The  Pater  Noster(i) 

III 

Super  Oratione  Do- 
minica 

89 

II  §  2,  On  the  Pater 
Noster. 

35 

ThePaterNoster(2) 

IV 

64,  On  the  Pater 
Noster. 

36 

The  Seven  Corporal 

\       [ 

De  operibus  corpo- 

155 

42,    Of    the    Seven 

Works 

[  ^  \ 

ralibus 

Works,  &c. 

37 

The  Seven  Spiritual 

De  spiritualibus  ope- 

156 

43,  Opera  Caritatis. 

Works 

^     ' 

ribus 

Printed  by  Dr.  Todd. 


ENGLISH  WORKS  ASCRIBED  TO  WFCLIF. 


XIX 


No. 

Genuine  English      |  ,  ^°:  °\.  ^        Title  in  Bale's 

No.  in 

Lewis' 

list. 

No.  and  title  in 

Works  of  W^clif.      :Pl^«'.°th.' 
•^            ;    edition. 

Summarium, 

Shirley's  Catalogue. 

38 

The  Ten  Command-  |        II 
ments                      ; 

Compendium  X  prae- 
ceptorum 

153 

40,  Of  the  Ten,  &c. 

39 

Vae  Octuplex 

Vol.  II 

277 

4,  same  title. 

40 

Vita  Sacerdotum 

XX 

De  Vita  Sacerdotum 

132 

53,  De  Vita  Sacer- 
dotum. 

41 

Wyclyffe's  Wycket 

•  • 

Ostiolum  Wiclevi 

126 

3  (I),  same  title. 

Doubtful  Woeks.    ! 

I 

Antecrist    and    his  i 
Clerkis                   | 

De    Antichristo    et 
membris 

64 

33,  same  title. 

2 

Commentary  on  St.  1 
John                       j 

8,  same  title. 

3 

Commentary  on  St. 
Luke 

7,  same  title. 

4 

Commentary  on  St.  j 
Matthew                i 

6,  same  title. 

5 

De  Obedientia  Prae-  | 
latorum 

same  title 

105 

12,  same  title. 

6 

De  Officio  Pastorali 

same  title 

83 

61,  same  title. 

7 

De  Papa 

.. 

62,  same  title. 

8 

For    the    ordre    of 
Presthod 

De  clericorum  ordi- 
natione 

86 

20,  same  title. 

9 

How  men  of  privat 
religion 

Pro    amplexando 
evangelio 

109 

30,  same  title. 

10 

How  Sathanas  and 
his  children 

■  * 

"3 

29,  same  title. 

11 

How  Sathanas  and  i 
his  prestis               ; 

De  Diabolo  et  mem- 
bris 

4,  114 

34,  same  title. 

12 

How  the    office  of; 
curatis^                   i 

De  XXXIII  errori- 
bus  curatorum 

78 

19,  same  title. 

15 

Of  Antecrist  and  his  ; 
Meynee  ^                 ! 

48,  same  title. 

14 

Of   Clerkis   posses- 
sioneris 

•• 

De   clericis   posses- 
sionariis 

106 

18,  same  title. 

15 

Of  feyned   contem- 
platifhf 

•• 

Impedimenta    evan- 
gelizantium 

107 

26,  same  title. 

16 

Of   good   prechyng 
prestis 

117 

37,  same  title. 

17  ;  Of  Prelates 

De  conversatione  ec- 

76, 121 

16,  same  title. 

clesiasticorum, 

;                 and 

1                   ;  De  praelatis  et  eo- 

1 

rum  officio 

18    Of   servauntis    and 

De  dominis  et  servis 

14 

31,  same  title. 

1      lordis 

19  ;  On  the  Ave  Maria 

" 

]I2 

28,  same  title. 

20  ■  On  the  Pater  Noster 

1 

" 

-- 

" 

27,  same  title. 

^  Printed  by  the  Religious  Tract  Society. 


2  Printed  by  Dr.  Todd. 


XX 


ENGLISH  WORKS  ASCRIBED  TO   WYCLIF. 


No. 

Doubtful  Works. 

No.  or 

place  in  this 

edition. 

Title  in  Bale's 
Summariuin. 

No.  in 

Lewis' 

list. 

No.  and  title  in 
Shirley's  Catalogue. 

21 

Rule  of  St.  Francis 

•• 

In  regulam  Minori- 
tamm 

70 

13,  same  title. 

22 

Single  Sermons  (2) 
^   (3)  (4) 

De       hypocritarum 
imposturis 

87 

3  (3),  same  title. 

23 

Speculum  de  Anti- 
cliristo 

same  title 

75 

1 7,  same  title. 

24 

Super  Cantica  Sacia 

I 

same  title 

42 

10,  same  title. 

35 

Testament     of    St. 
Francis 

•• 

Super      testamento 
Francisci 

71 

14,  same  title. 

26 

Three  thingis    dis- 
troien  this  world 

281 

25,  same  title. 

27 

Tractatus  de  pseudo 

freris 
Whi     pore     prestis 

.. 

47,  same  title. 

28 

Pro  egentibus  pres- 

no 

32,  same  title. 

han  non  benefice 

byteris 

Sp  jRious  Works  ^ 

I 

Commentary  on  the 
Apocalypse 

In  Apocalypsin  Jo- 
annis 

104 

9,  same  title. 

2 

Early  Sermons 

.. 

I,  same  title. 

3 

Speculum  vitae  Chris- 
tianas 
§  I   In  Mandatum 
§  7.  Six    things   to 
know   God  Al- 
mighty 

ir  (i),  same  title. 
1 1  (7),  same  title. 

^  These  works  are  taken  from  Dr.  Shirley's  Catalogue,  and  it  did  not  seem  necessary  to  add 
to  them  works,  formerly  ascribed  to  Wyclif,  such  as  •  The  Poor  Caitiff,'  and  Hampole's  Psalter, 
his  connection  with  which  has  been  already  disproved  by  Dr.  Shirley  and  others. 


CONTENTS. 


PAGE 

Introduction v 

List  of  MSS.  of  the  Miscellaneous  Works     .....  xiii 

Wyclif  Literature xv 

List  of  English  works  ascribed  to  Wyclif xvii 


Part  L— EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC  TREATISES. 

L         Super  Cantica  Sacra i 

§     I.  The  Thanksgiving  of  Israel         ....  5 

§     2.  The  Prayer  of  Hezekiah 8 

§     3.  The  Song  of  Hannah 13 

§     4.  The  Song  of  Moses  and  the  Children  of  Israel  18 

4     5.  The  Prayer  of  Habakkuk 24 

§     6.  The  Song  of  Moses 32 

§     7.  The  Magnificat 48 

§     8.  Te  Deum  Laudamus 52 

§     9.  Benedictus .56 

§   10.  Nunc  Dimittis 61 

§   ri.  The  Song  of  the  Three  Children       ...  62 

§   12.  Quicunque  Vult 71 

II.  -The  Ten  Comaundementis 82 

III.  ,   The  Pater  Noster 93 

IV.  The  Pater  Noster 98 


xxii  CONTENTS, 

PAGE 

V.  •    Ave  Maria m 

VI.  On  the  Apostles*  Greed 114 

VII.  On  the  Five  Outer  Wits 117 

VIII.  On  the  Five  Inner  Wits 117 

IX.  On  the  Seven  Deadly  Sins up 

X.  ,   The  Seven  Werkys  of  Mercy  Bodyly  .        ,         .       168 

The  Seven  Werkys  of  Mercy  Gostly  '.         .        .         .       177 
XL  Five  Questions  on  Love 183 

XII.  On  the  Sufficiency  of  Holy  Scripture   .         .        .         .186 

XIII.  Of  Weddid  Men  and  Wifis 188 

XIV.  De  Stipendiis  Ministronim .202 

XV.  A  Short  Rule  of  Life    .        ...        .        .        .20^ 


Part  IL- CONTROVERSIAL  WORKS. 


XVL  Simonists  and  Apostates         .        .        .         .        .         .211 

XVII.  Church  Temporalities 213 

XVIII.  De  Precationibus  Sacris 219 

XIX.  Lincolniensis 230 

XX.  Vita  Sacerdotum 233 

XXL  De  Pontificum  Romanorum  Schismate          .        .        .      242 

XXII.  The  Grete  Sentence  of  Curs        .         .         .         .         .267 

-XXIII.       The  Church  and  her  Members 338 

XXIV.  Fifty  Heresies  and  Errors  of  Friars      .        .         .        .366 

XXV.  De  Blasphemia 402 

XXVI.  .    De  Apostasia 430 

XXVII.  Seven  Heresies 441 

XXVIII.  Octo  in  quibus  seducuntur  simplices  Christiani     .         .      447 

XXIX.  On  the  Twenty-five  Articles 454 


CONTENTS,  xxiii 


Part  III.— LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS. 


PAGE 


XXX.  Concerning  the  Eucharist  (No.  i)       .        .        .        .  499 

XXXI.  Concerning  the  Eucharist  (No.  2)       .        .        .        .  501 

XXXII.  Letter  to  Pope  Urban 504 

XXXIII.  A  Petition  to  the  King  and  Parliament      .        .        .  507 


APPENDIX. 

Note  on    the  Authenticity  of   the    Fifth    Book    of  Knyghton*s 

Chronicle 525 


PART    I. 

EXEGETICAL  AND   DIDACTIC 
TREATISES. 


WYCLIF.      VOL.   in. 


SUPER    CANTICA    SACRA. 


[Bishop  Bale's  catalogue  is  the  only  authority  for  ascribing  this  Com- 
mentary on  the  Canticles  to  Wyclif.  But  in  the  same  catalogue  the  well- 
known  Commentary  on  the  Psalms,  beginning  '  Grete  haboundaunce  of 
gostly  comfort,'  is  ascribed  to  Wyclif,  whereas  it  has  been  shown  with 
abundant  evidence  by  the  editors  of  the  Wycliffite  versions  of  the  Bible 
(Preface,  p.  iv)  to  be  the  work  of  Richard  Rolle,  commonly  called  Ham- 
pole.  Now,  in  most  (perhaps  in  all)  of  the  copies  of  the  Commentary  on 
the^Psalms — which  we  will  call  Hampole's  Psalter — the  Commentary  on 
the  Canticles  foUows  without  a  break,  and,  so  to  speak,  as  a  matter  of 
course,  in  such  a  manner  as  to  give  rise  to  a  strong  presumption  that  Ham- 
pole  was  the  author  of  both.  But  against  this  presumption  had  to  be  set 
the  undoubted  fact  that  the  Commentary  on  the  Canticles  bears  in  several 
places  decisive  marks  of  a  Lollard  or  Puritanical  cast  of  sentiment,  which  no 
one  acquainted  with  Hampole's  genuine  writings,  and  with  his  life  and 
character,  so  far  as  known,  could  possibly  father  upon  him.  It  was  mani- 
festly the  fact  of  the  occurrence  of  these  LollaM  passages  which  induced 
Bale,  and  many  others  since  his  time,  to  attribute  the  Commentary  to 
Wyclif.  Out  of  these  difficulties,  some  introductory  verses  prefixed  to  a 
copy  of  the  Psalter  and  Canticles,  contained  in  a  MS.  of  about  the  middle 
of  the  fifteenth  century  (Laud,  286),  seem  to  afford  the  means  of  extrica- 
tion. This  MS.  stops  short  at  the  seventh  canticle,  the  Magnificat,  omit- 
ting those  five,  the  commentary  on  which  in  Bod.  288  and  other  MSS. 
contains  most  of  the  Lollard  passages  before  mentioned.  The  writer  of 
the  introductory  lines,  after  saying  that  this  is  the  same  Psalter  as  that 
which  lies  chained  at  Richard's  own  place  of  burial,  in  the  nuimery  at 
Hampole,  thus  proceeds : — 

*  Copyed  has  J)is  Sauter  ben  of  yvel  men  of  LoUardry, 
And  aftirward  hit  has  bene  sene  ympyd  in  wip  eresy. 
They  seyden  Ipen  to  leude  foles,  ])at  it  shuld  be  all  enter 
A  blessyd  boke  of  hur  scoles,  of  Richard  Hampole  ]?e  Sauter. 
Thus  ho  ]>ei  seyd  to  make  ]?em  leve  on  her  scole  thoro  sotilte. 
To  bring  hem  in,  so  hem  to  greve,  ageyn  ]?e  feyth  in  grete  fole; 
And  sclaundrid  foule  l>is  holy  man  wij?  her  wykkid  waryed  wyles ;'  &c. 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS, 


The  Lollards  then,  it  seems,  had  been  grafting  heresy,  that  is,  their  peculiar 
opinions,  into  the  Psalter  (in  which  general  expression  it  seems  certain  that 
the  Canticles  are  included)  of  Richard  Hampole,  and  then  circulating  it  as, 
in  its  entirety,  '  a  blessed  book  of  their  schools/  From  these  words  it  may 
clearly  be  inferred  that  the  copy  to  which  these  lines  are  prefixed,  and  in 
which  the  handwriting  is  the  same  throughout,  was  the  genuine  work  of 
Hampole,  free  from  all  Lollard  interpolations.  What  difference  this  makes 
in  the  Psalter  itself,  I  am  not  prepared  to  say  with  certainty ;  but  the  form 
which  it  wears  in  Bod.  288  (a  MS.  containing  all  the  passages  of  advanced 
LoUardism  in  the  Canticles)  appears,  from  a  tolerably  close  examination,  to 
present  scarcely  anything  that  could  be  decidedly  pronounced  to  come  from 
a  Lollard  pen.  But  in  the  Commentary  on  the  Canticles,  the  difference 
caused  by  presenting  them  in  the  form  exhibited  in  the  copy  of  this  ardent 
versifier,  as  compared  with  that  which  they  bear  in  Bod.  288,  is  very  great. 
The  former  copy,  containing  only  seven  canticles,  has  not  a  single  word 
which  might  not  have  been  written  by  Hampole.  The  latter,  containing 
twelve  canticles,  has  in  it,  especially  in  the  commentary  on  the  Benedictus, 
passages  which  only  Wyclif  or  one  of  his  disciples  could  have  composed. 
The  conclusion  which  I  arrive  at  therefore  is,  that  in  this  Commentary  on 
the  Canticles,  we  have,  down  to  the  end  of  the  seventh  canticle,  a  genuine 
work  of  Richard  Hampole,  retouched  in  certain  MSS.  by  a  Lollard  hand, 
but  that  the  five  remaining  canticles  are  a  later  addition,  made  either  by 
Wyclif  himself,  or  by  his  school.  Some  confirmation  of  this  view  may  be 
found  in  the  fact  that  the  valuable  New  College  MS.  (No.  95)  of  which, 
nearly,  if  not  absolutely,  all  the  remaining  contents  are  of  Wyclif  s  compo- 
sition, gives  just  these  five  later  canticles,  and  none  of  the  seven  earlier  ones. 

The  text  is  based  on  Bod.  288  (T  in  this  edition).  The  scribe  seems  to  have 
been  imperfectly  acquamted  with  Latin,  and  has  made  frequent  blunders  in 
quoting  the  Latin  originals  ;  these  I  have  corrected  either  from  other  MSS. 
or  from  the  Vulgate.  Other  MSS.  of  the  whole  or  of  a  portion  of  the 
Canticles  are  the  following ;  of  the  whole,  Laud  448,  University  College, 
Oxford,  56  (although  in  this  MS.  the  conime?ttary  on  the  last  six  canticles 
is  wanting,  as  if  the  scribe  had  been  afraid  to  reproduce  it) ;  Magdalen 
College,  Oxford,  52  ;  of  Nos.  1-7,  Laud  286;  of  Nos.  8-12,  New  College, 
Oxford,  95;  of  Nos.  11,  12,  Laud  174;  of  No.  12,  Douce  258. 

*  In  the  Old  Testament  Canticles  there  is  no  agreement  with  either  Wyc- 
liffite  version ;  in  the  Benedictus  and  Nunc  Dimittis  the  agreement  is  veiy 
close  with  the  earlier  version.' — Shirley's  Catalogue,  p.  37. 

These  twelve  canticles  (or  rather  these  eleven  canticles  and  one  creed, 
the  so-called  Symbolum  Athanasii)  are  found  intennixed  among  the  Psalms , 
as  they  are  appointed  to  be  read  on  the  different  days  of  the  week  in  the 
Psalter  of  the  Roman  Breviary  (ed.  Lyons,  1546).  Thus  a  commentator, 
who  besides  commenting  on  the  Psalms,  should  have  explained  these 
canticles,  would  have  given  a  commentary  on  the  entire  contents  of  the 
Psalter  in  his  Breviary,  with  the  exception  of  the  S>Tiabolum  Apostolorum.] 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC, 


[THE    THANKSGIVING    OF    ISRAEL.] 
[  Isaiah,  ch.  xii.  ] 


Confitebor  tibi,  Domine,  quia  iratus  es  rnicM;  con- 
versus  est  furor  tuus,  et  eonsolatus  es  me :  /  schall  schryve 
to  pee,  Lord,  for  pou  art  wrapped  to  me  ;  turnyd  is  pi  hreep,  and 
pou  cumforiidist  me, 

pat  is,  to  ])e  heriyng  of  ])ee  I  schall  schryve  my  synnes ;  and 
]?at  I  schal  do,  for  \€\  displesen  l?ee,  and  maken  J?ee  wraj?]?id  to 
me  synnynge,  and  I  may  not  preie  Jjee,  but  if  I  fordo  my 
synne.  perfor  verry  schrift  is  levynge  of  synne,  ]?at  turnej)  \\ 
bree]?  fro  me ;  but  ]?ou  turnyst  eendelees  peyne  which  I  have 
disserved  lyvyng,  into  schort  penaunce  of  a  soruful  herte, 
absteynynge  fro  synne.  And  in  J^at,  Lord,  ]?ou  cumfortist  me, 
]?at  Jjis  sentence  in  dyverse  stidis  of  \\  lawe  is  approvyd,  not  in 
newe  writynge  and  newe  confirmacioun,  for  noj?ing  is,  to  trowe 
soo]?,  left  out  of  ])e  sentence  of  \\  lawe.  pis  cumfort  bowij?  into 
myn  herte,  knowynge  of  feelinge  of  \\  love,  delyverynge  my 
conscience  of  alle  byndinge  errours.     Ffor 

Ecce,  Deus  salvator  meus,  fiducialiter  agam  et  non 
timebo :  Loo,  God  is  my  saveour,  tristfulli  I  schal  worche,  and 
I  schal  not  dreeden, 

Alle  men,  biholden ;  Lo,  Jesus  Crist  is  my  saveour,  clensinge 
me  of  synne,  and  delyverynge  me  of  turment.  Now  he  me 
save])  turnyd  to  him,  whom  he  bifore  blyndide  turnyd  to  J?e 
world,  perfor  tristfuUy  I  schal  worche,  dredynge  no  man, 
seiynge  boldly  J)at  he  schal  come  to  deeme,  ^eldynge  to  ech 
man  aftir  his  deede.  pe  deedis  of  tirauntis  and  of  ipocritis, 
hi^ed  in  ]?is  world,  ensaumplinge  wickidenes,  schulen  be  lowid 
poru  peyne  eendelees,  whanne  trewe  meke  men  schulen  have 
coroun  of  joie ;   and  I  schal  not  dreede  to  seyn  it,  f  0U5  I  be 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS, 

dispisid  J?oru  soggestioun  of  my  false  brij^eren  for  my  soj?- 
fastnes.     Whi  ? 

Quia  fortitude  mea  et  laus  mea^,  et  factus  est  tc\\\\\  in 
salutem:  For  my  sirenkpe  and  myn  heriing  oure  Lord,  and 
maad  he  is  to  me  in  helpe. 

My  strenk]?e  of  whom  I  am  stalwor})e  is  Crist,  for  of  mysilf 
I  am  ful  week ;  and  myn  heriing  is  heriinge  in  Jesus,  for  I  seke 
in  wil,  word,  and  werk  not  myn  heriing  but  Cristis ;  and  he  is 
maad  to  me  double  heelj^e,  a^ein  Adam  j?at  brou^te  me  in 
seekenes  of  dee]?,  and  a^ein  hem  J^at  in  blindenes  of  malice 
pursuen  me  for  my  soo]?sawel  But  ^e  ]?at  wolen  folowe  J^e 
iforme  of  J^is  conversacioun, 

Haurietis  aquas  in  gaudio  de  fontibus  salvatoris,  et 
dieetis  in  ilia  die,  Confitemini  dom.ino  et  invocate  nomen 
ejus :  3^  schulen  drawe  waiirs  injoie  ofJ?e  wellis  of  fie  saveour, 
andy  schulen  seie  in  pat  day,  schryvefi  tope  Lord  and  inclepip  his 
name. 

5e  schulen  drawe  ]?oru  charite  and  mekenes  watir  of  devo- 
cioun  of  hevenly  desiris  in  joie,  ^eldinge  servise  to  God  of  fe 
wellis,  ))at  is,  of  J?e  plenteuouse  graciouse  ^iftis  of  Jesus  Crist; 
and  5e  schulen  sey  to  ojjere  m  J?at  day,-~-]?at  is,  whanne  ^e 
drinken  of  so  cleer  wellis  of  Cristis  lawe  J^at  purgij?  alle  J?e  vicis, 
and  leven  ]>e  mody  watirs  of  mannys  lawe  troubhd  wi]>  coveitise 
and  lustis, — Schryve]?  to  om'e  Lord  ^oure  synnes,  for  he  oonli 
^eve]?  pardoun,  and  so  inwardly  inclepij?  his  name,  j?at  is,  lyve]? 
so  fat  50ure  liif  schewe  J)e  heriing  of  Jesus;  and  fat  may  not 
be  but  ^e  ]?oru  charite  inclepen  his  name  to  ^ou,  makynge  50U 
foru  mekenes  his  woniynge  stide.     If  fou  do  >us, 

I^otas  facite  in  populis  adinvenciones  ejus,  mementote 
quia  excelsum  est  nomen  ejus :  Makip  knowen  in  pefolkpe 
fyndingis  of  him  ;  hipenkip^  for  his  name  is  hi^. 

Here  he  monestij?  ech  man  to  lyve  wel,  and  prestis  to  make 
knowe  opinly  Cristis  meedful  werkis.  Maki]?  knowen,  fat  is, 
prechif  among  fe  folk,  what?  — fre  soffastnes,  fat  ]?ei  moun 
knowe  his  incarnacioun,  f  oru  f  e  which  he  found  oure  heelpe. 
And  tellij?  to  hem  alle  fablis  left,  fat  he  is  not  founden  but  in 

1  Vulg.  lans  mea  Bominus.  2  clause  om.  in  U. 

"  So  in  U ;  unbipmkip,  T. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC. 

meke  and  wilful  charyte  ful  worching;  and  bej?inki}>,  jjat  is, 
holdij)  him  evere  in  mynde,  or  in  J>inkinge,  or  in  spekinge,  or  in 
worchinge,  J?at  ^e  no  tyme  be  founden  out  of  his  heriynge ;  for 
he  failij)  no  tyme,  here  in  helpinge,  ne  in  hevene  of  meedynge. 
And,  for  his  hi)  name  Jesus  is  above  alle  names,  holdi]?  ]>at  in 
5ore  J)0U3t,  for  it  is  of  greet  virtu  in  a  clene  soule ;  fot  foru  Jje 
virtu  })erof  is  ech  soule  clensid  of  vicious  fil]?e.  And  if  clensid 
it  kepij?  cleene,  bowynge  J>ereinne  abundantly  grace  of  parfi^t 
knowynge  of  virtues,  no  devel  ne  yvel  man  may  noien  \2X  soule, 
J?ou3  ]?e  body  sufFre  peyne  in  which  it  resti)?  peesibly.  It  is  of 
so  greet  virtu  J?at  blynde  men  coveyten  to  bere  it  on  hem,  but 
]?e  help  of  Jesus  is  not  wi]?  hem,  to  meede  hem  in  hevene,  J)at 
beren  it  not  in  clennes  of  lyvynge,  ne  it  faili]?  not  hem  J?at  lyven 
wel,  J?ou3  Jjei  herden  nevere  speke  Jjerof.  3^  f^-t  moun  heere 
and  seke  to  knowe  Goddis  wille,  tristi]?  in  heringe  of  it  in  ^oure 
hertis,  not  in  schewinge  ]?erof  in  ^oure  clo|?inge,  for  it  suffri]? 
not  J)e  love  J?erof  fallen  into  pride  ne  covetise  a^ens  Goddis 
honour,  as  Lucifer  and  Adam  diden. 

Cantate  domino  qtiia  magnifice  egit,  Annnciate  hee  in 
tiniversa  terra:  Syngip  to  oure  Lord  for  worschipfully  he  dide, 
schewip  pat  in  alpe  erpe, 

3e  loviers  of  J)e  name  of  Jesus,  syngij?  to  oure  Lord  in  con- 
templacioun,  for  Jjere  is  delitable  cumfort.  perfore  is  it  ri^t 
clepid  contemplacioun,  for  j)e  soule ^  of  a  good  man  or  womman 
in  J)is  liif  ha])  no  cumfort  but  ];ereinne.  perfor  Jjerwi]?  wel 
worchinge  honourij?  Jesus  Crist,  for  worschipfully  he  dide  \^ 
heeljje  of  mankynde,  diynge  }?erfore,  savynge  synful  wrecchis 
J>at  wolen  leve  synne.  What  ]?ing  is  more  bifore  God  J)an  to 
^elde  good  a^en  yvel?  ]?erfore  schewij)  ])at  worschipful  J^ing 
among  alle  men.     But  ])0u  namely, 

Exnlta  et  lauda,  habitatio  Syon,  quia  magniis  in  medio 
tni  Sanctus  Israel :  Be  glad  and  merie,  pe  wonyng  of  Syon^ 
for  greet  in  myddis  ofpeepe  holy  of  Israel. 

pou  lovier  of  Crist  J)at  wonyest  in  Syon,  ])at  is,  in  holy  Chirche 
and  contemplacioun  of  God,  for  ]?ou  art  maad  \q  wonying  of 
Crist,  be  glad,  J^at  is,  schewe  J?ee  wel  cheerid  in  ]?i  soule,  worch- 

^  corrected ;  T  has  oule ;  U  om.  the  clause. 


WYCLIF'S  WORKS, 

inge  gode  werkis,  and  herye  God,  j^at  ha})  do  so  to  j?ee  j?at 
Jjou  hast  wille  to  love  him  and  noon  o]?er.  perfore  greet  he  is 
in  ))ee  j^oru  love  and  virtu,  he  J^at  is  halowe  of  Israel,  J^at  is, 
Crist  halowynge  ))ee  in  his  love,  Jjat  is  verri  Israel  in  truj?e, 
hope,  and  charite,  seeynge  J?ere  ]?oru  God. 


[PRECATIO    EZECHI^.] 

[Isaiah  xxxviii.  lo.  ] 

Ego  dixi ;  In  dimidio  dierum  meorum  vadam  ad  por- 
tas  inferi:  I  seyde,  in  half  of  my  dates ^  I  schal  \go\  to  pe  "^atis 
of  helle. 

Ezechie  J>e  king,  aftir  his  siiknes,  grauntynge  of  liif  xv  ^eer 
over,  heriej?  God,  and  sei]?,  I  seide  in  myn  herte,  dispeiringe  of 
liif,  fro  I  hadde  herd  jje  vois  of  dee]?  of  J?e  profetis  mou]?,  In 
half  of  my  dayes,  ])at  is,  in  unperfi^tnes  ^  of  werkis  not  fulfillid,  J)e 
dayes  in  whiche  I  schulde  have  lyved,  I  schal  go  to  ]?e  ^atis  of 
helle ;  ]>at  is,  I  j^iis  unperfi^t,  diynge,  schal  passe  to  helle,  for 
]?idir  ^eden  alle  men  bifore  ]?e  comynge  of  Jesus  Crist.  And 
J?erfore, 

Quesivi  residuum  annorum  meoruin.  Dixi,  non 
videbo  domum  Domini  a  in  terra  viventium:  /  somfe  pe 
levyng  of  my  yeris  ;  I  seide,  I  schal  not  se  pe  Lord  inpe  lond  of 
lyvynge. 

I  sou3te,  preiinge  to  God,  Jjat  I  my3te  eende  }je  levynge  of 
myn  5eeris,  \2X  is,  fat  I  my^t  bringe  my  Hif  to  perfi^tnes  and 
fulnes  of  dales.  For  I  seide  in  mysilf,  if  I  now  die  wi]?outen 
child,  I  schal  not  se  God-man  in  hevene ;  as  who  seie,  I  cam 
nevere  Jjere.  For  he  wiste  fat  God  hadde  hi^t,  ]>at  Crist, 
Goddis  Sone,  schulde  be  borun  of  his  kynde,  and  fat  my^t  not 
han  be,  speciali,  if  Ezechie  hadde  died  and  left  no  seed  aboven 
erf  e.     Ffor  I  seide, 

1  SoinU;  T  om.  i?i. 
^  '  Dominum  Deiim  '  in  the  Vulgate. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC, 

Non  aspieiam  hominem  ultra,  et  liabitatorem  quietis : 

/  schal  not  seen  vian  overe,  atid  wonier  of  reste. 

pat  is,  if  I  die  now,  I  schal  not  seen  him  ]?at  is  God  and  man 
bomn  of  my  kynde,  over,  J)at  is,  aftir  J^at  I  be  deed ;  and  so 
I  schal  not  seen  wonyer  of  reste,  ])at  is,  I  schal  not  seen  cum- 
panyes  of  chosun  men  wonyinge  in  eendelees  reste,  ne  wone 
wij?  hem  where  is  delitable  reste.     Ffor  lo, 

Generaeio  mea  ablata  est,  et  convoluta  est  a  me 
quasi  tabernaculum  pastorum :  My  generacioun  is  raft^  mtd 
togidere  lappid  is  fro  me,  as  iahernacle  ofheerdis. 

My  generacioun,  J^at  is,  successioun  of  children,  is  so  holly 
moved  fro  me  as  a  tabernacle  of  heerdis,  J?at  in  schort  while 
[is]  lappid  togidere,  and  remewede  ^  is  not  seen.   And  }?erwi|), 

Precisa  est  velud  a  texente  vita  mea;  dum  adliue 
ordirer,  succidit  me  :  Bifore  schoren  is  as  pe  wevyng  my  liif  ; 
whilis  I  was  in  wevy7ige  he  kit  me  doun. 

My  liif  is  schoren  awey,  ^oujjeheed  bifore  er  I  come  to 
eelde,  as  of  j^e  wevynge  ]?at  scheri]?  doun  j^e  web,  er  it  be 
fully  woven.  And  ^it  while  I  bigan  to  lyven  he  scheri]?  me 
doun  wij?  sikil  of  dee]?,  for  no  sunner  bigynne  we  to  lyven 
]?an  we  bigynnen  to  dien. 

De  mane  usque  ad  vesperam.  finies  me.  Sperabam 
usque  ad  mane,  quasi  leo  sic  contrivit  omnia  ossa  mea : 
Fro  morn  to  even  pou  schalt  eende  me.  I  hopide  to  pe  morn,  as  lioun 
so  I  hrak  alle  my  hoones, 

I^e  ^  speki]?  in  a  maner  of  a  man  Jjat  liij)  in  a  strayt  fevere,  J?at 
fro  ]?e  morn  to  even  abidi]?,  aftir  passing  of  J)e  yvel  or  of 
fe  deej>.  I  hopide  to  }>e  morn,  })at  is,  al  ny^t,  to  be  releeved 
or  to  dien.  As  lyoun  ]?at  no]?ing  spari]?,  so  God  in  my  siiknes 
brak  alle  my  boones,  J?at  is,  wastide  al  myn  strenkj^e. 

De  mane  usque  ad  vesperam  finies  me.  Sieut  pullus 
jrrundinis  sic  clamabo,  m.editabor  sicut  columba:  Fro 
morown  to  even  pou  schalt  eende  me.  As  a  bird  of  a  swalowe,  so 
I  schal  crie,  I  schal pinke  as  a  dowve. 

pou  schalt  eende  me,  J?at  is,  I  abide  myn  eende  fro  morn  to 
even,     pat  he  rehersi}?  ]>is  tsvies,  he  schewi]?  )>e  greetnes  of  his 

^  vSo  in  U  ;  T  has  is  not  seen  remount.  ^  he,  U. 


lO 


WYC LIE'S  WORKS. 


yvel,  and  Jje  worchinge,  as  })e  maner  of  siik  men  is  whanne 
}?ei  felen  ri3t  hard,  and  witen  not  what  )>ei  moun  best  seyn. 
As  bird  of  swalowe  ]?at  gredily  aski]?  mete,  so  in  siike,  woundid 
in  sorowe,  and  in  noye  of  siiknes,  schal  I  crie  to  God  my  leche, 
|}at  I  now  fynde  his  hoolsum  medicyn;  and  I  schal  ])inke  as 
a  douve,  ]?at  is,  mekely,  wi])Outen  galle  of  grucching,  ire,  and 
wickid  wille,  stilly  usynge  sorowynge  for  my  synne,  cum- 
fortynge  me  in  hope  of  God  wi]?  devout  song  of  meditacioun, 
not  wi])  song  of  vanite.     And  in  ])is  cry  and  })inkinge, 

Attenuati  sunt  oculi  mei,  suspicientes  in  excelsoa; 
Thynnyd  ben  myn  iyn^  uplokynge  in  hi^. 

Myn  i^en  ben  ])inned,  J?at  is,  my  J^ou^t  and  myn  entent 
ben  purgid  of  vile  lustis,  and  foule  willis,  and  veine  fou^tis, 
and  maad  sotil  and  semely  in  ])e  love  of  Jesus  Crist;  and 
so  ])ei  ben  uplokinge  in  hei^te  to  ]?e  joie  of  hevene,  not 
pressid  doun  in  love  of  J)is  world. 

Domine  vim  ipatior;  responde  pro  me  quid  dicam; 
aut  quid  respondebit  mihi  cum  ipse  fecerim :  Lord, 
force  I  suffre,  answere  for  me  what  schal  I  seyn,  or  what 
schal  I^  answere  to  me  whanne  I  have  do. 

Lord,  I  suffre  force,  J^at  is,  violence  of  siiknes  and  disesis 
above  my  my^t;  [}>at  is^]  answere  for  me,  })at  is,  be  boru 
of  myn  amendement;  for  my  wille  is,  if  ])0u  wilt  suffre,  to 
amenden  J)at  I  have  errid.  It  is  greet  perel  to  synnen,  but 
myche  more  to  be  founde  in  ligginge  where  God  is  borowe; 
jjerfore  ech  Cristen  man  }>at  J)oru  synne  brekij?  his  truj^e  dis- 
pisij)  l^e  boruheed  of  Crist,  J>at  witnessij?  ech  trewe  mannys 
fruj^e.  But  what  schal  I  sey  to  God  whanne  I  suffre  ri^twiisli 
})is  peyne  ?  or  what  schal  God  answere  to  me  whanne  I  have 
synnyd  grevousli  in  his  si^t,  and  he  but  as  ri^twiis  venger  of 
synne  puneschi})  it  ri^twiisli  ?  For  he  is  makir  of  my  kynde, 
as  a  sli3  werkman,  knowynge  betere  how  his  hondi-werk  is 
defouHd  J^an  I,  Jjou^  I  were  keper  ]?erof.  For  whanne  I  hadde 
defouhd  it,  I  coude  not,  ne  noon  o}?ir,  amenden  it  wij^outen  him; 
and  I  Imewe  J)at  I  have  ofte  defoulid  his  werk  wilfully,  and  he 

^  he^  U.  ^  These  words  are  redundant. 

^  '  excelsum '  in  the  Vulgate. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC.  ii 

as  ofte  ha]?  recounsilid  it;  but  now  me  schame]?  wi]?  mysilf, 
knowinge  him  for  hi5est  Lord,  and  me  for  moost  vile  wrecche. 
How  schulde  I  dore  jjinke  to  meve  him  J?us  ofte  to  amende  my 
wilful  defaute  ?  As  who  seie,  Jje  best  is  in  al  angwische  to  take 
Goddis  sooude  mekely,  and  preien  him  of  mercy,  ])at  dide  as  it 
was  his  wille.     And  ]?erewi]7, 

Beeogitabo  tibi  omnes  annos  meos  in  amaritudine 
anime  mee :  /  schal  pinke  a^ein  to  pee  alle  my  yris,  in  hittir- 
fiesse  of  my  souk, 

I  schal  ])inke  to  }?ee,  J)at  is,  for  Jjc  heriyng  of  ]?ee  I  schal 
bringe  to  my  mynde  alle  my  ^eeris,  Jjat  is,  al  my  liif  ]?at  is 
passid,  in  which  I  knowe  me  coupable ;  and  J?at  in  bittirnes  of 
my  soule,  ]>at  is,  bittirnes  of  sorowe  be  in  my  soule  for  my 
synnes,  and  so  I  schal  ]3oru  ]?i  mercy  waische  me  clene  of  alle 
iil|?is,  lovynge  ]?i  name  wijjouten  eende,  more  qwemynge  })ee 
wij)  heriinge  ]?an  evere  I  displeside  j?ee  in  synnynge. 

Domine,  si  sic  vivitur,  et  in  talibus  vita  spiritus  mei, 
corripies  me,  et  vivifieabis  me.  Eece  in  pace  amaritudo 
mea  amarissima:  Lord^  if  man  so  lyve  and  in  sich  pe  liif  of 
my  spirit,  pou  schalt  chastise  me,  andpou  schalt  qwikene  me.  Lo, 
in  pees  my  bittirnes  bitterist. 

Lord,  if  man  so  lyve,  as  who  seie,  it  is  a  general  rule  j?at  man 
so  lyve,  Jjat  is,  ])oru  verri  penaunce,— and  in  siche,  ))at  is, 
hatrede  of  synne  and  in  love  of  ri^twisnes,  is  ]?e  liif  of  my  spirit, 
— ellis  it  is  deed, — Jjerfore  ]?ou  schalt  chastise  me  here  as  fou 
doost  J?i  sones,  \2X  I  peresche  not  wi])  sones  of  ))is  world 
wi|)Outen  eende.  And  chastisynge  ])0u  schalt  quykene  me, 
])at  is,  J?ou  schalt  ^eve  to  me  perj[i3t  heeljje.  For  lo,  in  pees, 
])at  is,  in  verri  pacience,  is  my  bittirnes,  fat  is,  my  siiknes ;  and 
tribulacioim  ]?at  ])0u  sendist,  of  me  is  suffrid  pacientli  and  in 
pees  wijjoute  grucchinge,  J?ou3  it  be  seen  bitteriste  while  o]?ere 
men  ben  in  welj?e. 

Tu  autem  eruisti  animam  meam  ut  non  periret,  pro- 
jeeisti  post  tergum  tuum  omnia  peeeata  mea :  But  pou 
delyveridist  my  soule  pat  it  pereschide  not,  pou  kestidest  bihynde  pi 
hak  alle  my  synnes, 

pou  ordeynedest  me  to  ]?i  love,  and  into  ]?in  heriyng;  delyvere 
my  soule  of  deej?  of  synne,  ]>at  it  peresche  not  wij?  \^  soulis  of 


T^  WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 

wickide  men,  which  Jjou  nei]?er  delyverist  fro  synne  ne  fro 
helle.  pou  castidest  bihynde  J?i  bak  to  for^eting  alle  my  synnes, 
)?at  ]?ou  se  hem  not  to  ponesche,  for  whom  ])0u  hast  poneischid 
sufficientli  here,  J)OU  wolt  not  ponesche  eft  wi})Oute  newe 
forfetynge. 

Quia  non  infernus  confitebitur  tibi,  neque  mors  lau- 
dabit  te ;  non  expeetabunt  qui  descendunt  in  lacnm 
veritatem  tuam :  For  helle  schal  not  schryve  to  pee ^  ne  deep  schal 
not  herie  pee ;  and  po  pat  Ihfen  in  pe  lake  7mle  not  abide  pi 
sop/astnes. 

Helle,— J^at  is,  he  or  sche  J^at  is  sett  in  j?e  derk  ground  of 
synnes;  for  siche  schulen  not  schryve  to  J?ee;  for  ]?e  devel 
byndij?  his  herte  and  his  mou]?,  ]?at  he  telle  not  his  synne  to  ]?ee 
wi]?  wille  to  amende  it.  Ne  dee]?,  ]}at  is,  he  Jjat  is  deed  in 
dispeir,  schal  not  love  ]?ee,  for  no  fair  heriyng  is  in  Jje  mouj?  of 
J?e  synful  man.  And  ]?o  ]?at  listen  in  J?e  lake  of  dampnacioun 
schulen  not  abide  ]>i  so]?fastnes,  ]?at  is,  f'ei  han  noon  hope  to  be 
delyverid  ]?oru  Jesus  Crist,  bier  of  mankynde.     But, 

Vivens,  vivens,  ipse  confitebitur  tibi,  sicut  et  ego 
hodie  ;  pater  notam  faciet  filiis  veritatem  tuam  ^  : 
Lyvynge,  lyvynge,  he  schal  schryve  to  pee,  as  and  I  in  pis  day ; 
fadir  schal  make  knowen  to  sones  pi  sop/astnes. 

Lyvynge  in  body  and  lyvynge  in  grace,  he  schal  schryve 
to  ]?ee,  lovynge  \\  name,  as  I  J)is  day,  Jjat  is,  in  })is  present  liif, 
schal  herie  ]?ee.  For  ech  good  fadir  bodili  and  goostli  lyvynge 
in  dreede  of  God,  aftir  })e  foorme  of  trewe  matrimonye,  or  after 
])e  office  of  trewe  presthood,  schal  make  knowen  to  hise  sones 
J}oru  trewe  teching  \i  so]?fastnes,  ])at  is,  verri  so))fastnesse  of 
trujje  in  \q  loore  of  Cristin  mannys  religioun.  For  wi])  wrong 
is  he  clepid  fadir  of  whos  fruyt  God  is  not  heried. 

Domine,  salvum  me  fae,  et  psalmos  nostros  eantabi- 
mus  eunctis  diebus  vite  nostre  in  dome  Domini  Dei 
nostri :  Lord,  make  me  saaf,  and  oure  salmes  schulen  we  synge 
alle  pe  day es  of  oure  liif  in  pe  hous  of  oure  Lord  God. 

Lord,  make  me  saaf  of  ]?e  devels  foundingys,  and  of  alle  oJ?ere 
yvelis  wi}>inne  and  wi}?oute,  and  we  schulen  synge  oure  salmes, 

^  corrected;  T  has  5iiam;  U  om. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC.  13 

jjat  is,  we  schulen  make  solempne  Jjin  heriingis  wi]?  herte, 
moujj,  and  bond,  alle  ]?e  dayes  of  oure  liif,  Jjat  is,  contynuely 
while  we  ben  in  goostiy  Hif,  and  in  chaiyte  in  Goddis  bous, 
Jjat  is  in  boly  cbirche ;  of  dwellinge  out  ]5erof,  J?ou3t  of  berte, 
ne  salm  of  mou]?,  ne  werk  of  hondis,  is  not  qweemeful  to 
Jesus  Crist. 


[THE    SONG    OF    HANNAH.] 

[  I  Sam.  ii.  i — 10.  ] 

Exultavit  cor  memn  in  Domino,  et  exaltatum  est 
cornu  meum  in  Deo  meo  :  Myii  herte  gladide  in  oure  Lord, 
and  myn  hornys  hiyd  in  my  God. 

Helcana  J?at  was  fadir  of  Samuel  badde  two  wyves,  Ffen- 
nenne  ^  and  Anne.  By  Ffenenne,  j?at  first  woxe  in  berynge  of 
cbildren,  is  bitokenyd  fe  synagoge  of  J^e  Jewis ;  by  Anne,  ]?at 
was  first  bareyn,  and  si}»in  bigan  to  be  more  multiplied  ]?an 
]?e'  to])ir,  is  bitokenyd  j^e  Cbirche  of  Cristen  men.  Wherfore 
Anna  brest  forj?  in  heriynge  of  God,  and  made  ]?is  Salm, 
enditinge  it  J)e  Holy  Goost,  stirynge  us  to  J^e  heriinge  of  oure 
God  ]?at  ha])  take  us  fro  ]?e  errours  of  he]?en  men.  At  fe 
bigynnyng  of  her  song  sche  schewij?  J^at  in  God  is  her  deliit, 
and  sei]),  as  in  figure  of  us,  Myn  herte  gladide  in  my  Lord,  in 
J)e  fruit  of  good  werk  and  of  meedful  meditacioun,  ])at  was  sory 
for  my  bareynheed ;  and  hi^ed  is  myn  horn,  J)at  is,  my  goostli 
strenk}?e,  in  j^e  which  I  putt  awey  my  scoorners,  hoping  in  my 
God,  not  in  mysilf,  ne  in  vanyte  of  j?is  world. 

Dilatatnm  est  os^  meum  super  inimicos  meos,  quia 
letata  sum  in  salutari  tuo :  Largid  is  my  moup  upon  myn 
enemy es,  for  I joiede  in  pin  heelpe. 

pat  is,  wilfully  and  wi]?  gladnes  I  openede  my  mou]?  in  jje 
heriinge  of  God,  above  my  foos,  Jjat  is,  moore  j^an  fei  ])at 
schameden  me  and  dispisiden  me  bifore;  and  J)at  for  I  joiede 

^  Phe7ienna^  in  Vulg,  ^  corrected  from  Vulg.  T  has  cor. 


14  WrCLIF'S  WORKS. 

not  in  pompe  and  in  vanyte  of  vein  joie,  but  in  )>in  heel])e,  jjat 
is,  in  Jesus,  J^at  me  ha]?  hi^ed  in  vertu. 

Non  est  sanctus  ut  est  Dominus,  neque  enim  est  alius 
extra  te,  et  non  est  fortis  sicut  Deus  noster :  Noon  ts  holy 
as  oure  Lor  d^  for  noon  oper  is  out  of  pee,  and  noon  is  sialworpe  as 
is  oure  God, 

Noon  is  hooly,  J>at  is,  fre  of  synne,  as  is  oure  Lord  Jesus 
Crist,  for  noon  o}»ir  is  })at  is  holy  out  of  J?ee,  for  in  Jjee  and  ])oru 
J)ee  is  ech  man  hooly.  And  noon  is  stalwor]?e  to  vengen  yvele 
deedis  as  oure  God  is,  ))at  ^eldi)?  to  ech  man  aftir  his  yvel  wille. 
perfore  J^e  ^  scorners  and  ]?e  ^  dispisers  of  meke  pore  men,  and 
honourers  ^  of  riche  men, 

ITolite  multiplieare  loqtii  sub]imia  gloriantes:  Willifi 
not  multiplien  to  speke  Jiiy  pingis  gloriynge. 

Willi)?  no  moore  ^eve  to  ^oure  tunge  leve  to  speke  proudli, 
for  ])at  ^e  ben  hi^ed  of  J?is  world,  for  ]?at  my^t  is  but  schame  and 
sorowe  to  50U,  if  ^e  coveiten  hem,  joiynge  in  richessis  Jjoru  pride 
in  30ure  delicis  and  leccherye.  And  if  ^e  bij^ou^ten  50U  wel,  ^e 
schulden  have  more  sorowe  ])an  joie,  for  ^e  ^eten  noon  o\\x 
hevene,  but  if  ^e  dispende  hem  at  Goddis  wille. 

Reeedant  vetera  de  ore  vestro,  quia  Bens  seienciarum 
Domimis  est,  et  ipsi  preparantur  cogitaeiones :  Olde  pingis 
departipfro  it^oure  moup,for  God  of  sciencis  is  Lord ;  to  him  ben 
redied  pouiftis, 

Olde  ]?ingis  ben  lesyngis,  false  o])is,  cursingis,  sclaundringis, 
backbityngis,  and  grucchingis  a^ens  Goddis  wille  and  his 
sooude,  whiche  schewen  J?at  ^e  dwellen  in  ^oure  oold  liif ;  but 
if  5ee  wolen  plese  God,  departe  ])0  fro  ^oure  mou]?  }?at  ^e  use 
hem  no  more,  but  newe  speche  in  newe  liif;  for  God  of 
sciencis  J?at  al  woot  and  al  may  is  Lord,  streitly  deemynge 
50ure  oolde  errours,  and  to  him  ben  j^ou^tis  redyed,  for  he 
knowiJ>  wel  al  ]>at  ^e  jjinken,  and  whereinne  ^oure  deliit  is  moost. 
Fyve  ))ingis  ben  founden  in  a  man, — J^ou^t,  affeccioun,  entent, 
werk,  and  speche.  pe  J^ou^t  schulde  be  devout  and  hooly,  })e 
affeccioun  cleene,  J?e  entent  ri^t,  }>e  werk  ri^twiis,  and  fe  speche 
atempre. 

^  35,  U.  ^  om.  U.  ^  So  in  U ;  honotiris,  T. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC.  15 

Arciis  fortium  superatus  est  et  iTtfirmi  aecincti  sunt 
robore :  p^  h(me  ofpe  stalworpe  is  overcomun,  and  pe  dike  hen 
gird  wij?  strenkpe, 

pe  bowe  of  J)e  staleworjje  is  })e  trist  of  riche  men  and  cove- 
touse,  ]>at  Jjei  beenden  to  wynne  to  J?e  honour  and  lordschip  of 
jjis  world,  and  Jjat  is  overcomun,  for  Crist  haj?  dampnyd  it,  and 
schal  breken  it,  and  casten  it  into  fe  fier  of  helle.  And  siike 
men,  J?at  is,  meke  men  and  feble  in  her  owne  i^en,  wij70ute 
presumpcioun  and  pride,  ben  gird  wiJ?  strenk})e,  J^at  is,  wi]> 
goostli  virtu ;  j?ei  ben  maad  stable  and  lastinge  in  good  )?ou5t, 
to  fi^te  a^enis  her  goosdi  enemyes  wij?  devoute  preiers,  and 
a^ein  her  bodily  enemyes  wiJ?  meke  suffraunce ;  for  alle  gode 
men  han  manye  foos,  while  Jjei  ben  in  J)is  liif. 

Repleti  prius,  pro  panibus  se  locaverunt,  et  famelici 
saturati  sunt :  Firste  fillide  for  looves  pei  ley  den  hem,  and  pe 
hungry  hen  fillid. 

Who  J?at  first  werun  fillid  in  erj^eli  lustis  and  bolueden  in 
looves,  ]>at  is,  for  fode  of  soule,  \€\  leyden  hem,  ]?at  is,  ]>ei 
^even  hem  mekely  to  resseyve  J?e  loore  of  hevene ;  and  so  ]?e 
hungry,  )?at  is,  desirynge  ri^twisnes  and  ])e  word  of  liif,  ben 
fillid  in  swetnes  or  eendelees  joie.  And  so  longe  schal  J)is 
goostli  breed  laste. 

Donee  sterilis  peperit  plurimos,  et  que  multos  habebat 
fiJios  infirmata  est :  Til  pe  hareyn  have  horen  manye,  and  siche 
pat  hadde  many  sones  he  maad  siik. 

Til  ]?e  bareyn,  |?at  is,  J?e  Chirche  of  Crisfen  men  ]?at  first 
was  bareyn  of  tru)?e  and  good  werk,  have  borun  manye  sones 
goostli  to  Crist,  and  \e  synagoge,  Jjat  hadde  manye  fleschly 
sones,  was  maad  syke^,  J)at  is,  it  is  knowen  jjat  it  brou^t  no 
man  to  perfeccioun,  and  now  bringij?  no  man  to  salvacioun. 

Donainus  mortificat  et  vivifieat,  deducit  ad  inferos  et 
reducit :  p^  Lord  sleep  and  he  qwikenep,  he  ledip  to  helle,  and  he 
hringip  ayin. 

Oure  Lord  sleej?  hem  |?at  loven  ))is  liif  outragiousli,   and 
qwikene}>  hem  )?at  forsaken  ]?is  world  and  dispisen  ]?is  Hif  for  ]>e 
liif  eendelees.     He  ledij>  to  helle,  ])at  is,  he  setti]?  drede  of  helle 
in  synful  men,  and  so  he  bringij?  hem  a^ein  to  hope  of  liif. 
1  SoinU;  T  has ////&. 


i6  WrCLIF'S  WORKS. 

Dominus  pauperem  faeit  et  ditatS  humiliat  et  sub- 
levat :  Oure  Lord  makip  pore  and  he  makijb  riche^  he  meMp  and 
he  upUfiip, 

Oure  Lord  mercifully  maki]?  a  pore  man  riche  of  eendelees 
goodis,  revynge  his  herte  fro  covetise  and  er}?eli  love;  for  he 
made  him  not  riche  J^oru  ri^twiisnes,  but  if  he  firste  made  him 
pore  in  herte  ])oru  mersy.  He  meki)?  ]?e  proude  to  peyne  of 
devels,  and  upliftij?  ])e  meke  to  joie  of  aungelis. 

Suscitans  de  pulvere^  egeaum,  et  de  stereore  erigens 
pauperem :  Reisynge  pe  nedy  out  of  dust,  and  out  of  fenne 
rv^iinge  pe  pore. 

Reisinge  wi}>inne  J>oru  grace  out  of  dust,  ]?at  is,  fro  yvel  liif 
)>at  is  stirid  wi]?  ech  wynd  of  temptacioun,  \t  nedy,  ]?at  is,  him 
j)at  knowij?  his  goostli  nede,  and  j)erfor  is  he  evere  askynge  of 
God  J>at  he  be  stable  in  his  love  and  not  movable  as  dust; 
and  out  of  }>e  fenne,  }?at  is,  of  corrupcioun  of  bodi,  ri^tynge  ]?e 
pore  ])at  dispisij?  ]?e  falsheed  of  ])is  world,  makinge  him  |)Oru 
grace  |3e  holy  lovere  of  Jesus  Crist. 

TJt  sedeat  cum.  principibus,  et  solium  gloriae  teneat : 
p^/  he  sitte  wip  princis^  and  holde  pe  soler  of  glorie. 

pat  is,  \2X  he  be  wij)  meede  and  reste  of  ]?e  aposths,  and  in 
])e  day  of  doom  holde  |)e  trone  and  j?e  pouste  of  deemynge. 

Domini  enim  sunt  cardines  terrae,  et  posuit  super  eos 
orbem:  For  pe  lordis  hen  pe  haccis^  ofpe  erpe^  and  he  sette  on 
hem  pe  world, 

pe  herds  of  erj?e  ben  ]?e  perfi^t  men  of  holy  Chirche  in  truj>e 
and  charite,  ]?oru  whiche  o)?ere  men  ben  brou5t  to  stablenes  and 
fastnyng ;  and  he  sette  on  hem  ]?e  world,  })at  is,  hem  he  sette 
]?e  ground  of  his  Chirche,  as  wyde  as  it  is  ])oru  ]?e  world. 

Pedes  sanctorum  suorum  servabit*;  impiL  et  in 
tenebris  conticeseent  ^,  quia  non  in  fortitudine  sua 
roborabitur  vir:  "pe  feet  of  hise  seyntis  he  schal  kepe,  and  pe 
wickid  in  derknes  schulen  be  stille,  for  not  in  his  stalworpnes 
schal  a  man  he  strengpid. 

pe  feet,  )>at  is,  j^e  gode  affecciouns  and  )?e  devoute  desiris,  of 

1  corrected  from  Vulg. ;  dicat,  T.  ^  corrected  from  Vtilg. ; 

ptdveretn,  T.  ^  herres,  U.  "^  corrected  from  Vulg.  ; 

servabufit,  T.  ^     corrected  from  Vulg. ;  conlicissent,  T. 

WYCLIF. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC.  17 

hise  seyntis,  J>at  is,  of  hem  whiche  he  halowi)>  and  holdi]?  cleene, 
he  schal  kepe  fro  fallyng,  for  on  }>o  feet  Jjei  goon  to  God. 
And  wickide  men  wijjouten  pite  of  her  owne  soule,  in  derkenes 
of  ignoramice  and  yvele  deedis,  schulen  be  stille,  ]>at  ]?ei  heve 
not  God  to  queeme  ^  ne  schrjve  her  synnes  verrily.  For  not 
in  his  stahvorJ?nes  is  a  man  streng]?id,  ]>at  is,  holy  men  han  no 
presumpcioun  of  her  owne  virtu  ne  of  strengjje,  as  proude  men 
han,  which  strenkjje  is  chesoun  of  her  dampnacioun. 

Dominuin  formidabTint  adversarii  ejus ;  et  super  ipsos 
in  coelis  tonabit :  p^  adversaries  of  oure  Lord  schulen  drede 
htm,  and  above  hem  in  hevene  he  schal pundir. 

Goddis  enemyes  ben  alle  J)at  doon  a^ein  ri^twiisnes,  or  jjat 
loven  falsheed.  And  if  Jjei  wolen  not  now  dreede  wi]?  her  wille, 
Jjei  schulen  be  maad  to  drede  him  a^ein  her  wille,  whanne  he 
schal  deeme;  fanne  he  schal  orribly  jjundir  above  hem  his 
dreede,  seiinge  to  hem,  Go,  ^e  wariede  wi^tis,  into  fier  wijjouten 
eende,  fat  is  greij)id  to  j?e  devel  and  hise  angels. 

Dominus  judicabit  fines  terre,  et  dabit  imperium 
regi  sue,  et  sublimabit  cornu  Cristi  sni :  Oure  Lord  schal 
deeme  pe  eendis  ofpe  erpe^  and  he  schal  yve  empire  to  his  kyng, 
and  he  schal  hi^  pe  horn  of  his  Crist 

Oure  Lord  schal  deeme  ]?e  eendis  of  erjje,  not  j?e  bigyn- 
nyngis  ne  ]?e  mydward  j  for  ech  man  schal  be  deemyd  of  God, 
sich  as  he  is  founden  in  ])e  eende  of  his  liif.  And  ]?anne  he  schal 
^eve  empire,  J)at  is,  alle  chosun  men  ]?at  lyveden  in  hise  com- 
aundementis,  to  his  kyng,  Jjat  is,  to  Crist,  J)at  is  his  sone  king. 
And  he  schal  hi^en  j^e  horn  of  his  Crist,  ]?oru  \t  which  he  blew 
away  al  J^e  my^t  of  his  enemy. 

^  l(yve  not  Gody  U. 


WOKKS.      VOL,  III. 


1 8  WFCLIF'S  WORKS, 


r 


[THE   SONG    OF  MOSES   AND   THE   CHILDREN 
OF  ISRAEL.] 

[Ex.  XV.  I — 19.] 

Cantemus  Domino,  gloriose  enim  magnificatus  est; 
equum  et  ascensorem.  ^  dejecit  in  mare :  Synge  we  to  om^e 
Lord,  for  glorioiisU  he  is  worschipid ;  pe  hors  and  pe  stier  he 
caste  doun  into  pe  see. 

We  ])at  ben  lad  out  of  Egypt,  \2X  is,  out  of  J^e  derknes  of 
vicis  and  out  of  j^e  affliccioun  of  erj^eli  bisynes,  synge  we  to 
oure  Lord,  ]>at  is,  herie  we  him,  ]?ankinge  him  wi]>  al  J^e 
devocioun  of  oure  herte,  for  gloriousli  he  is  worschipid  in  sich 
delyveraunce,  ])at  dee]>  is  distried  in  glorios  victorie.  pe  hors, 
\2X  is,  alle  dampnable  wrecchis  J^at  now  beren  hem  ful  proude, 
and  ])e  stier,  }>at  is,  J?e  devel,  whom  alle  yvele  membris  ^  beren  ^, 
he  caste  doun  into  J?e  see,  J^at  is,  into  ]>e  pit  of  helle.  pis  schal 
be  fulfillid  in  ))e  day  of  doom;  j^erfore  we,  j?oru  grace  de- 
lyverid,  synge  we  to  God  and  seie, 

PortitiidG  mea  et  laus  mea  dominus,  et  faotus  est 
mihi  in  salutem :  My  strengpe  and  myn  heriynge  pe  Lord,  and 
maad  he  is  to  me  into  heelpe, 

pom  him  we  ben  stalworjje  to  stonde,  }>oru  him  we  schulen 
be  heried,  whanne  oure  enemyes  )?at  ben  now  heried  schulen  be 
dispisid;  and  he  is  maad  to  us  into  heelj^e  eendelees,  and  her 
sti3er  to  hem  to  eendelees  dampnacioun. 

Iste  Deus  meus,  et  glorificabo  eum,  Dens  patris  mei, 
et  exaltabo  enm :  He  is  my  God  and  I  schal  glorifien  him, 
God  ofmyfadirs,  and  I  schal  hiyn  him. 

He,  ))is  Jesus  Crist,  ^ever  of  grace,  is  my  God ;  and  J>erfore 
I  schal  glorifien  him.     pat  is,  I  schal  seke  his  joie  and  heriyng, 

1  corrected  from  Vulg. ;  assemorem,  T.  2  ^^^^^  -jj^ 

3  FrornU;  om.T. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC, 


19 


not  myn,  for  he  is  God  of  my  fadir,  patriarkis  and  apostlis,  and 
I  schal  hi^en  him  \2X  his  name  be  honourid  ])oru  me. 

Dominus  quasi  vir  pugnator,  omnipotens  nomen  ejus ; 
CTirrus  Pharaonis  et  exercittmi  ejus  projeeit  in  mare: 
p^  Lord  as  a  man  filter,  almv^ti  his  name ;  pe  cartis  of  Farao 
and  his  00 si  he  casie  into  pe  see, 

Omre  Lord  is  fi^tir,  for  he  betij?  out  J)e  devel  fro  })e  hertis  of 
hise  servauntis;  Almy3ti  is  his  name,  for  no]?ing  may  a^en- 
stonde  him.  And  ]>at  is  wel  seene,  for  J?e  cartis  of  Farao,  \2X 
is,  ])e  boostful  pride  of  })e  devel,  and  his  oost,  J>at  is,  alle 
unri^twise  men  J?at  serven  to  him  as  hise  trewe  kny^tis,  for  fei 
han  levere  to  dien  in  pryde  and  in  malice  }>an  to  lyve  in  meke- 
nes  and  charite,  hem  he  caste  into  ]?e  see,  ])at  is,  alle  siche  on 
domesday  schal  Crist  caste  wij?  \t  devel,  fadir  of  alle  )?e  children 
of  pride,  into  ]?e  bittir  peyne  of  helle  wi}?outen  eende. 

Electi  prineipes  ejus  submersi  sunt  in  marl  rubro. 
Abyssi  operuerunt  eos;  deseenderunt  in  proftindum 
quasi  lapis :  Hise  chosone  princis  hen  drenchid  in  pe  Reed  see. 
Depnessis  hiliden  hem  ;  pei  li^iiden  into  pe  depnes  as  a  stoon, 

pe  chosone  princis  of  Sathan  ben  ]?e  gloriouse  princis  and 
prelatis,  wi)>  o]?ere  lustful  riche  men  of  ])e  world,  \2X  setten  al 
her  love  and  her  likyng  in  erjjeli  weljje;  Jjese  schulen  be 
drenchid  in  J>e  Reed  see  of  eendelees  fier,  for  here  )?ei  ben 
drenchid  in  |)e  blak  see  of  synne.  Depnesses  of  helle  schal 
hile  hem,  ]?at  ))ei  se  no  more  of  her  vanyte ;  jjei  li^tiden  into  }?e 
ground  of  turmentis,  as  a  stoon  cast  into  Jje  ground  comeJ> 
nevere  a^ein. 

Dextera  tua,  Domine,  magnificata  est  in  fortitudine ; 
dextera  percussit  inimicum;  et  in  multitudine  glorie 
tue  deposuisti  omnes  adversaries  tuos :  p/  r^y  hond,  Lord, 
is  worschipid  in  strengpe ;  pi  ri'^t  hond  smootpe  ene?ny  ;  and  in 
mychilnes  of  pi  glorie  pou  didist  doun  alle  myn  adversaries. 

pat  is, — Lord,  )?i  Sone  schewide  strenkjje  a^ein  })e  devel,  and 
refte  him  his  my^t ;  and  for  J)e  heriyng  of  }>i  myche  joie  |?ou 
didist  doun  alle  yvele  spiritis  and  vicis  of  her  oold  seete,  ])at  \€\ 
hadden  no  power  in  my  soule. 

Misisti  iram  ^  tuam  que  devoravit  eos  sicut  stipulam ; 

^  So  in  U ;  T  has  terram. 
C  2 


^o  WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 

in  spiritu  furoris  tui  congregate  sunt  aque :  ]>ou  seniist  pi 
wrappe  pat  eei  hem  as  stohle.  In  spirit  of  pi  hreep  gaderid  hen 
wain's. 

pou  sentist  )>i  wra}>])e,  }>at  is,  J)Ou  didist  veniaunce  on  hem,  ]>e 
which  eet  hem  as  fier  waasti]?  stoble ;  hard  veniaunce  is  in  fier. 
In  spirit  of  \i  breej>,  \2X  is,  )?y  spirit  wra])]?ide,  gaderid  ben 
watirs  of  al  turment  to  synful  men. 

Stetit  unda  fluens;  congregati  sunt  abyssy  in  medio 
maris :  '^e  flowynge  watir  stood ;  gaderid  hen  depnessis  in  myddis 
ofpe  see, 

pe  fiowynge  watir  stood,  ]>at  is,  }?e  peyne  of  proude  bolnyd 
maliciouse  dampnyd  men  and  wommen  lastij?  wijjouten  eende. 
Gaderid  ben  depnessis  of  alle  sorowis  in  myddis  of  ))e  see,  ]?at 
is,  in  })e  foulist  pitt  of  helle,  })at  f>ei  ben  poneschid  }?ere  eende- 
lees,  })at  ben  depe  here  in  malice  and  wickidnes.     But  first, — 

Dixit  inimieus,  Persequar  et  eomprehendam,  dividam 
spolia,  implebitnr  anima  mea:  p^  enemy  seyde,  I  schal 
folowe,  and  I  schal  take,  and  schal  departe  spoilis^  my  souk  schal 
hefulfillid. 

pe  enemy  \q  devel  seide,  I  schal  folowe  wi}»  yvel  ^ggy^g 
Cristen  men  J)at  turnen  out  of  Egypt  and  hasten  into  ]?e  lond  of 
hevene,  and  I  schal  pursue  hem  wij?  snaris  of  dyverse  temp- 
taciouns  and  manyfoold  errours  and  fantums.  I  schal  departe 
spoilis,  ))at  is,  whanne  J?ei  ben  wi})drawe  fro  clennes  and  charite, 
I  schal  putt  hem  in  dyverse  vicis  and  crueltees,  and  so  my  wille 
schal  be  fulfillid  in  hem.  For  \t  devel  coveiti]?  no  moore  but 
to  han  me  out  of  charite,  for  ])anne  ben  J?ei  lost  fro  grace  if  J^ei 
dwellen  in  pride  and  malice.     And  if  ]?ei  stonden  a^ein  me, — 

Evaginabo  gladium  meum,  interfieiet  eos  manus  mea : 
/  schal  drawe  out  my  swerd,  and  hetn  schal  myn  hond  sle. 

I  schal  outdrawe,  J)at  is,  apeertly  I  schal  schewe  bifore  her 
i^en  my  swerd,  ]>at  is,  venemouse  lustis  and  hkingis  of  deedly 
synnes,  and  j)om  \o  my  my3t  schal  sle  hem  goostU.  Manye  he 
sleej?  but  not  alle,  and  al  his  malice  schal  J)e  wickider  ben. 

Mavit  spiritus  tuus,  et  opernit  eos  mare,  submersi 
sunt  quasi  plumbum  in  aquis  vehementibus :  'pi  spirit 
hlew,  and  pe  see  hilide  hem;  drenchid pei  hen  as  leed  in  grete 
watris. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC,  %i 

Thi  Spirit  blew,  \2X  is,  veniaunce  pass}nage  of  )?i  wille  fel  on 
hem;  ]?e  see  hilide  hem,  J>at  is,  ]?e  devel  wi]?  alle  ])at  he  haj) 
disseyved  schulen  be  swolowid  of  helle,  )?at  J?ei  angre  not  aftir 
gode  men.  Drenchid  ]?ei  ben  hevy  as  leed,  for  birpun^  of 
synnes,  in  grete  watris,  ]?at  is,  in  grete  turmentis  }?at  nevere 
moun  be  goon. 

Quis  similis  tm  in  fortibus,  Domine  ?  cfuis  similis  tiii 
magnifieus  in  sanctitate,  terribilis  atque  laudabilis,  et 
faciens  mirabilia?  Who  is  pee  liik  in  stalworpnes,  Lord?  who 
is  J?ee  liik^  worschipful  i7i  holynes,  feerdful  and  preisahle  and 
doinge  wondris  ? 

Who  is  hik  to  oure  Lord .?  as  who  sey,  noon ;  for  he  doo]?  al 
J?at  he  wole,  and  no})ing  is  doon  wi]?outen  his  suffring  and  his 
wille.  perfore  is  he  worschipful  in  largete  of  ^iftis  of  grace  to 
holy  men,  feerdful  in  veniaunce  of  yvele  men,  and  to  herien  in 
delyveringe  of  ri^twise  men,  and  doynge  wondris  in  hi^inge  of 
meke  men  and  pore,  and  in  doun-castinge  of  proude  men. 

Extendisti  manum  tuam,  et  devoravit  eos  terra.  Dux 
fuisti  in  miserieordia  tua  popnlo  tuo,  queni  redemisti: 
pou  strecchidist  pin  hond,  and  pe  erpe  devour ide  hem.  Leder 
pou  were  in  pi  mercy  to  pi  folk  pat  pou  bou^iist. 

Thow  schewidist  \>i  my^t  to  ]?e  veniaunce  of  hem  ])at  weren 
eten  here  wi]?  er]?eli  covetise,  sleinge  hem  sodeinly,  and  put- 
tinge  hem  into  helle ;  but  in  J?i  mersi  ]?ou  leddist  to  hevene  alle 
meke  folk,  dispisers  of  synne,  for  ]>ei  ben  \>m  heritage  bou^t  wi)? 
J?i  blood. 

Et  portasti  eum  in  fortitudine  tua,  ad  habitaculum 
sanctum  tuum:  And  pou  heere  him  in  pi  sirenkpe  to  pin  holy 
woniyng, 

pat  is,  in  ])i  virtu  and  J)i  goodnes  Jjou  berist  J)i  loviers  fro  J)e 
malicious  bisynes  of  ]?is  world  to  ))i  wonying  in  eendelees  joie. 

Ascendunt  populi  et  irati  sunt;  dolores  optinuerunt 
habitatores  Philistiim' :  p^  folk  stieden  and  weren  wrappid; 
sorowis  weeldiden  pe  wonyers  of  Filisteis. 

Gode  men  dispisen  J)is  liif  and  haasten  to  hevene;  Jeanne 
fendis  and  )^ele  men  comen  and  casten  before  hem  manye 

^  bir\>en,  U. 


%%  WrCLIF'S  WORKS. 

noyes  to  letten  hem ;  and  if  ]?ei  moun  not  overcomen  hem,  ))ei 
waxen  wrojje,  and  ])Oru  her  \vra]?j?e  and  indignaciouns,  Jje  whiche 
)?ei  han  a^ein  ri^twise  men,  J)ei  ben  endurid  in  her  unskilful 
errour  til  eendelees  deej>  weelde  hem.  And  so  \d  ben  liik  to 
j?e  wonyers  of  Filistiym,  })at  ben  fallynge  Jsoru  drinke,  for  J^ei 
ben  di'unke  ]3oru  malice  and  pride,  J>at  \e\  han  no  witt  to 
amende  hem,  but  liggen  as  drunken  men  in  erj?eli  lustis. 

Tunc  conturbati  sunt  principes  Edom,  robustos  Moab 
obtinnit  tremor,  obriguerunt  omnes  habitatores  Cha- 
naan:  panne  ben  irouhlid  pe  princis  of  Edom ^  trembly  nge  weel- 
dynge  J?e  stalworpe  of  Moab ^  alle  pe  wonyers  of  Chanain  waxen 
starke. 

pe  princis  of  Edom  ben  erfeli  kyngis,  J)at  of  pride  and 
tirauntrie  ]?risten  mennys  blood  wi])  injuries ;  )?ese  schulen  be 
troublid  whanne  Crist  deeme]?,  Jjou^  Jjei  ben  now  holden  ful 
glorios.  pe  stalworfe  of  Moab  ben  alle  ]?e  proude  princis  ^ 
prelatis,  and  prestis  of  J)is  world,  })at  maken  hem  stronge  in 
getynge  of  richessis  |?at  Crist  and  hise  forbeden  to  hem.  Boost- 
ynge  of  her  power  schulen  tremble,  for  her  dampnacioun  may 
not  be  a^ein-clepid,  for  stinkinge  of  her  ypocrisie.  Wonyers 
of  Chanaan  ben  chaunsable  men  and  unstable  in  good  purpos, 
knowen  defautis  and  amenden  hem  not,  but  for  love  of  covetise, 
or  for  drede  of  noies,  ofte  tymes  assenten  or  letten  to  sey  ]?e 
so]?e.  But  manye  of  ))ese  schulen  be  movyd  ]>oru  tru]?e  and 
charyte,  and  so  J)ei  schulen  waxe  starke  for  drede,  havynge 
sorowe  in  her  hertis  for  lackinge  of  socour  to  helpe  in  Goddis 
cause,  for  enemyes  schulen  multiplie,  and  fewe  doren  holde 
jje  trujje.  But,  for  J?ou  failist  not  in  dayes  of  angwisch  to 
J?i  loviers, 

Irruat  super  eos  formido  et  paver  in  magnitudine 
brachii  tui :  Falle  on  hem  dreede  and  qwaking  in  pe  greetheed 
of  pin  arm. 

That  is,  make  J?in  enemyes  in  drede  of  ]?i  doom  so  afeerd  for 
]?ee,  ]?at  ]?ei  have  no  my^t  to  distrouble  )>i  servauntis  in  her  weye. 

Fiant  immobiles  quasi  lapis,  donee  pertranseat  popu- 
lus  tuuSj  Domine,  donee  pertranseat  populus  tuus  iste 

1  proude  men,  U  ;  rest  of  sentence  om. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC.  23 

quein  possedisti :   Maad  he  pei  unstable  as  a  stoon,  HI  pat  pi 
folk  passe ^  Lord,  til  pi  folk  passe,  pis  is  pe  which  pou  hastweldid. 

pat  is,  yvele  men  be  holden  in  hardnes  of  obstynacioun,  til 
\2X  ]>e  folk  \2X  ]?ou  hast  chosun  be  groundid  in  stedefast  bileeve^ 
for  Jeanne  Jjei  ben  passid  |?e  dreede  of  ]?is  liif. 

Introduces  eos,  et  plantabis  eos  in  monte  hereditatis 
tue,  firmissimo  habitaeulo  quod  operatus  es,  Domine : 
'^ou  shall  lede  hem  into  pe  lojtd,  and  pou  schalt  sette  hem  inpe  Ml 
of  pin  heritage,  and  in  pi  fas  list  wonyng,  pe  which  pou  wrot^tist, 
Lord. 

pat  is,  )?ou  schalt  out-lede  hem  J)at  ben  out-cast  and  deed 
for  ]?i  love  into  ])e  lond  of  lyvynge,  and  setten  hem  an  hi^ 
in  heven,  Jjat  is  fast  wonyng  wij^oute  angir  or  envye,  ))e  which 
]>ou  wrou^tist  to  hem,  ]?at  \€\  moun  be  in  endelees  rest. 
And  \2X  is, 

Sanetuarium  tuum,  Bomine,  quod  firmaverunt  manus 
tue.  Dominus  regnabit  ^  in  seeulum  et  ultra :  'pi  sey7i- 
tuarie,  Lord,  pe  whiche  pin  hondis  fastneden.  Oure  Lord  schal 
regne  wipouten  eende  and  over. 

In  \2X  seyntuarie  oure  Lord  schal  be  kyng,  ]?at  is,  in  all  savyd 
men  wi]?outen  eende ;  and  over,  he  sei]?,  for  he  is  bifore  al  fing, 
and  over  al  J^ing, — bifore  al  ]?ing  as  maker,  bifore  al  ])at  is 
maad, — and  over  al  J^at  is  or  schal  be,  for  of  him  ]?ei  ben  alle, 
and  wiJ)OUten  him  moun  ]?ei  not  be. 

Ingressus  est  enim  eques  Pharao  cum  curribus  et 
equitibus  in  mare,  et  reduxit  super  eos  Dominus  aquas 
maris  :  Pharao  and  hors  wip  charts  and  horsemen  entriden  into 
pe  see,  and  oure  Lord  hroiv^te  on  hem  pe  watirs  ofpe  see. 

pat  is,  ]?e  devel  sittinge  in  yvele  men  is  entrid  into  j^is  world 
to  tempten  and  to  angren  wi]?  alle  hise  lymes  gode  men;  but 
oure  Lord  bringi]?  on  him  and  alle  hise  \t  peynes  of  helle. 

Eilii  autem  Israeli  ambulaverunt  per  siccum  in  medio 
ejus  :  Butpe  sones  of  Israel  ':i,eden  hi  drie,  in  myddis  of  it, 

pat  is,  trewe  Cristen  men,  folowynge  Crist,  passen  ]?oru  ]?e 
world  to  hevene  by  )?e  drie  wey  of  meke  chastite  and  charyte, 
wijjoute  watris  of  fleschli  lustis. 

^  corrected  from  Vulg. ;  regnavit,  T. 


H  WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 

[THE  PRAYER  OF  HABAKKUK.] 
[Hab.  iii.  2 — 19.] 

Domine,  audivi  audicionem  tuam,  et  timui:  Lord, 
I  herde  pin  heeryng,  and  I  dredde. 

Lord,  ])Oru  fe  pryvyte  of  j)in  incarnacioun  I  knew  ]?ee  verri 
God,  havynge  mersy  of  ))in  hondywerk,  and  I  dredde ;  ])at  is, 
])0U5  al  my  soule  were  glad,  I  helde  me  unwor]?i  to  heere  sich 
an  heerynge. 

Domine,  opus  tuum,  in  medio  annorum  vivifica  illud : 
Lord,  pi  werk,  in  myddis  ofyeris,  qwikene  it. 

Lord,  ]?is  woundirful  natyvyte  of  ]?e  Mayden  is  ]?i  werk,  not 
werk  of  mannys  kynde ;  in  myddis  of  ^eeris,  ]?at  is,  in  fulnes 
of  tyme,  qwikene  it,  |?at  is,  sende  }?i  Sone  to  qwikene  us. 

In  medio  annorum  notum  faeies.  Cum  iratus  fueris, 
miserieordiae  recordaberis :  In  myddis  of  yeris  pou  schalt 
make  knowen.  Whanne  pou  were  wrappid,  of  merci  pou  schalt 
hipinke. 

In  ]?e  laste  eelde  Jjat  now  is,  ])at  is  clepid  myddis  of  ^eeris, 
for  it  is  in  fulnes  of  tyme  and  of  grace  in  which  Crist  is  maad 
knowen  to  alle  })at  wolen  come  to  him,  for  now  is  ]?e  tyme  in 
which  he  j^ou^te  to  do  mersy. 

Dens  ab  Austro  veniet,  et  sanetus  de  monte  Pharon : 
God  schal  come  of pe  Soup,  andpe  holy  ofpe  Ml  of  Far  on. 

pat  is,  Jesus  Crist  shal  come  J>oru  truj)e  and  love  bi  J)e  my^t 
of  his  Fadir  and  J)e  heete  of  }>e  Holy  Goost,  and  knowynge 
of  his  lawe. 

Operuit  eelos  gloria  ejus,  et  laudis  ejus  plena  est 
terra :  His  glorie  keveride  hevenes ;  and  of  his  heriing  ful  is 
pe  erpe. 

pat  is,  tru])e  and  love  J^oru  }?e  which  he  is  glorified  hilide 
\t  apostlis  and  oj^ere  holy  men  as  honorable  clo]?ing,  and  so 
he  is  heried  J>oru  al  holy  Chirche,  of  hem  fat  weren  J^is  cloJ?ing, 
and  of  noon  oJ?ir,  Jjou^  })at  he  be  in  holy  Chirche  \ 

^  U  om.  of  hem — Chirche. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC. 


^5 


Splendor  ejus  ut  lux  erit,  comua  in  manibus  ejus : 

P^  schyny7ig  of  him  schal  he  as  li^t,  horny s  in  hise  hondis. 

pat  is,  ]?e  verri  'knowing  in  his  lawe  maki})  alle  men  fat 
holden  it  bri3t  and  schinynge  in  his  love,  for  it  suflfrij)  not  ]?e 
knower  to  erre.  He  knowij?  it  verrili  }>at  fulfillij)  it,  not  }?at 
redi})  it  or  tellij?  it,  for  so  doon  ipocritis,  enemyes  j^erof ;  and 
hornys  in  hise  hondis,  \2l  is,  hise  hondis  weren  strecchid  and 
nailid  in  two  corners  of  ]?e  cros.  Bischopis  mytrid  wi]>  two 
hornys  figuren  J?at  J?ei  schulden  ]?oru  good  ensaumple  putte 
j?e  folk  fro  vicis  to  virtues,  but  now  J)oru  pride  and  covetise 
j}ei  ben  principal  ensaumpleris  of  turnynge  fro  virtues  to  vicis ; 
for  ]5e  which  distruccioun  Crist  dyede  on  J^e  cros.     Ffor, 

Ibi  abseondita  est  fortitude  ejus.  Ante  faciem  ejus  ibit 
mors :  ]^ere  is  hiyd  his  strengpe.     Bifore  his  face  deep  schal  go. 

There,  ]>at  is,  in  mekenes  of  )>e  cros,  was  hid  in  manheed  ]?e 
strenk}?e  of  his  Godheed ;  and  Jjere  deej>  wolde  have  fled  his 
prescence,  but  it  my^te  not ;  for  he  diynge  overtook  dee]?  and 
slou5  it,  as  he  seij?,  Dee]?,  I  schal  be  ]?i  dee]?,  and  helle,  I  schal 
be  ]?i  bityng.  He  ]?at  biti]?  a  ]?ing,  he  taki]?  a  part  ]?erof  in  his 
mou]?  and  anoJ?ir  part  he  leve}?  wi}?oute;  so  dide  Crist  wi]? 
helle.  Alle  gode  men  he  took  wi]?  him,  and  develis  and  yvele 
men  he  lefte  ]?ere. 

Egredietur  dyabolus  ante  pedes  ejus.  Stetit  et  mensus 
est  terram :  p^  devel  schal  goon  out  hi/ore  hise  feet.  He  stood, 
and  he  mat  ^  pe  erpe. 

Ffor  at  ]?e  comynge  of  Jesus  Crist  J)e  devel  5ede  out  of  manye 
bodies  and  soulis,  and  ])anne  Crist  stood  and  mat  ])e  er]?e,  ]?at 
is,  chosun  men  he  took  as  his  owne,  and  ^af  hem  grace  and 
joie  aftir  J)e  mesure  of  his  ^evyng. 

Aspexit  et  dissolvit  gentes,  et  contriti  sunt  montes 
seeuli :  He  hihelde  a7td  he  looside  folkis,  alto  broken  hen  hillis 
of  pis  world. 

He  bihelde  wij?  i^en  of  mersy,  and  he  looside  folkis  of 
boondis  of  synne ;  and  ]?anne  ]?e  hillis,  )?at  is,  proudist  men 
]?at  bolneden  in  erjjeli  hi^nes,  ben  alto  broken,  ]?at  is,  J?ei  weren 
})oru  Cristis  loore  maad  ful  meke. 

^  mette,  U. 


Hos.  xliL  14. 


26  WFCLIF'S  WORKS, 

Incurvati  sunt  eolles  mtuidi  ab  itineribus  eternitatis 
ejus :  IncroMd  hen  pe  hillis  of  pe  woj'ld  fro  pe  weies  of  his 
eendeleesheed. 

pat  is,  lasse  proude  men  crokiden  hem  to  ])e  bowynge  to 
Cristis  comaundementis ;  and  ^it  fro  J?at  ])ei  knewen  hise  weyes, 
bi  ]?e  whiche  he  clepi]?  to  eendelees  joie. 

Pro  iniquitate  vidi  tentoria  Ethiopie ;  turbabuntur 
pelles  terre  Madian :  For  wickidnes  I  say  pe  tentis  of  Ethiopie; 
trouhlid  schulen  be  pe  skynnes  of  pe  lond  of  Madyan. 

pe  tentis  of  Ethiopie  ben  alle  )?at  serven  to  ]>e  devel,  for  l?ei 
ben  blake  and  foule  of  synne ;  pe  skynnes  of  Madyan  ben  alle 
|)at  dreeden  not  ]>e  ri^twise  doom  of  God,  and  al  ]?ese  fe  pro- 
fete  say  be  troublid  in  peyne  and  turmentis  for  her  wickidnes. 
But, 

ISTumquid.^  in  fluminibus  iratus  es,  Domine  ?  et  in  flu- 
minibus  furor  tuus  ?  vel  in  mari  indignatio  tua  ?  Whepir, 
Lord,  inflodispou  art  wrappid,  or  in  flodis  pi  hreep,  or  in  pe  see 
pin  indignacioun  ? 

pat  is,  whe]?ir  )?ou  schalt  suffre  alle  to  peresche,  and  al  ]?is 
world  to  falle  in  veniaunce.  As  who  se]?.  Nay,  flfor  \o\x  art 
now  he, — 

Qui  ascendis^  super  equos  tuos,  et  quadrige  tue 
sal  vatic :  That  stiest  on  pin  horsis,  and  pi  charis  salvacioun. 

pat  is,  })0U  sittist  in  ]?e  apostlis,  and  in  alle  holy  techers  ])oru 
|>e  world,  to  werren  a^ein  ]?e  devel ;  \»\  charis, — propirly  ]?at  ben 
j?in  evangelistis,  for  ]?ei  ben  salvacioun^  of  men  J?at  ben  saaf 
J)oru  |)e  holy  evangelie. 

Suscitans  suscitabis  areum  tuum,  juramenta  tribubus 
que  loeutus  es  :  Reisinge  pou  schalt  reise  pi  bowe,  oopis  to 
kynredis  whiche  pou  speke, 

pat  is,  J?ou  reisinge  holy  writt  in  ])e  knowynge  of  ])in  apostilis 
schalt  reise  it  in  alle  her  meke  folowers  to  worche  ]>ereafter, 
]>at  lay  slepinge  while  men  undirstoden  it  not,  for  ]?e  oolde 
lawe  was  mysty  til  it  was  qwikenyd  J>oru  ]?e  Spirit  of  Crist,  and 
so  )?ou  schalt  fulfille  ]?e  ooJ?is  J?at  J?ou  madist  to  )?e  kynredis  of 
Israele. 

1  So  in  U  and  Viilg. ;  T  has  nunquam.  ^  So  in  U  and  Vulg. ; 

assendis,  T.  ^  So  in  U  ;  savacioiin,  T. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC,  27 

Pluvios  scindes  terre ;  viderunt  te  [aque^],  et  doluerunt 
montes ;  gurges  ^  aquarum  transiit :  Streemys  pou  schalt 
schere  to  pe  erpe^  killis  seien  and  sorowden ;  pe  dam  of  waives 
passtde. 

pese  streemys  ben  holy  loore  fadris,  J)e  whiche  Crist  departij? 
to  dyverse  stidis,  ))at  men  ])oru  hem  moun  take  weetynge  of 
b  evenly  deew  to  her  drie  hertis.  pese  saien  hillis,  fat  is,  proude 
men  reisid  above  oj^ere  for  richessis  and  pride,  and  ]?ei  sorowiden 
for  her  synnes,  resseyvynge  holsum  medicyns  of  her  hevenly 
lechis.  And  so  ])e  dam  of  watris,  J?at  is,  })e  abundamice  of 
goostly  loore,  passi]?  wondirfulli  }?oru  J>is  fals  world  fro  lovier 
to  lovier  of  Crist.     Ffor, 

Dedit  abyssus  vocem  suam,  altitude  manus  suas  leva- 
vit^:  Depnessis  "^af  his  nois^  hiyiessis  liftide  hise  hondis, 

pat  is,  \o  ]?at  weren  in  ]?e  ground  of  yvelis  ^even  her  vols  of 
a^ein-seiing  to  so]?efastnes,  as  oure  prelatis  wi})  her  obedienseers 
and  her  lyvyng  dispisen  J^e  mekenes  and  Jje  povert  of  Crist; 
and  ]?e  hi^nes  of  jje  world  reisid  power  to  distrie  trewe  Cristen 
men,  adversaries  to  hem.     And  nevere-J>e-lattir  *, 

Sol  et  luna  steterunt  in  habitaculo  suo ;  in  luce  sagit- 
tarum  tuarum  ibunt,  in  splendore  fulgurantis  hastae^ 
tue :  p^  sunne  and  pe  moone  stoden  in  her  wonyng  ;  in  li'^t  of  pin 
arrowis  pei  schulen  go,  in  schynynge  of  pi  li^tnyng  or  gliteringe 
spere. 

The  sunne,  Crist,  and  ]?e  moone,  oonheed  of  holy  Chirche, 
stoden;  ))at  is,  lastingly  J>is  oonheed,  ground  of  al  goodnes, 
stondi]?  in  ri^twise  men,  for  ]?ei  schulen  go  ]?oru  li3t  of  ]?in 
arro^vis,  })at  is,  of  J>i  ]?urlinge  wordis,  ])oru  londis  and  stondis, 
woundinge  mennys  hertis  wij)  ]?e  love  of  })i  lawe ;  and  in 
schynnynge  of  miraclis  of  parfi3t  lyvynge  {?ei  schulen  make 
men  afeerd  as  lei^tynge  doo]>,  to  dwelle  in  her  synne. 

In  fremitu  eoneulcabis  terrain,  et  in  furore  tuo  obstu- 
pefaeies  gentes :  In  gnasiynge  pou  schalt  trede  pe  erpe,  in  pi 
wrappe  pou  schalt  stony efolkis. 

In  gnastynge,  }>at  is,  drede  of  })i  ri^twise  doom,  ))0U  schalt 

^  Not  in  Vulg.  2  corrected  from  Vulg. ;  gurgies,  T.  ^  cor- 

rected from  Vulg. ;  levahit,  T.  ^  nepeles,  U.  ^  corrected  from 

Vulg. ;  hauste,  T. 


(ZS  WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 

meke  J^e  hertis  of  manye  proude  men  and  covetouse ;  and  in 
j)i  wraj>)?e,  that  is,  in  manaassinge  of  eendelees  fier,  ])0U  schalt 
make  maliciouse  men  stonyed  for  wo  ])at  is  comynge  to  hem. 

Egressus  es  in  salutem  populi  tm,  in  salutem  cum 
Christo  tuo  :  'pou  ari  goon  out  in  heelpe  of  pi  folk  ^  in  heelpe  wip 
pi  Crist, 

pat  is,  ])0U  schewidist  J?ee,  and  ^it  schalt  to  |?e  eende  of  j?e 
world,  ]3om  trewe  preching  and  lyvynge  }>ereafter,  to  ]?e  helj?e 
of  trewe  Cristen  men  dwellinge  in  hele,  wij?  J)i  Crist  Jesus  oure 
Lord,  ensaumpler  of  al  trewe  preching  and  lyvynge. 

Percussisti  caput  ^  de  domo  impii,  denudasti  funda- 
mentum  ejus  usque  ad  coUum :  '^ou  smyte  pe  heed  ofpe  hous 
ofpe  wickid.pou  nakidist  pe  foundement  qf  him  to  pe  necke. 

pe  devel,  ]?at  is  heed  of  alle  J)e  sones  of  pride,  j)0u  smyte  out ' 
of  ])e  hertis  of  many  wickide  men  in  hour  of  ]>i  dee]> ;  and  so 
it  is  to  trowe  )?at  ]?ou  schalt  smyte  ]?e  heed  of  pride  regnynge  in 
hi^e  princis  and  prelatis,  \e  whiche  blenden  J)e  peple  bi  pryve 
ipocrisie,  and  so  ))i  loviers  schulen  be  stablid  in  )?i  trewe  trouJ>e 
of  J?i  lawe,  aftir  J?e  knowinge  of  j?is  ipocrisye.  And  ]?ou  nakidist 
him  to  ])e  necke,  J^at  is,  ])0U  reftist  him  al  ]>e  lappinge  of  pride 
and  ipocrisie  whereinne  he  hadde  trecherousli  hankid  ])i  chosun, 
and  so  \q  devel  and  his  proude  lymes  han  lost  her  power  in 
trewe  Cristen  men,  and  ben  left  but  nakide  heedis  of  hem,  j?at 
schulen  regne  above  hem  in  helle.  For  God  wole  ]?at  he  })at 
eggi)?  a  man  to  yvel  have  double  penaunce  of  him  ])at  dooj? 
yvel. 

Maledixisti  sceptris^  ejus,  capiti^  bellatorum  ejus, 
venientibus  ut  turbo  ad  dispergendum  me  :  'pou  cursidist 
to  hise  ceptris,  to  pe  heed  of  hise  fi'^ters,  comynge  as  whirlewynd 
to  scatere  me, 

pe  kyngis  ^erde  and  ])e  bischopis  staf  bitokenen  her  regalte 
and  her  dignyte,  by  J?e  whiche  }>ei  schulen  mayntenen  and  rulen 
hemsilf  and  her  sogetis  in  resoun  and  Goddis  lawe ;  and  if 
])ei  be  turnyd  ^  lastynge  into  tirauntrie  and  ipocrisie  ])oru  pride 
and  covetise,  God  schal  dampne  hem  as  wickide  men  in  whiche 
J)e  devel  haj?  my^t,  regnynge  in  hem  for  her  synne.     And  also 

^  corrected  from  Vulg. ;  capud,  T.  "^  corrected  from  Vulg. ;  ceptris, 

capita,  T.  ^  corrected ;  turyd,  T. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC,  %^ 

}?ou  cursidist  Jje  heedis  of  hise  filters,  for  noon  of  J?ese  hi3e 
princis  or  prelatis  doon  her  deedis  aloone  by  hemsilf,  wijjouten 
assent  of  connceiiers ;  Jjerfore  he  cursi]?  her  wickide  coun- 
ceileers,  as  hedis  and  capteyns  of  her  bateils,  fi^ tinge  a3ens  Jesus 
Crist  in  levynge  of  hise  comaundementis,  in  lyvynge,  in  lustis 
and  likyngis.  For  alle  ]?ese  ben  helpers  to  ]?e  devel  J?at  come}? 
wij>  manye  temptaciouns  to  waiste  gode  men  as  dust  bifore 
wynd.     But, 

Exultatio  eorum  sicut  ejus  qui  devorat  pauperem  in 
abscondito :  p^  gladnes  of  hem,  as  of  hym  pat  devourip  pe  pore 
in  hidlis  ^. 

pat  is,  al  her  joie  is  brou^t  to  nou3t,  as  of  him  J>at  spoilij)  a 
pore  man,  whanne  he  hadde  ben  riche  and  is  not,  and  so  he 
is  disseyved;  so  schulen  J^ese  tirauntis  of  pride  fallen  in  her 
owne  turn,  whanne  }>ei  pursuen  })e  meke  ]?at  doren  not  keveren 
}?e  sojje. 

Viam  fecisti  in  mari  equis  tuis,  in  luto  aquarum  mul- 
tarum :  Weye  pou  madist  in  pe  see  to  pin  hors,  and  in  pe  leir 
of  many  watris, 

pat  is,  in  vile  and  clam  coveitise  of  men,  turnynge  hem  par- 
fi^tli  to  J)ee,  lovynge  ]jee  oonli  for  ])i  silf,  and  noon  oJ?ir  creature 
but  for  ]?e  and  in  ])ee. 

Audivi,  et  eonturbatus  est  venter  mens,  a  voce  eon- 
tremuerunt  labia  mea :  /  herde,  and  my  wombe  is  troublid, 
fro  pe  vois  trembliden  my  lipps. 

I  herde,  ])at  is,  I  undirstood  jjoru  ]?e  Holy  Goost  what  an- 
guische  gode  men  schulen  suffre  in  ])e  eende  of  J>is  world,  and 
my  wombe,  \2X  is,  my  freelte,  is  stirid  fro  dreede,  for  ])e  vois  of 
})at  heeryng ;  my  iippis  trembliden,  j^at  is,  I  qwook  for  dreede 
of  ]?e  synne  of  my  mouJ>  filid  in  speche,  and  wonyinge  among 
folk  })at  haj)  foule  Iippis,  foulid  wij?  vein  speche  and  unnayt; 
as  who  seie,  I  dreede  to  telle  holy  wordis  vA^  my  foule  mouJ>, 
fillid  wij?  unhoneste  wordis.  But  I,  trustynge  to  Goddis  mersy, 
forsakinge  and  lev}'nge  my  synne,  aftir  scharp  sorowe  sorowide 
jjerfore,  wantinge  ablenes  of  men  and  covenable  tyme;  and 
I  clenside  my  mouj?  spekynge  Goddis  wordis,  J>at  bifore  was 
filid  ]?oru  unfructuouse  jangelingis. 

1  bidda,  U. 


30 


WYCLIF'S  WORKS, 


Ingrediatur  putredo  in  ossibus  meis,  et  subter  me 

scateat :  Rotynge  go  in  my  hones ^  and  undir  me  springe, 

pat  is,  my  flesch  rote  to  my  boones,  and  undir  me  springe 
rotynge  ful  of  wormes ;  J>is  befalle  me  heer,  ]>at  I  may  fie  \t 
worse. 

Et  ut  requiescam  in  die  tribulaeionis,  et  ascendam  ad 
popnlnm  aecinetum  nostrum :  pa/  /  reste  in  day  of  tribu- 
lacioun,  andpat  I  stie  til  oure  fold  gird, 

pat  I  reste  wi]?  halowis  in  day  of  moost  angwisch,  )?at  is,  in 
]?e  day  of  doom,  and  fanne  stie  to  ])e  cumpany  of  folk  gird,  J^at 
was  so  gird  in  })e  love  of  Crist  J?at  \€\  fou^ten  a^en  alle  yvele 
stiryngis  stalwor])li  for  ))e  love  of  Crist,  pe  profete  assentij) 
not  to  ]?e  love  of  ony  creature  }?at  coveitij?  \2X  he  rote  above 
er)?e,  or  he  sufFre  peyne  in  J^e  to]?ir  world.  And  sij^en  he  ]?at 
was  so  holy,  for  drede  of  peyne  aftir  ]?is  liif,  and  for  greet  desier 
to  be  wi)?  his  love,  Crist,  coveitide  here  to  rote  quyk  if  God 
wolde  suffre  it,  what  schulen  we,  ]>at  hoten  grete  avowis  to 
voiden  angus  and  siiknessis  of  })is  liif? 

liens  enim  non  florebit,  et  non  erit  germen  in  vineis : 
For  pe  fige-tre  schal  florischen  not^  and  hurioun  schal  not  he  in 
pe  vigners, 

pat  is,  greet  part  of  Cristen  men  ]?at  seemede  to  be  swete 
in  devocioun  schal  no  flour  schewe  of  virtu.  For  J>e  rote  of 
charite,  ]?at  is,  ]?e  kepinge  of  Cristis  comaundementis,  ])at  was 
wont  to  make  men  drunken  in  goostli  joie,  schal  faile  in  hem 
for  her  double  synne,  doon  of  hemsilf  and  suffrid  in  her  nei^- 
bore ;  and  so  ]>ei  schulen  be  drie  and  to  no])ing  able  but  to 
brenne  in  helle. 

Meneietur  opus  olive,  et  arva  non  afferent  cibnm : 
p(?  werk  ofpe  olyve  schal  lien,  and  feeldis  schulen  not  hringe  forp 
mete. 

pat  is,  hi^e  kyngis  and  prestis  schulen  faile  fro  mersy,  op- 
pressynge  her  sogetis  by  her  statutis,  and  her  feyned  sensuris, 
more  for  her  displesing  ]>an  for  brekinge  of  Goddis  biddyngis ; 
and  so  jjei  Hen  to  God,  for  \t\  doon  not  as  ]jei  hi^ten.  And 
feeldis,  l?at  ben  her  sogetis,  myche  for  defaute  of  pilinge, 
schulen  faile  to  ^eve  goostli  fruyt  to  paie  wij?  God;  for  how 
schulde  })at  lond  here  good  fruyt  ))at  nedij?  bo}>e  tilinge  and 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC. 


31 


dungynge  and  haj?  neijjer?  Here  moun  sovereyns  drede  \^ 
synne  of  her  sogetis,  leste  it  be  arettid  to  her  defaute.  But 
schulen  sogetis  ben  excusid  of  her  synne,  for  \€\  have  noon 
good  informacioun  of  her  curatis?  Nay  whi?  for  }?ei  han 
resoun  to  lede  hem  wijjal,  in  love  of  God  principalli,  and  to  do 
nou^t  to  her  nei^bore  }>at  \€\  wolden  were  not  do  to  hem. 
And  faile  \€\  not  of  J?is  double  charite,  and  Crist  schal  not  faile 
to  5eve  hem  double  ^ift,  to  norischen  wij)  her  bodies  and  save 
})erwiJ5  her  souHs. 

Abscindetnr  ^  de  ovili  pecus,  et  non  erit  armentum  in 
praesepibus^ :  Awey  schal  he  smyien  heesi  of  pe  foold^  and  neet 
schal  7iot  he  in  pe  crihhis. 

Beest  he  clepij?  ech  yvel  Cristen  man,  lyvynge  as  beestis, 
unresonable  in  lustis  and  likyngis ;  alle  siche  schulen  be  smyten 
awey  as  dede  lymes  out  of  ]/e  fold  of  holy  Chirche.  And  neet, 
)>at  is,  goostli  travelours,  schulen  not  be  in  cribbis,  \2X  is,  in  ]?e 
degrees  of  ri^t  liif ;  for  neer-hond  alle  at  regard  schulen  faile  in 
to  errour,  and  J?e  moost  perel  of  alle  schal  be,  J?at  J)e  greet 
multitude  of  yvele  men  schulen  grevousli  pursue  )?e  fewe  loviers 
of  Crist. 

Ego  autem  in  Domino  gandebo,  et  exultabo  in  Deo 
Jesn  meo  :  But  I  in  oure  Lord  schal  joien^  and  I  schal  he  glad 
in  God  my  Jesus. 

pis  is  J?e  sawe  of  chosun  men,  j^at  lasten  stably  in  Goddis 
love ;  as  who  seye,  \€\  J>at  han  here  joie  in  er})e  schulen  perische 
]?erewi]?,  but  I  schal  joien  in  my  Lord  Jesus  ]?oru  swetnes  of  his 
love ;  and  I  schal  be  glad  in  God  my  Jesus,  ])at  is,  my  saveour, 
not  in  ]?e  fals  world  ]>at  is  leser  of  alle  J^at  it  loven. 

Deus  mens  fortitude  mea,  et  ponet  pedes  meos  quasi 
cervorum^:  God  Lord  my  strenkpe,  and  he  schal  sette  my  feete 
as  of  her  Us. 

Yvele  mennes  fete  are  sette  ^  as  of  weike*  assis,  J^at  ben 
fastnyd  as  in  myddis  of  depe  leir;  so  yvele  mens  affecciouns 
ben  yvele,  for  ]?ei  ben  evere  tackid  wi|?  sum  love  \2X  drawi]?  hem 
fro  Goddis  love.  But  holy  mennys  affecciouns  ben  as  of 
hertis,  j)at  li^tly  lepen  over  all  lettingis,  and  casten  out  fro  her 

^  corrected  from  Vulg.;  ahcidettir,  precepibiis,!!.  ^  corrected  from 

Vulg. ;  servorum,  T.         '■^  So  in  U  ;  T  has  yvele  men  he?i  sett.         *  vjayhe,  U. 


3^ 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS, 


hertis  al  vile  glat  ^  })at  stoppi]?  her  breej?.  Ellis  my3ten  ]?ei  nevere 
verrili  loven  Jesus  Crist. 

Et  super  excelsa  mea  deducet  me  victor  in  psalmis 
canentem  :  Aboven  myn  hiy  my  victor  schal  lede  me,  in  psalmes 
syngynge. 

Crist,  j)at  is  verri  victor  of  deej?  and  of  J)e  devel,  schal  lede 
me  syngynge  to  his  heriinge,  in  salmes,  )>at  is,  gode  werkis,  and 
goostly  devocioun  above  myn  hi^,  Jjat  is,  above  al  bodily  J)ing 
]>at  seme)>  hi^  to  fleschli  men.  He  schal  lede  wij?oute  dreede 
in  ])is  liif,  to  hi^  contemplacioun  of  God. 

[THE  SONG  OF  MOSES.] 
[Deut.  xxxii.  I — 43.] 

Audite,  celi,  que  loquar,  audiat  terra  verba  oris  mei : 

Hevenes,  heere  y  J?at  I  schal  speke^pe  erpe  heere  pe  wordis  of  my 
moup. 

That  is,  3e  men  }>at  han  ^oure  conversacioun  in  hevene,  and 
^e  \2X  ben  in  actif  liif,  undirstondi])  }>at  I  schal  seie;  berij) 
witnes  \2X  I  holde  not  stille  ])e  wickidnes  of  my  folk. 

Concreseat  ut  pluvia  doctrina  mea,  fiuat  ut  ros  elo- 
quium  m.eum :  My  loore  growe  in  reyn^  as  deem  renne  my 
word. 

That  is,  my  loore  make  \q  heerers  of  it  to  here  goostli  fruyt 
multiplied  in  }?e  reyn  of  hevene,  and  my  wordis  renne  in  mennys 
hertis  as  deew  of  grace,  J>at  may  coole  hem  in  temptaciouns 
fro  heete  of  vicis. 

Quasi  ymber  super  herlbam,  et  quasi  stille  super  gra- 
mina.  Quia  nomen  Domini  invocabo :  As  reyn  o/gras,  and 
as  dropis  of  huriownyngis ,  for  pe  name  of  oure  Lord  I  schal 
inclepe. 

My  loore  be  to  50U  as  reyn  in  gras,  ]?at  is,  make  it  to  be 
greene  in  ]?e  buriownyngis  of  virtues ;  and  seemynge  it  is  J?at 
I  be  herd,  for  I  schal  inclepe  God  into  myn  herte,  heriinge  him 
overe  alle  J?ingis,  in  herte  and  mou})  and  werk,  not  oonH  honoure 
him  \vi]?  my  lippis,  as  riche  men  and  fleischely  doon.     perfore, 

1  glet,  U. 

WYCLIF. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC,  33 

Date  magniftceneiam  deo  nostro.  Dei  perfeeta  sunt 
opera,  et  omnes  vie  ejus  judicia:  ^evep  worschip  to  oure 
God,  For  of  God  hen  parfi^t  werkis,  and  alle  pe  weies  of  him 
doomes. 

That  is,  al  jjat  he  doij?  he  doij?  wij>  doom,  whej?ir  he  take  us 
or  he  forsake  us;  he  J?at  wole  not  erre  leede  him  in  alle 
)?ingis,  in  trewe  doom  of  discrecioun,  kepinge  him  fro  foly 
deemynge. 

Deus  fidelis  et  absque  ulla  iniquitate,  Justus  et  rectus. 
Peccavenint  ei,  et  non  filii  eius  in  sordLbus  :  God  is  trewe 
and  wipouten  ony  wickidnes  ri^twise ;  and  ri^i  pei  synneden  to 
him,  and  not  hise  sones  in  filpis. 

God  is  trewe  in  his  heetynge,  and  he  noie]>  to  no  man 
ri^twiis  in  ^eeldinge  and  in  vengynge.  Firste  synneden  to 
him  oure  former  fadris,  and  sij^en  yvele  sones  in  filjje  of 
synne;  as  who  seye,  not  oonli  oure  former  fadris  synneden 
to  him,  but  no  sone  of  her  ospring  is,  ])at  ne  he  is  taken  in 
filjje  of  synne. 

G-eneracio  prava  atque  perversa.  Haeccine^  reddis 
domino,  popule  stulte  et  insipiens  ?  Generatioun  schrewid 
and  weyward,     Whepir  pou  "^eldisi  to  oure  Lord yvel for  good  ? 

As  who  seye,  is  ]?at  covenably  doon,  J^e  servaunt  to  do  to  his 
Lord  ?  J?erfore  se,  pore  fool,  what  wrecchidnes  Jjou  art  in  and 
unwiis,  j)at  wolt  not  wyte  to  how  greet  turment  fou  goest  for 
\\  wilful  foly. 

Wumquid  non  ipse  est  pater  tuus  qui  possedit  te,  fecit, 
et  creavit  te  ?  Whepir  he  is  not  pi  fadir  pat  weeldip  pe,  and 
made ^  and wrou^te pee? 

As  who  seie,  him  J?ou  schuldest  love  as  J?i  fadir  pat  made 
]?ee  man  and  ordeynede  fee  to  his  heritage,  if  J)0u  J?isilf  wilt. 

Memento  dierum  antiquorum,  cogita  generationes 
singulas :  Bipinke  of  oolde  dayes,  pinke  alle  generaciouns. 

How  j)at  he  delyverede  his  folk  of  dyverse  perels,  and  how 
he  echide  encreessingli  hise  servauntis  among  yvele  men,  not 
lesynge  hem.     If  ]?ou  wolt  wyte  J^at  ]>is  is  soo]?, 

Interroga  patrem  tuum,  et  annunciabit  tibi ;  majores 

^  corrected  from  Vulg. ;  eccine,  T. 
WOKKS.      VOL.  III.  D 


34  WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 

tuos,  et  dicent  tibi  :  Askepifadir  and  he  schal  scheme  topee, 
pi  sovereym,  andpei  shulen  sey  io  pee. 

What  is  al  ]?at  )?ou  hastnede  to  cunne?  Aske  of  J?i  prelat 
or  of  \\  prest,  for  fei  ben  bounde  to  teche  J?ee ;  and  if  \€\  failen 
m  Jjis  loore,  wij>  wrong  }?ei  occupien  heerdis  office,  for  in  J?at 
is  knowen  a  trewe  heerde  fro  an  hiyrid  hyne,  ]?at  he  leede  hise 
scheep  in  hole  pasturis  and  plentenous. 

Quando  dividebat  Altissimus  gentes,  quando  sepa- 
ravit  filios  Adam :  Whanne  pe  h^este  departide  folkis^  whanne 
he  iwynnede  pe  sones  of  Adam. 

pis  departyng  was  whanne  men  bigunnen  to  wone  in  alle 
parties  of  erj^e. 

Constittut  terminos  populorum  juxta  numerum  jaiio- 
rum  Israel:  He  sefte  pe  iennys  of  pe  folk  hisyde  pe  noumbre 
of  pe  sofzes  of  Israel. 

That  is,  folk  schulen  be  dwellinge  in  ])is  world  til  ]?e  noumbre 
of  Goddis  sones  be  fulfild,  ])at  is,  til  God  have  as  manye  as  he 
ha]?  ordeyned  to  be  saaf 

Pars  axitem  Domini  populus  ejus,  Jacob  funiculus 
hereditatis  ejus :  But  pe  part  of  oure  Lord  Ms  folk,  facoh 
streng  of  his  heritage. 

As  who  seye,  myche  folk  of  l?e  world  is,  but  Jacob  oonli, 
]?at  is,  wrastler  a^ein  vicis,  is  marke  of  his  heritage,  \2X  is,  ]?is 
marke  recchi]?  no  firj?ir  ])an  in  siche;  alle  oJ)ere  ben  out  of 
termys.  perfore  if  ];ou  wolt  be  of  Goddis  part,  loke  bisily 
ransakinge  al  \\  liif,  if  ony  vice  regne  in  }>ee  bi  wille  or  by 
custum,  and  wrastle  J^ere-a^ein  tH  ])0u  have  )>e  maistry,  and 
sette  ])anne  in  his  stide  a  virtu  contrarie  to  it,  strenger  ])an  it 
was,  and  laste  in  good  worching,  and  hope  to  be  of  Goddis  part. 

Invenit  eum  in  terra  deserta,  in  loco  horroris  et  vaste 
solitudinis :  He  foond  hi7n  in  lond  deseert,  in  stide  of  uglynes 
and  of  waste  wildirnesse, 

pat  is,  him  ]>2X  he  hadde  lost  he  foond  erringe  in  ]?e  ^vrec- 
chidnes  of  ])is  liif,  and  ]?e  which  is  uggynge  for  drede  and  wo, 
and  wast  wildirnes  for  defaute  of  good  teching,  not  of  God, 
but  of  sleu]?i  prestis ;  for  ]?oru  her  pride  and  covetise  al  ])e  world 
is  markid  in  synne  and  bareyn  of  gode  werkis. 

Cireumduxit  eum,  et  docuit,  et  custodivit  quasi  pu- 


EKEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC. 


iS 


pillam  oectili  sui :  He  aboute  ledde  him,  and  he  leride  him,  and 
he  kepte  as  pe  appil  of  his  iy, 

Lo,  what  kyndenes  Crist  schewij)  to  his  lovier !  He  ledde 
him  aboute  fro  yvele  mennys  liif,  }>e  nexte  wey  to  hevene,  and 
he  tau^te  him  in  what  degre  or  staat  ]?at  he  ordeynede  hym 
])anne,  how  he  schulde  love  him,  kepinge  him  in  alle  anoies, 
as  tendirly  as  a  man  in  derke  wody  placis  kepi})  hise  i^en  fro 
hirtynge,  for  of  j^at  J)ing  ben  men  moost  tendir  a. 

Et  sieut  aquila  provoeans  ad  volandum  pullos  sues 
et  super  eos  volitans:  As  pe  eerne'^  clepynge  hise  hriddis  to 
fleen  and  above  hem  fleinge. 

Expandit  alas  suas,  et  assumpsit  eos,  atque  portavit 
in  humeris  suis :  He  spredde  hise  wyngis  and  he  took  hem,  and 
hare  hem  in  hise  schuldris. 

The  eerne,  clepinge  his  briddis  to  \q  si^t  of  )?e  sunne,  whanne 
he  see}?  }?at  })ei  waxen  wery  fleinge,  he  holdi}?  hem  up  wi}?  hise 
wyngis ;  so  Jesus  Crist  spredij?  two  wyngis  of  charite,  upberynge 
us  in  oure  werynes,  and  ledynge  us  to  virtues.  And  }?oru  his 
my^t  he  raveschi}?  oure  hertis  to  hevene,  })at  we  moun  goostli 
se  sunne  \2it  nevere  schal  have  settinge,  where-|)oru  we  ben 
cumfortid  to  sufifre  mekely  for  his  love  alle  tribulaciouns. 

Bominus  solus  ^  dux  ejus  fuit,  et  non  erat  cum  eo 
Deus  alienus :  Oure  Lord  oonly  was  his  leder,  and  ofier  God 
was  not  wij?  him, 

Ffor  he  }>at  ha}?  him  to  help  oonli,  nedi}?  noon  o})U-,  for  he 
is  hilyng  fro  al  yvel. 

Constituit  eum  super  exeelsam  terram,  ut  eomederet 
fructus  agrorum :  He  sette  him  on  hi^  londpat  he  etepefruytis 
o/feeldis. 

pat  is,  Crist  setti}?  his  lover  in  holy  Chirche  in  mekenes,  to 
have  deliit  in  abundaunce  of  goostli  fruyt  and  holy,  not  in  gredy 
gaderinge  of  money,  but  in  heel}>e  of  mennis  soulis. 

Ut  sugeret^  mel  de  petra,  oleumque  de  saxo  duris- 
simo :  'pat  he  schulde  souke  hony  of  pe  stoon,  and  oile  of  pe 
hardist  rooche. 

^  heron,  U.  ^  corrected  from  U  and  Vulg. ;  soleus,  T.  ^  cor- 

rected from  Vulg. ;  suggeret,  T,  U. 

a  A  beautiftil  comment  on  the  text. 
D   2 


36  WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 

Hony  of  ])e  stoon  he  soukij?,  ])at  occupie])  him  ententifly  in 
)?e  lawe  of  Crist,  for  it  is  swetter  Jjan  hony  to  him  ]?at  love]) 
Crist.  And  he  schal  [not]^  erre  in  treue  bileeve.  Oyle  of 
]?e  hardist  roche  is  ]?e  anoyntynge  of  ]>e  Holy  Goost  sent  fro 
Crist  glorified,  and  maad  so  hard  in  love  }>at  he  }>at  resseyve]? 
it  may  suiFre  in  })is  liif  noon  harmful  peyne.  pis  hony  and  oile 
schulden  prestis  resseyve,  and  fynde,  if  J^ei  traveiliden  truly  in 
Cristis  vyne^eerd,  in  so  greet  plente  ]?at  J)e  swete  odour  ];erof 
schulde  flawme  mennys  hertis  ])at  comowneden  wif>  hem. 

Butirum  de  armento  et  lae  de  ovibus,  cum  adype 
agnorum  et  arietum  filiorum  Basan :  Buttir  of  neet  and 
viylk  of  s cheeps  wij?  grees  of  faines  of  lombis  and  of  weperis  of  pe 
sones  of  Basan, 

Buttir  of  neet  is  J>e  stable  loore  of  }>e  ensaumplis  of  patri- 
arkis,  mylk  of  scheep  is  loore  Jjat  falli]?  to  hem  })at  bigynnen 
to  do  wel.  Grees  of  lombis  and  of  wej^eris  is  J)e  brennyng 
desier  ]?at  holy  techers  wiJ?  her  folowers  han  to  hevene.  pe 
sones  of  Basan  ben  lovers  of  J>is  world  }?e  which  ofte-si]?e  han 
lordschip  overe  gode  men  here  to  her  owne  dampnacioun, 
for  ])e  mysuse  ]?erof,  lyvynge  aftir  ])e  flesch,  not  after  \q  spirit. 

Et  hircos  cum  medulla  tritici,  et  sanguinem  uve  bibe- 
rent  meraeissimuin :  And  geet  wip  marw^  of  wheete,  and  pat 
pel  drink  schirist  blood  of  grape. 

Geet  ben  \o  ])at  enfoormen  us  wi}>  ensaumple  of  penaunce, 
discreetly  norischinge  oure  hors  as  he  may  journey  en.  In  Jjese 
us  owi])  to  have  deliit  wij?  marow^  of  whete,  fat  is,  wij?  ]?e  body 
of  Crist,  for  he  is  ]?e  grape  whos  flesch  and  blood  trewe  Cristen 
men  in  |)e  sacrament  of  J?e  auter  in  J^e  foorme  of  breed  and 
wiin  wor)?ili  resseyven,  ])oru  trewe  bileeve  her  savacioun,  and 
yvele  men  and  unclene  her  dampnacioun. 

Inerassatus  est  dilectus  et  reealeitravit ;  incrassatus, 
impinguatus,  dilatatus :  Encorif  is  pe  loved,  and  kest  up ; 
he  encortiffattid,  and  enlargid. 

pat  is,  )?e  folk  ])at  God  lovede,  ^evynge  plente  of  goodis,  haj) 
cast  up  at  God,  dispisinge  hise  maundementis,  multipliynge 
hem  in  richessis.    Manye  siche  dispisers  ben  now  of  Crist,  but 

^  ora.  in  T  ;  passage  om.  in  U. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC.  37 

noon  so  myche  as  ben  J?o  j?at  schulden  ben  hise  next  folowers, 
for  ]>o  schulden  be  in  ensaumple  of  alle  ojjere  above  hem  and 
binejje  hem,  to  dispisen  ])is  world  ]?at  blyndij)  ]?e  men  in  covetise 
of  multipliinge  of  richessis.     Ffor  ech  sich, 

Dereliquit^  Deum  faetorem  suum,  et  recessit  a  Deo 
salutari  suo:  He  forsook  God  his  makir,  and  he  departide  fro 
God  his  heelpe. 

Ffor  ese  and  welj^e  drawij?  men  oftsiJ?e  to  synne,  and  maki]? 
hem  to  for^ete  God  and  turne  to  J?e  devel. 

Provocavenint  eum  in  diis  alienis,  et  in  abhomina- 
eionibus  suis  ad  iraeundiam  concitavenint  ^ :  ^ei  stiryden 
bin  in  opere  goddis,  and  in  her  wlatingis  pei  moveden  him  to 
wrappe. 

pat  jjing  ech  creature  makij)  his  god,  what  ])ing  he  love]) 
moost  in  his  herte ;  ])e  wlatingis  ben  glotenye  and  leccherie  wij> 
covetise  and  pride,  which  God  hatij?.  And  here  moun  men 
seen  how  prelatis  hi^e  and  lowe  loven  moore  her  owne  ex- 
cellence J?an  Cristis  worschip,  and  so  Jjei  worschipen  false 
goddis,  and  ben  unable  }>er]?oru  to  ^eve  or  to  take  ony  sacra- 
ment a.     Whi  ? — 

Immolaverunt  demoniis  et  non  Deo,  diis  quos  igno- 
rabant :  ^ei  offriden  to  develis  not  to  God ;  to  goddis  whiche  pei 
knewen  not. 

That  is,  Jjese  Cristis  enemyes  qwemen  not  to  God  in  her  lyv- 
ynge,  for  ])ei  ben  avoutreris  of  alle  vicis,  in  levynge  of  verri 
God  and  worschipinge  develes,  of  whiche  J)ei  hadden  nevere 
good. 

Tfovi  reeentesque  venerunt  dii,  quos  non  coluertmt 
patres  eorum :  Newe  andfreische  goddis  camen,  pe  whiche  her 
fadris  worschipiden  not, 

pat  is,  dyverse  goddis  leeden  to  dyverse  errours,  her  wor- 
schipis.  For  |?e  devel  ha]?  in  alle  siche  unstable  men  and 
women  comoun  entre,  to  entise  hem  to  leve  J)e  truj?e  of  verri 

^  corrected  from  U  and  Vulg. ;  dereliquid,  T.  ^  corrected  from 

Vulg. ;  conscit.f  T. 

a  This    sentence,    which    has    a      Commentary,    is    omitted   in    the 
truly  Wycliffite    ring,   -with    many      Magd.  Coll.  MS. 
other  passages  in  this  part  of  the 


38  WYCLIF'S  WORKS. 

God,  and  folowen  J?e  lustis  of  pe  world,  lovynge  moore  vicis 
fan  virtues,  and  so  ]?ei  serven  mawmetis,  \q  whiche  trewe 
Cristen  men  bifore  hem  usiden  not. 

Deuni  qui  te  gentdt  dereliqxiisti,  oblitus  es  Domini  ^ 
ereatoris  tui :  God  pat  pee  gat  pou  hast  forsaken,  pou  hast 
fo7yte  God  pi  creaiour. 

We  ben  borun  goostli  of  God;  him  alle  forsaken  ]?at  as- 
senten  to  ony  deedli  synne ;  and  so  ech  body  for^eti}?  him  while 
])er  jjou^t  is  bounden  to  love  ony  creature  imordynatli. 

Vidit  Bominus,  et  ad  iraeundiam  eoncitatus  ^  est,  quia 
provoeaverunt  eum  filii  sui  et  filie :  p^  Lord  say,  into 
wrappe  he  is  stir  id,  for  him  moveden  his  sones  and  doubters. 

God,  J?at  ai  woot,  see}>  })e  wickidenes  of  men,  ]?erfore  he  is 
stirid  to  veniaunce.     Lo,  what  come]?  Jjerof ! 

Et  ait,  Abscondam  faeiem  meani^  ab  eis,  et  eonsider- 
abo  novissima  eorum:  And  he  seide,  I  schal  huyde  my  face 
fro  hem,  and  I  schal  hiholde  pe  laste  of  hem. 

Noting  is  moore  pyne  }>an  for  to  ]?arve  ]?e  si^t  of  God  and  his 
good  wille;  and  \o\y^  yvele  men  be  in  myche  ese  here  and 
wel]?e,  God  biholdij)  what  wo  schal  falle  hem  in  her  eendyng. 

G-eneratio  enim  perversa  est  et  infideles  filii :  For  it  is 
a  schrewid  generacioun  and  untrewe  sones, 

Untrewe  fadris  geten  often  tymes  untrewe  sones,  for  whanne 
a  child  is  norischid  among  vicis,  how  schulde  he  be  uniilid? 
Fadris  and  modris  ben  cause  if  >e  child  be  vicious,  for  while  it 
is  5ong,  it  cannot  but  love  and  drede  not  upon  resoun;  but  of 
kynde  it  love])  to  ben  fed  and  clad,  and  it  dredij?  ])e  ^erde  of 
scourynge.  Who  schal  be  excusid  if  ]?e  child  mysfare?  As 
who  sey,  no  fadir  ne  modir;  Jjou^  j^at  it  myskarie  whanne 
it  come])  to  age,  ]?e  childheed  ])ei  moun  save.  And  }>us  yvele 
trees  bringen  for])  yvel  fruyt.  For  nejjer  \e  toon  ne  ])at  oJ)ir, 
Jjat  is,  nei]?er  eldris  ne  her  children,  ben  trewe  to  God.  Whi  ? 
for  ])ei  holden  not  fat  ]?ei  hi^ten  in  her  baptem,  but  unkyndely, — 

Ipsi  me  provocavenint  in  eo  qui  non  erat  Dens,  et 
irritaverunt  in  vanitatibus  suis :  \iei  me  stiriden  in  him  pat 
was  no  God,  and  moveden  in  her  vanyiees, 

^  corrected  from  Yulg. ;  Beum,  T.  ^  corrected  from  Vulg. ;  con^ 

docatus,  tuam,  T. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC.  39 

That  is,  fei  wraj)J)iden  me,  lovynge  Jje  J?mg  as  God  ]?at  was  not 
God,  and  havynge  moore  deliit  in  her  van}1:ees  ])an  in  my 
servise,  for  al  pat  is  loved  wi]?oute  God  is  vanyte.  But  what 
schal  I  do?  gaderen  togidere  ]je  wickidnes  of  fadris  and 
modris  and  of  her  children. 

Et  ego  provocalbo  eos  in  eo  qm  non  est  populus,  et 
in  gente  stnlta  irritabo  illos :  And  I  schal  stire  hem  in  him 
pai  is  notpeple,  and  infole  '^  folk  I  schal  stire  hem. 

As  who  seye,  si]?in  I  have  doon  for  hem  al  J^at  \€\  moun  aske 
bi  resoun,  and  Jjei  for^eten  to  ]?anke  me  in  lovynge  me  and 
heriynge  me  as  her  God,  I  schal  for^ete  hem  as  \t\  werun  no 
folk ;  but  as  J^ei  ben  movynge  to  do  her  owne  lustful  wil  con- 
trarie  to  my  biddyng,  so  I  schal  al  bi})inke  to  ponesche  hem 
wij>  eendelees  peyne,  contrarie  to  her  heeljje.  For  alle  proude 
men  and  dispitouse  God  schal  so  lowe  bringe  ]?oru  his  ri^twise 
veniaunce,  j^at  \€\  schulen  not  ben  wor})i  to  be  likenyd  to  hem 
]?at  seemeden  here  foolis,  and  weren  holde  nou^t  for  Goddis 
sake.  In  ]?at  maner  J)ei  schulden  be  stirid  to  envy  and  hatrede, 
]?at  her  synne  stiri}>  God  to  veniaunce. 

Ignis  succensus  est  in  furore  meo ;  et  ardebit  usque 
ad  inferni  novissima :  Fier  is  kyndelid  in  my  wraJ?J?e,  and  it 
schal  hrenne  to  pe  laste  of  helle. 

That  is,  Goddis  veniaunce  bigynne]?  here  in  wickide  men  and 
women,  ]?at  lyven  in  lustis  and  likingis,  and  wolen  not  amende 
hem  ne  hers,  and  it  schal  turmente  hem  wi])Outen  eende  in 
helle. 

Devorabitque  terram  cum  germine  suo,  et  moncium 
fundamenta  eomburet^ :  And  it  schal  devour e  J?e  erj?e  wip  his 
buriownyng,  andpe  groundis  of  helles  he  schal  hrenne, 

pat  is,  ]?e  veniaunce  of  God,  })at  is  eendelees  peyne  of  helle, 
schal  devour e  wickide  fadris  and  modris  wij?  her  ospring,  for  it 
schal  swolowe  alle  loviers  of  erjjeli  ]?ingis,  wij)  al  her  fairheed, 
and  ])e  hope  of  proud  folk  it  schal  waaste.     Ffor, — 

Congregabo  super  illos  mala,  et  sagittas  meas  eom- 
plebo  in  eis :  /  schal  gadere  on  hemyveliSy  and  myn  arowis  I 
schal fulfille  in  hem. 

^  supplied  from  U,  which  has  in  gensfole.  ^  corrected  from 

Vulg. ;  conb.,  T. 


40  WFCLIF'S  WORKS, 

That  is,  alle  kyndis  of  turmentis  schulen  comen  on  hem,  ]?e 
whiche  ben.yvele  and  noiouse  to  hem  Jjat  suflfren,  but  ]?ei  ben 
ri^twise  in  Goddis  doom;  and  myn  arowis,  J>at  ben  scharpe 
and  soore  bitinge  peynes,  I  schal  fulfille  in  hem,  J?at  is,  \t\ 
schulen  come  to  J?es  peynes  and  be  fulfild  of  hem. 

Consumentur  fame,  et  devorabunt  eos  aves  morsu 
amarissimo :  \iei  schulen  he  distried  wip  hungir,  and  devoure 
hem  schulen  foulis  in  hitynge  alper  hitteriste. 

pat  is,  wickide  men  in  ])is  world  dien  in  soule  for  hungir  of 
Goddis  word,  and  so  feendis  eeten  hem  J>oru  venemous  tempta- 
ciouns,  in  ]?e  whiche  \€\  fallen  sodeynli,  and  taken  J^ereinne  \2X 
is  to  hem  ful  bittir  bityng. 

Dentes  bestiarum  mittam  in  eos,  cum  furore  trahen- 
tium  super  terram  atque  serpencium :  Teep  of  heestis  I 
schal  sende  into  heni^  wip  woodnes  of  drawynge  and  serpentis 
ahoven  erpe, 

pat  is,  yvele  men  schulen  suffre  gnawyng  of  ugly  devels,  j^e 
whiche  crueli  reeven  her  souhs  fro  God,  scateringe  hem  fro 
virtues  into  dyverse  vicis,  wij?  woodnes  of  yvele  men  Jjat  drawen 
and  entisen  to  fleschli  werkis.  As  neddris  ])ei  schulen  be 
sli^tli  brou^t  into  temptacioun  of  devels,  but  J?ei  schulen  in 
peyne  venge  hem  as  wode  men,  so  Jjat  yvel  come  on  ech  syde 
to  wickide  men. 

Foris  vastabit  eos  gladius,  et  intus  pavor,  juvenem 
simul  ae  virginem,  lactentem  ^  cum  homine  sene :  Wip- 
outen  schal  waaste  hem  swerd,  and  wipinne  drede,pe  '^onge  man 
and  may  den  togidere,  pe  soukyng  wip  pe  oold  man, 

pat  is,  ]?e  swerd  of  helle  fier  schal  be  her  peyne  in  bodi  and 
soule,  for  ]?ei  schal  have  J?e  worm  of  yvel  conscience  bitinge 
and  etinge  hem  wij^outen  eende;  J>at  swerd  schal  waaste  a 
5onge  man,  ]>at  is,  ech  ]>at  is  bareyn  of  gode  werkis.  3onge 
man  and  mayden  he  setti]?  togidere  in  peyne  of  helle,  for  fei 
usen  myche  to  be  togidere  in  ))is  lif  in  synne.  Soukynge  ben 
\ti  ])at  ben  so  blyndid  in  lustis  and  bisynes  of  ]?is  fals  world, 
))at  J;ei  han  no  witt  to  do  Goddis  wille  lyvynge  in  virtues. 
Eldir  man  is  he  j^at  eeldi)?  in  synne  ))oru  yvel  custum,  weenynge 

^  corrected  from  Vulg. ;  lactanteniy  T. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC.  4t 

his  liif  glorios  }?at  is  vicious,  perfore  dreedij?  God,  and  love)? 
him,  amendinge  ^oure  lyves ;  for  ^e  moun  wyte  bi  jjis  sentence 
fat  God  closi[)  not  fro  belle  fier  ne]?er  man  ne  womman,  ^ong 
ne  oold,  ]>at  wilfully  synne]?  and  amendij?  it  not  here.  For  of  al 
maner  of  men  greet  part  goo}>  to  helle. 

Et  dixi,  Ulbinam  sunt?  cessare  faeiam  ex  hominibus 
memoriam  eonun:  And  I  seide,  Where  hen  pel?  I  schal  make 
to  ceessen  ffro  men  pe  mynde  of  hem. 

I  schal  in  my  loviers  Jjat  haten  synne  seyn,  Where  be  j?ei  alle 
bicomen  ))at  florischiden  in  ))is  world  in  vicis,  and  where  is  al 
her  jolite  and  weljje  ?  Al  is  awey  and  }>ei  in  peyne ;  and  now 
I  schal  do  so,  \2X  her  mynde  schal  nevere  be  among  ri^twise 
men. 

Sed  propter  iram  inimicorum  distuli,  ne  forte  snper- 
birent  hostes  eoriun  :  But  for  pe  ire  of  enemy es  I  delay ede, 
teste  whanne  enemy  es  pry  ded'^. 

Et  dicerent,  Manus  nostra  excelsa  et  non  Dominus 
fecit  hec  omnia :  And  pel  seiden^  Oure  hond  is  hii^  and  not  God 
dide  alle  pese  pingis. 

God  wole  not  as  soone  as  men  ban  synned  do  veniaunce, 
but  he  dilaiej?  it  til  serteyn  tyme,  Jjat  \o  to  whiche  )>ei  han  doon 
harm  waxen  not  proude,  and  seyn,  For  oure  meryt,  and  for  fei 
weren  contrarie  to  us,  God  distriej?  hem ;  and  so  \€\  seyn  J?at 
God  dide  not  alle,  for  hem  ])inken  J?at  her  my3t  halp. 

G-ens  absque  eonsilio  est  et  sine  prudeneia.  TJtinam 
saperent  et  intelligerent  ac  novissima  providerent :  Folk 
is  wipoute  counceil  and  wipoute  prudence.  Wolde  God  pei 
saver iden  and  undirstoden  and  purveieden  for  pe  taste. 

The  folk  of  alle  unri3twise  men  is  wi]?oute  counceil  of  heel]?e  of 
soule,  and  wij?oute  prudence  to  fie  synne ;  but  God  wolde  J^ei 
hadden  ony  savour  in  Goddis  love,  and  undirstoden  J?e  wille  of 
Jesus  Crist  to  doon  it ;  J>anne  schulden  J>ei  purveie  her  laste,  J)at 
})ei  my3ten  dye  sikirly,  and  ben  holden  wijjouten  drede  what 
schal  falle  at  J^e  laste  eende. 

Quomodo  prosequebatur  unus  mille,  et  duo  fugarent 

^  So  in  U ;  preiederi,  T. 


42  WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 

decern  milia:  How  oon  pursmde  apoustnde,  and  two  gart^  fle 
tenpousinde? 

How  \\%  my^te  be  he  schewij?,  and  sei]?, — 

nSTonne  ideo  quia  Dens  suus  vendidit  eos,  et  Dominus 
conelusit  illos  ?  Whepir  not  perfo7'e  her  God  soolde  hem,  and 
pe  Lord  hem  loukide  ^  ? 

As  who  seye,  ferfore  \€\  ben  overcomun  to  her  harme,  for 
God  alienede  hem  fro  him  for  synne  of  hem,  and  loukide  hem 
in  }?e  my^t  of  her  enemyes. 

I^on  enim  est  Deus  noster  ut  dii  eorum,  et  inimici 
nostri  sunt  judices :  For  whi?  oure  God  is  not  as  pe  god  is  of 
hem,  and  oure  enemyes  hen  domesmen. 

Om*e  God  is  not  as  her  god  is,  for  J)ei  han  deliit  in  wickid- 
nes,  and  oure  God  leve]?  no  synne  unponeschid,  and  oure 
enemyes  ben  doomesmen,  ])at  is,  ])ei  moun  here  witnes  of  ]?at 
]3ing,  ])at  oure  God  dampne]?  and  poneschi]?  yvele  deedis,  for 
oftsij?is  he  smytij?  yvele  men  in  ]?is  world. 

De  vinea  Sodomorum.  vinea  eorum,  et  de  suTburbanis 
Gomore :  \)e  vyner  of  Sodomo  pe  vyne  of  hem,  and  ofpe  suhurhis 
of  Gomorre. 

Sodom  is  as  myche  to  seye  as  dombe,  and  Gomorre  is  scharp, 
as  who  seye,  oure  hi^e  prelatis,  if  ]?oru  hem  manye  o}?ere  ben 
dombe  to  serve  God  in  ])e  foorme  of  his  servise,  and  ]?ei  ben 
scharp  in  vicis. 

Uva  eorum  uva  fellis,  et  botrus  amarissimus  :  'pe  grape 
of  hem  pe  grape  of  galle,  and  flower  hiiterist. 

Her  fruyt  is  turnyd  into  pride  and  covetise  and  ipocrisie,  J^e 
whiche  ben  bask  or  bittir  synnes  in  Goddis  knowyng ;  and  ]?e 
flower  fat  is  in  hem  is  bittereste,  for  her  fleschli  love  and 
covetise  of  er]?e  ^  is  to  hem  eendelees  sorowe.  But  men 
seyn  \€\  moun  have  goodis  and  love  hem  not,  and  soo)>  it  is ; 
but  whanne  men  seen  ]?at  office  \2X  men  ben  holden  to  do  to 
God  is  lettid  for  ]?e  occupacioun  of  worldli  goodis,  J?o  godis  ben 
overmyche  loved,  whereof  wole  come  eendelees  sorowe. 

^  closed,  U.  ^  So  in  U  ;  fleschli  and  love  of  er)>eli  covetise,  T. 

a  The  use  of  this  word  proves  that  the  wiiter  was  an  inhabitant  of 
the  north  of  England.     U  reads  cbasid. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC, 


43 


Pel  draeonura  vinmn  eorum,  et  venenum  aspidum  in- 
sanabile :   Galle  of  dragouns,  J?e  wiin  of  hem,  and  venym  of 
snakis  incurable. 

Galle  of  dragouns  is  ]?e  fel  tresoun  of  bacbiters,  fe  which 
tresoun  ]?ei  drinke  wi]>  deliit  as  wiin,  and  birlen  it  to  ojjere  men. 
For  he  ]?at  bacbiti]?  his  nei^bore,  in  ])at  ])at  in  him  is  techij)  him 
to  whom  he  tellij?  his  bacbiting  to  do  so  of  ojjere.  And  venym 
of  snakis,  J?at  is,  lastinge  malis,  is  her  drynke  incm-able ;  for  ]?ei 
wolen  not  be  amendid  of  her  malicious  ire,  taken  of  her  owne 
hi^nes ;  and  if  men  snybbe  hem,  or  chastise  hem  bi  resoun,  her 
malice  waxi]?,  and  J?ei  ben  worse  ]?an  J^ei  weren  bifore.  For  he 
fat  is  defectif,  and  heeri|>  his  trespas,  and  wole  not  amende  it, 
is  Hik  to  be  endurid  in  his  synne,  as  ]?e  cruel  Jewis  weren  ]?at 
stoppiden  her  eeris  whanne  Seint  Stevene  disputide  wij?  hem  fe 
trujje  of  ri^t  bileve. 

Wonne  hec  oondita  sunt  apud  me,  et  signata  in  thesau- 
ris  meis  ?  Whepir  pes  ben  not  hid  anemptis  me,  and  selid  in  my 
tresours  ? 

pat  is,  alle  fes  jrv^eKs  ben  holden  in  Goddis  mynde,  and  kepte 
as  undir  seel,  for  to  be  put  for]?  in  )?e  doom  to  schewe  \t  ri^t- 
wisenes  of  Crist  in  dampnynge  of  wickide  men.  And  in  fe 
same  tresours  ben  hid  virtues  of  gode  men,  to  schewe  J)at  dai 
to  Jje  ri^twiisnes  of  her  corownyng,  J?at  )?ei  schulen  take  bi 
Goddis  ri^twiis  doom,  panne  schulen  gode  men  be  maad 
riche  of  Goddis  tresore  in  eendelees  joie,  and  yvele  men  schulen 
be  ful  pore  in  eendelees  pejme. 

Mea  est  uleio,  et  ego  retribuam  eis  in  tempore,  ut 
labatur  eornm  pes^:  Myn  is pe  veniaunce,  audi  schal  ylde 
hem  in  tyme,  pat  her  foot  slide. 

pat  is,  to  ^  me,  seij>  God,  falK]?  ]?e  veniaunce  of  synful  men,  not 
to  man  woniynge  in  er])e,  for  it  is  not  semely  o  bro]?er  venge  him 
on  ano}>ir,  and  unsemelynes  schulde  not  be  in  Cristis  Chirche 
in  )?e  ^eeris  of  grace,  si])in  it  was  forboden  of  God  in  J^e  ^eeris 
of  veniaunce*  For  I  schal  ^elde  hem  aftir  her  yvel  wille  in 
tyme  of  doom,  Jjou^  I  abyde  a  while.  Be  J?ou  not  to  haasty,  for 
ech  day  is  day  of  grace,  and  I  am  not  qweemyd  in  veniaunce ; 


corrected  from  Vulg. ;  pees  eos,  T. 


^  So  in  U ;  om.  T. 


44  WrCLIF'S  WORKS, 

ferfore  Jjou  makist  me  ]>in  enemye  whanne  ]?ou  sekist  veni- 
arnice  of  ony  Jjing  but  oonli  of  synne.  pat  veniaunce  sekij?  no 
bodili  harm,  if  synne  wi]?outen  ]?at  may  be  amendid.  And  sij)in 
I  am  God,  jjat  no  )?ing  mai  leve  unponeschid,  suffre  yvele  men 
lyven  til  I  do  her  foot  slippen,  ])at  is,  til  I  make  al  her  pride  and 
her  vanyte  to  fallen,  \2X  berij?  hem  to  helle.  For  it  schal  breke 
sodeinli  and  turne  to  nou^t,  ifor, — 

Juxta  est  dies  perdieionis,  et  adesse  festinant  tempera: 
Bisyde  is  pe  day  of  perdicioun,  and  to  hem  haasten  pe  tyines. 

Biside,  J>at  is,  neer  is  ])e  day  in  which  alle  yvele  men  schulen 
be  lost  fro  ]?e  cumpany  of  halowis,  and  tyme  ^  of  ^eldynge  to 
yvele  and  gode  haasti]?  to  ben  ^  and  come])  faste.   And  ]>anne — , 

Judieabit  Dominus  populum  suum,  et  in  servis  suis 
miserebitur :  Oure  Lord  schal  deeme  his/oik^  and  in  servauntis 
he  schal  have  mercy. 

pat  is,  Crist  schal  departe  hise  lovers  fro  ))e  lovers  of  ]?is 
world,  and  in  hise  servauntis  he  schal  ben  seen  merciful,  here 
and  in  ]?e  day  of  doom,  and  in  alle  o])ere  ri^twise  venger  of  al 
wickidnes. 

Videbit  quod  infirmata  sit  mantis,  clausi  quoque 
defecerunt,  residtiique  eonsumpti  sunt :  He  schal  se  pat 
pe  hond  he  niaad  siik,  and  pe  closide  failide,  and  pe  laste  hen 
distried. 

He  schal  se,  Jjat  is,  he  schal  make  to  seen,  )?at  alle  ]>at  ^  yvele 
men  doon  is  not  sufficient  to  her  salvacioun ;  for  preier,  almes- 
deede,  and  penaunce  of  him  }>at  X\\\  in  synne,  and  wole  not 
amende  him  for  Cristis  love,  is  abhominable  ofFryng  in  Goddis 
si^t.  For  }?e  closid  in  pouste  of  ]?€  devel  faiHde  for  peynes ; 
for  alle  j?at  ben  left,  }?at  is,  forsaken  of  God,  schulen  be  distried 
in  eendelees  dee]?. 

Et  dieent,  Ubi  sunt  dii  eorum,  in  quibus  habebant 
fiduciam  ?  And  pei  schulen  seye,  Where  hen  her  goddis,  in  pe 
whiche  pei  hadden  trisi? 

Gode  men  \2X  schulen  seen  |)e  peynful  peynes  of  yvele  men, 
schulen  seien.  Where  ben  now  alle  her  vanytees  of  worldly 
bisynes  and  lustis,  j?e  which  J)ei  loveden  moore  fan  God,  for 

^  tymes,  U.  2  lasten  to  he,  U.  ^  So  in  U ;  \>e,  T. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC,  45 

\€\  setten  her  joie  and  her  trist  in  hem,  as  ]?ei  schulden  nevere 
have  failid  hem ;  havynge  greet  indignacioun  to  hem,  ]?at  for 
her  soule  hele  reprehendiden  her  over  bisy  worldli  lyvynge; 
seiinge,  how  schulde  ]?e  world  ofere  weies  be  mayntenyd? 
But  he  is  foHly  blyndid  ]>at  mayntene]?  his  enemy  to  his  owne 
harm,  pe  world  and  oure  owne  iiesch  ben  enemyes  \o  us,  )?e 
whiche  moun  not  be  mayntenyd  over  )>e  tyme  j>at  God  ha]^  sett. 
Perfore  foolis  and  idiotis,  J>at  leften  ]?e  unfmctuous  bisynes  of 
])is  Hif  for  Goddis  love,  schulen  scorne  wise  my^ti  men  of  ])is 
world,  J?at  setten  her  trust  and  her  joie  in  j)at  J?ing  J)at  my^te 
not  bifore  God  helpe  hem. 

De  quorum  vietimis  comedebant  adipes  ^,  et  bibebant 
vinum  libaminum  ?  Ofpe  offringis  ofpe  whiche  pei  eeten  greets, 
pei  drunken  pe  wiin  of  offringis. 

Here  ]>e  prophete  dampne]?  covetise  and  likerousnes  of 
prestis,  for  it  is  more  abhominable  in  hem  ])an  in  oJ?ere,  sij?en 
]?ei  schulden  be  mooste  fleers  ferof  in  ensaumple  to  ojjere; 
seiinge,  of  ])at  ]?ing  j?at  was  oflfrid  to  her  unclennes,  \€\  hadden 
deliit  in  greet  abundaunce  of  gaderynge,  and  in  lustful  lyvynge, 
dispendynge  it  to  preisyng  of  Jje  world,  ])at  was  ofFrid  to  hem 
to  lyve  upon,  and  to  departe  among  \%  pore  and  nedy  peple. 
And  so  ])ei  ben  drunken  in  lustis  and  likyngis  of  erjjeli  goodis, 
for^etinge  Jje  povert  of  Jesus  Crist,  perfore  on  domesday,  ))at 
wrecchidnes  ])at  ^e  tristen  on  moore  })an  on  God, — 

Surgant  et  opitulentur  nobis,  et  in  necessitate  nos 
protegant :  Rise  pei  and  helpe  "^ou,  and  in  Tiede  hile  "t^ou, 

pis  is  but  scoornyng  ]?at  gode  men  schulen  have  of  wrecchis 
J?at  for^eten  Crist  for  jje  failinge  world;  as  who  seie,  5oure 
goodis  ]>at  helden  50U  in  honour  in  erj^e,  rise  ]?ei  now  and  come 
fei  to  helpe*  50U,  if  J^ei  may.  And  si]?in  J)ei  moun  do  nou^t  but 
ska|?e,  for  J?at  schal  be  peynful  schame  to  yvele  men,  to  knowen 
and  to  have  rehersid  J)e  J)ing  })at  made  hem  to  lese  J^e  blis  of 
Crist,  J>erfore,  ^e  J^at  ben  3it  on  lyve, — 

Videte  quod  ego  sim^  solus,  et  non  sit  aliu^  Deus 
preter  me  :  Seep  pat  I  am  oonli,  and  pat  opir  God  is  noon  but  /. 


^  corrected  from  Vulg. ;  adbipes,  T.  2  corrected  from  Vulg. ; 

sum,  T. 


46  WYCLIF'S  WORKS. 

That  isj  5e  )?at  wolen  be  wifoute  schame  on  domesday,  wyti]? 
]?at  God  is  oonli  to  tristen  in,  and  he  J)at  kepi]?  not  hise  bid- 
dingis,  triste  not  in  him  to  his  heelj^e.  perfore  -love]?  him  as  he 
lovede  30U,  denynge  for  his  love  to  triste  in  ony  creature ;  for 
al  ])ing  ])at  3e  loven  wiJ?oute  him  letti]?  30U  of  his  love  and  dis- 
seyve]?  50U.     Ffor, — 

Ego  occidam,  et  ego  vivere  faeiam ;  pereuciam,  et  ego 
sanabo ;  et  non  est  qui  de  manu  mea  possit  eruere :  / 
schal  sleen  and  I  schal  make  to  lym  ;  I  schal  smyte,  and  I  schal 
hele  ;  and  noon  is  pat  may  delyvere  of  myn  hond. 

Whi  ?  for  I  am  auctour  of  liif  and  dee}),  hem  J^at  I  love  I 
schal  smyte,  chastisinge  hem  as  a  good  fadir  owi]?  to  doon  his 
wel-loved  sone.  For  it  is  not  semely  }>at  curteis  Crist  have  an 
untau^t  child ;  ]?erfore  I  schal  make  my  children  holde  perfi^tly 
biddingis  in  ])is  liif,  qwikenynge  hem  wi])  my  grace,  to  lyve  in 
mekenes  vertuously,  and  I  schal  sle  her  enemyes  whanne  best 
tyme  is.  And  if  ony  temptacioun  or  anoie  hirte  hem,  if  \€\ 
triste  to  me  I  schal  hele  hem.  perfore  stondi]?  bi  me  in  love, 
\2X  I  stonde  wi]?  50U  in  needful  tyme  of  help,  for  noon  is  ])at 
may  delyvere  himsilf  or  o]?ere  of  myn  hond.  For  alle  creaturis 
ben  undir  my  my^t,  and  to  me  fallij?  ])e  deemynge  of  alle. 

Levabo  ad  celum  manum  meam,  et  dieam,  Vivo  ego  in 
eternum :  /  schal  lifie  to  hevenes  myn  hond,  and  I  schal  seyn, 
I  lyve  wipouten  eende. 

pat  is,  I  ^  schal  schewe  me  Lord  Almy^ti  aboven  al  ]?ing,  and 
I  schal  seyn  apertly,  I  lyve  wi]?outen  eende.  It  is  oure  al]?ir- 
00]?,  and  a  vow  to  fulfiUe  ]?is  Lordis  bidding. 

Si  acuero  ut  fulgur  gladium  meum,  arripuerint  judi- 
cium manus  mee:  If  1  schal  scharpe  as  lei^inyng  my  swerd, 
and  myn  hondis  schulen  take  doom. 

pat  is,  I  schal  make  qwaken  for  dreede  alle  wickide  men  of 
er]?e,  whanne  I  have  redyed  my  swerd  of  poneschinge,  comynge 
sodeinli  as  leytnynge ;  ])anne  myn  hond,  ]?at  is,  my  my^t,  schal 
schewe  ]>e  laste  dreedful  doom  :  ffor-]?anne, — 

Beddam  ulcionem  hostibus  meis,  et  Ms^  qui  oderunt 
me  retribuam :  /  schal  ylde  veniaunce  to  myn  efiemyes^  and  to 
hem  pat  hatiden  me  I  schal  y,lde. 

^  from  U ;  om.T.  ^  corrected  from  Vulg. ;  hits,  T. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC,  47 

I  schal  ^elde  veniaunce  of  eendelees  peyne  to  my  foos ;  ]>at  is, 
to  alle  ]?at  I  foond  contrarious  to  me,  clad  out  of  J^e  cloo]?  of 
charite,  not  holdinge  my  comaundementis.  And  to  hem  \2X 
hatiden  me,  puttinge  out  of  her  hertis  me  for  love  of  o])ir  })ing, 
I  schal  5elde  woniynge  in  peynes  eendelees  wij?  orrible  devehs 
in  helle.     And  {janne, — 

Inebriabo  sagittas  meas  sanguine,  et  gladius  mens 
devorabit  earnes :  /  schal  drunken  myn  arowis  in  blood,  and 
my  swerd  schal  devoure  flesch. 

Myn  arowis,  j^at  is,  my  scharpe  manasynge  wordis,  I  schal 
drunken,  ))at  is,  I  schal  fulfille  in  blood  of  dede  dampnyd  men ; 
and  my  swerd,  J>at  is,  my  veniaunce,  schal  hastily  smyte  alle  ])at 
lyveden  fleisheli,  and  dieden  so,  into  helle,  to  be  devourid  of 
feendis.     And  3it  myn  arowis  I  schal  drunken, — 

De  cruore  occisornm  et  de  captivitate  nndati  inimi- 
corum  capitis :  Ofpe  blood  of  slayn  and  of  cailifie  a7id  pe  nakid 
heed  of  enemy es. 

Verrili  ben  )>ei  slayn  jjat  ben  deede  fro  ])e  joie  of  God  wd})- 
outen  eende,  and  of  ]>e  caitifte  of  helle,  of  Jje  nakidheed  fro  al 
solace  of  hevene  or  of  er]?e,  of  enemyes  dampnyd.  Nakidheed 
he  seif>  at  Jje  liknyng  of  taken  prisoners  in  conqueringe,  ]?e 
whiche  weren  wont  to  be  shaven  ]?e  heed  and  so  soold. 

Landate  gentes  popnlnm  ejus,  qnia  sangninem  ser- 
vornm  snorum  ulciscetur :  Herie,  y  hepene,  pe  folk  of  him, 
for  pe  blood  of  hise  servauntis  he  schal  venge, 

3ee  synful  men,  J^ou^  al  ^e  wolen  not  folowe  Cristis  folk  in 
virtu  and  goodnes,  at  ]?e  laste  holdij)  alle  wor])i  heriyng  )?at 
loven  him  in  worchinge  of  vertues,  and  angrij)  hem  not  in  word 
ne  deede.     For  if  ^e  do,  God  wole  vengen  it ;  flfor, — 

Et  vindictam  retribnet  in  hostes  eorum,  et  propieins 
erit  terre  popnli  sni :  And  veniaunce  he  schal  yelden  into  her 
enemyes,  and  mersiful  he  schal  be  to  pe  lond  of  his  folk, 

pe  lond  of  his  folk  in  ]?is  liif  is  holy  Chirche,  in  ]?e  which  his 
folk  wonen  in  tru]>e  and  in  charite.  Alle  oJ?ere  wonen  in  ]?e 
lond  of  ]?e  develis  folk,  to  whom  God  schal  be  ri^twiis  in 
veniaunce  and  poneschinge. 


48  WYCLIF'S  WORKS, 


[MAGNIFICAT.] 
[  Luke  i.  ] 

Magnificat  anima  mea  Dominum :  My  souk  worschipe 
pe  Lord, 

Oure  Lady  Seynt  Marye,  aftir  Jje  greetinge  of  Gabriel,  and  J?e 
conseyvynge  of  Goddis  sone,  oure  Lord  Jesus  Crist,  verri  God 
and  verri  man,  and  aftir  ]?e  blessing  of  Elizabet  J?at  clepide  her 
modir  of  hir  Lord,  sche  roos  not  in  hi^nes  of  jjou^t  for  vein 
glorie  ne  in  bolnynge  of  pride,  dispisinge  J)erfore  oJ?ere,  but  in 
swetnes  of  herte  and  ful  devout  mekenes,  Jjankinge  God  of  al 
his  goodnes,  seiinge, — My  soule,  fillid  of  his  grace,  worschipij?, 
J?at  is,  heriej)  perfi^tli  })e  Lord  of  hevene  and  er]?e,  ]?at  me  ]?is 
grace  ha]?  doon.  As  who  seie,  I  holde  not  mysilf  greet,  but 
God  I  herie  of  alle  hise  ^iftis  in  al  myn  herte.  pat  soule  wor- 
schipij)  God  perfi^tli,  ]?e  whiche  v^ickide  Jjou^tis  greeven  not; 
unclene  deliit  fill])  not,  uncovenable  berynge  hi^e]?  not,  ne  vein 
speche  envenemej?  not;  but  in  alle  vertues,  of  kynde  and  of 
grace,  it  stondij)  in  lastynge  love  and  stable  mekenes. 

Et  exultavit  spiritus  meus  in  Deo  salutari  meo :  And 
my  spirit  joiede  in  God  nyyn  heelpe. 

Not  oonii  ]?is  blessid  maide  and  modir  heriej?  God  enteerii, 
but  also  sche  sei]?  pat  hir  ^  gladnes  and  hir  joie  was  in  mynde  of 
God,  in  love  and  likynge  of  whom  al  hir  love  sche  sette.  Sche 
joiede  not  in  hirsilf,  ne  in  vanyte  of  J?is  liif,  as  oure  founyd 
maidens  don  now,  J)at  joien  more  in  synful  vanytees  of  j?is 
world,  J?e  whiche  hem  lusten  to  love,  ]?an  in  God  her  saveour, 
]>at  corowne]?  alle  trewe  virgyns  in  hevene.  But  Jjou^  devoute 
soulis  of  holy  men  and  wommen  wor])ili  worschipen  God,  and 
wondirfulli  ben  joiyinge  in  Jesus,  J>is  blessid  mayden  and  modir, 
oure  Lady  Seynt  Marye,  bifore  alle  o]?ere  in  privilegie  of  moost 
brennynge  love  sche  heriede  God,  and  in  singuler  joie  sche 
was  glad  in  Crist,  pe  songis  of  heriinge  ben  swettist  in  hir 
mouJ>,  and  J^e  nootis  of  love  ben  Jje  delitablist  in  ]?e  melody  J?at 

1  SoinU;  his.l. 

WYCLIF. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC,  49 

sche  ^  sche\vi]>.  pat  spirit  now  joiej)  in  God,  J^e  which  is  verrili 
kyndelid  wi})  ]?e  fier  of  fe  Holy  Goost,  to  j^e  which,  for  my- 
chilnes  of  Cristis  love,  no  passing  |)ing  paie]?,  but  al  fieshli  lust 
and  er[)eli  covetise  lo]?iJ>  and  is  viile  to  it.  For  al  J?e  joie  and 
cumfort  of  it  is  in  Crist,  of  whom  it  hopij?  liif  and  heele 
eendelees. 

Quia  respexit  humilitateni  ancille  sue,  ecce  enim  ex 
hoc  beatam  me  dicent  onmes  generaciones :  For  he  lokide 
}>e  mekenes  of  his  hondmayden ;  lo,  for  whi  of  pat  hlisful  me 
schulen  seyn  alle  generacioufis. 

Wrecchid  wommen  of  fis  world  loven  synful  creaturis  whom 
hem  luste,  and  worschipen  hem,  and  han  vein  joie  in  hem  ]>at 
schulen  passe  as  schadowe  aftir  settinge  of  ))e  sunne  ;  but  oure 
Ladi  Marye  sette  al  her  love  and  joie  in  God,  offringe  hersilf 
holly  to  Goddis  love ;  and  }>at  for  he  lokide  wi]?  bli]?e  i^en  of 
grace  J)e  mekenes  of  hir  ])at  was  ful  of  alle  gode  ]?ewis,  and 
buxumer  to  his  bidding  ]?an  ony  hond-mayde  in  erjje  may  be  to 
hir  Lord.  Lo,  for  whi  of  ]?at,  ])at  is,  of  hir  mekenes,  for  ])at 
lokinge  of  God  to  me,  as  he  were  take  in  my  love  at  a  si^t, 
J?erfore  blisful  me  J^ei  schulen  seyn,  alle  generaciouns  of  trewe 
Cristen  men  in  ]?is  world.     And  Jjat  is  worJ)i, — 

Quia  fecit  mihi  magna  qui  potens  est,  et  sanctum 
nomen  ejus  :  For  he  hap  do  to  me  grete  pingis  pat  m^ii  is,  and 
his  name  holy, 

Grete  ]?ingis  he  dide  to  hir  in  quantite  of  grace,  grettere  in 
mynystration  of  ]?e  aungel,  grettist,  J)oru  wondir  of  Goddis  vertu 
in  wombe  he  made  parfi3t  hir  halowyng.  In  vertu  he  ^af  to 
hir  clenness  of  liif,  in  vow  first  offringe  of  hir  maydenheed, 
and  in  alle  ])es  ]>at  moost  seeme]?  deppist  mekenes.  pus  he 
dide  to  me  J?at  is  my^ti,  and  whos  name  is  holy  halowynge 
me ;  and  alle  J?at  hooly  ben,  in  his  goodnes  ben  holy,  not  in 
hir  meryt. 

Et  misericordia  ejus  a  progenie  in  progenies  timenti- 
bus  eum:  Andpe  mercy  of  him  fro  kinredis  into  kynredis  to  po 
pat  dreeden  him. 

His  mersy,   delyveringe   fro   synne  and   sorowe,  is  fro  J?e 

1  So  in  U ;  side,  T. 
WORKS.      VOL.  II.  E 


50  WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 

kynrede  of  holy  men  into  ])e  kynredis  of  synful  men,  for  J>ere- 
])oru  oonli  ben  synful  men  maad  ri^twiis ;  but  ]?e  mersy  of  God 
is  oonli  to  \o  ])at  dreden  him,  for  wifoute  ])e  drede  of  God  may 
no  man  be  maad  ri^twiis. 

Fecit  poteneiam  in  brachio,  dispersit  superbos  mente 
cordis  sui:  He  dyde  my^i  in  his  arm,  he  scaieridepe  proudefro 
pe  pomf  of  his  herte, 

God  dide,  J)at  is,  he  schewide  ))at  mj^t  is  in  his  vertu,  whanne 
he  sette  ])e  help  of  hise  loviers  in  his  Sone,  doinge  vertu  or 
my^t  in  his  arm  to  defenden  him  and  hise  fro  alle  her  enemyes. 
And  so  he  scateride,  J)at  is,  so  he  departide  Jje  proude,  \2X  is, 
\o  \2X  seken  J)e  weye  of  hi^nes  aboven  oJ?ere,  fro  }>e  fou^t  of 
her  herte,  )?at  \€\  my^ten  not  do  in  deede  J^e  wickidnessis  \2X  ]?ei 
coveitiden,  in  conseyvynge  of  her  yvel  wille. 

Deposuit  potentes  de  sede,  et  exaltavit  humiles:  He 
putte  dounpe  nvy^ii  of  seete,  and  he  hiyde  pe  meke. 

pe  my3ti  he  clepij)  })0  fat  joien  in  her  my^t,  usinge  it  wrong- 
fulli  in  wickidnes ;  ]>ese  he  dide  doun  of  seete  of  dignyte  and 
honour.  For  kyng  Salmon  putt  doun  viciouse  bischopis  and 
proude,  and  sette  in  her  stide  meke  men  and  vertuouse.  For 
it  falli]?  to  erjjeli  princistao  mende]?e  defautis  of  Cristis  Chirche; 
))erfor  ]?ei  beren  jje  swerd  of  correccioun  J)at  J^eir^.  And  he 
hi^ede  to  Jje  seete  of  angels  felowschip  }>e  meke,  J?at  is,  Jjo  ]?at 
holden  noJ)ing  lower  J>an  hemsilf,  and  putten  hem  mekely  to  be 
defoulid  of  alle;  knowynge  hem  viile  as  erjje,  and  grucchen 
a^ein  noon  angwisch  of  J?is  liif,  but  ben  fayn  to  suffre  alle  ]?ingis 
for  Cristis  love.  And  {jerfore  j^ei  ben  worJ?i  to  ben  hi^ed  for  })at 
greet  mekenes,  \dX  ])ei  ben  not  stirid  to  wra]>])e  for  her  owne 
cause,  |)0U5  men  sey  hem  yvel  or  do  hem  yvel. 

EsTirientes  implevit  bonis,  et  divites  dimisit  inanes  : 
p^  hungrynge  he  fillide  wip  goodis,  and  pe  riche  he  lefie  empty, 

pe  hungrynge  Oure  Lady  clepi})  hem  J^at  greetli  coveiten 
ri3twisnes,  wisdom  of  God,  grace  and  cumfort  of  J?e  Holy 
Goost,  ])at  evere  stirij?.  her  desier  to  coveiten  moore  and  moore, 
and  contynuen  |)erinne;  for  siche  good  fulfillij?  of  goostli 
goodis,  profitable,  delitable,  and  honest,     pe  first,  f>at  is,  ri^t- 

a  The  sentence  suddenly  breaks  off  in  T,  and  is  unfortunately  absent 
altogether  fi'om  the  Magdalen  MS. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC. 


51 


wiisnes,  helpi]?  to  meryt;  ]?e  seciinde,  ]>at  is,  wisdom  of  God, 
drawi]?  fe  ^ernyng  fro  er]?e  to  hevene;  ]?e  fridde,  ]?at  is,  fe 
cumfort  in  )>e  Holy  Goost,  maki})  a  man  parfi3t  in  vertuouse 
werkis.  pes  goodis  han  swete  savour  to  ))e  soule.  pre  maner 
of  hungry  men  ]?ere  ben,  J)e  whiche  God  filli]>  not  but  wi}> 
peyne ;  as  J?o  Jjat  desiren  )?e  pompe  and  \t  pride  of  j?is  liif,  and 
covetise  of  riches,  and  harmynge  of  her  nei^bore.  pe  first 
hungir  is  of  bittirnes,  fe  to]?ir  of  avarice,  j)e  jjridde  of  bacbitinge. 
peso  men,  wi]?  alle  ojjere  Jjat  ben  wickid,  fou^  ]?ei  han  greet 
weljje  and  ese  in  j)is  liif,  and  ypocritis  ]>at  leeten  ^  as  ]?ei  weren 
riche  of  goostli  goodis,  criynge  her  holynes  in  outwarde  tokenys, 
he  lefte  empty  of  grace  and  joie,  ])0U5  ]?ei  ben  ful  of  favour  of 
folk,  and  vile  lustis  priveli,  and  manye  apertly ;  but  in  J?e  day 
of  doom  Jjei  schulen  fynde  nou3t  but  peyne. 

Suseepit  Israel  puerum  suum  recordatus  misericordie 
sue  :  He  resseyvede  Israel  his  child^  he  poiafe  of  his  ?nercy  ; 

Sicut  loeutus  est  ad  patres  nostros,  Abraham  et 
semini  ejus  in  secular  As  he  spak  to  oure  fadris^  to  Abra- 
ham and  to  his  seed  into  worldis, 

pus  schal  ]je  lettre  be  joyned ;  he  ressyvede  Israel  his  child 
for  mekenes  and  clennes,  and  he  spak  to  oure  fadris,  and  fat 
he  dide  bi  ]?ou3t  of  his  mercy,  ]?e  which  he  hi^te  to  doon  to 
Abraham  and  to  his  seed,  ]?at  is,  to  alle  hise  folowers  in  trupe 
and  ri^twisnes  while  J>e  world  stondi]?.  He  resseyvede  »  Israel  in 
kynde,  in  grace,  in  defendinge,  in  governynge.  poru  takinge 
of  kynde  he  ri^tid  us  out  of  dee]?,  and  out  of  ire  of  God ;  ]?oru 
takinge  of  grace  he  drou^  us  out  of  synne;  ]?oru  takinge  of 
grace  in  defence,  he  delyverij)  us  )?at  oure  enemy  have  no  my^t 
ne  maistry  of  us ;  jjoru  takinge  in  govern}Tige,  he  ledi})  us  out 
of  perels  of  ])is  wey ;  ])oru  takinge  of  blisfulheed,  he  bringi}?  us 
out  of  al  wrecchidnes  of  synne  and  sorowe,  and  setti]>  us  yn 
}?e  joye  of  hevene.    Amen. 

1  hhen,  U. 
»  The  Magd.  MS.  ends  imperfect  at  this  point. 


5^ 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


[TE  DEUM  LAUDAMUS.] 

Te  Deum  laudamus,  te  Dominum  et  confltemur :    We 

herienpee  God^  we  Imowlechen  pee  Lord. 

It  is  comounly  seid  ]>at  J?is  song  was  maad  of  Austin  and 
Ambrose  a  whanne  Austin  was  convertid.  But  j)is  we  may 
suppose  bynejje  ])e  bileeve ;  but  howevere  it  be  herof,  ])is  song 
is  devout.  First  Crist  is  God,  and  si{)  he  is  Lord,  for  he  is  not 
Lord  but  if  he  have  a  servaunt. 

Te  eternum  patrem,  orrinis  terra  veneratur :  Alpe  erpe 
worschipip  pee^  everlastinge  fadir. 

Here  we  seyen  by  partis  fe  heriyng  of  God ;  and  first  how 
alle  men  in  er)?e  worschipen  God  ]>e  Fadir,  si]?  al  ]?e  Trynyte  is 
fadir  to  men,  for  it  made  man  of  nou^t,  and  ])erfore  it  is  fadir. 
And  so  al  J^e  Trinyte  is  fadir  to  man,  but  ]?e  first  persoone  is 
Fadir  to  his  Sone. 

Tibi  omnes  angeli,  tibi  cell,  et  universe  potestates. 
Tibi  cherubyn  et  seraphyn  incessabili  voce  proelar 
mant : 

Alle  angels  and  hevenes,  and  alle  powers  in  pis  wo^'ld,  cherubyn 
and  seraphin,  crien  hi  vols  and  unsiyntinge  to  pee. 

Al  if  er])eli  men  be  first  in  oure  knowinge,  3it  hevene  and 
sitesyns  Jjerof  ben  first  in  her  kynde,  and  specialy  angels  of  J)e 
two  firste  ordris,  for  ]?ei  ben  schynynge  wi]?  kunnynge,  and 
brennynge  wij)  charite.     And  alle  creaturis  seyn  to  God  |?at  he 


a  In  the  ancient  offices  of  the 
English  Church,  according  to  Mr. 
Palmer  {Origines  Liturgicae,  I.  228), 
this  hymn  is  named  indifferently  the 
*  Psalm  Te  Bmm^  or  the  'Song  of 
Ambrose  and  Augustine.'  No 
higher  authority  for  the  legend 
mentioned  in  the  text  is  known, 
than  that  of  a  spurious  chronicle, 
ascribed  to  Dacius,  a  successor  of 
St.  Ambrose,  but  really  written  five 
centuries  later.  The  rudiments  of 
a  large  portion  of  the  hymn  may 


be  traced,  as  has  been  shown  by 
Archdeacon  Freeman  in  his  ex- 
cellent work,  Principles  of  Bivine 
Service,  in  Oriental  liturgies.  But  in 
its  actual  form,  a  preponderance  of 
testimony  seems  to  trace  it  back  to 
Gaul ;  the  earliest  author  named  for 
it  is  Hilary  of  Poitiers  (circa  354). 
If  so  it  would  be  not  one  of  the 
least  precious  gifts  to  Christianity 
from  the  glorious  church  of  Gaul, 
well  and  fittingly  called  '  the  eldest 
daughter  of  the  Church.' 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC.  S?, 

made  hem,  for  ])is  is  kyndeli  seiing,  )>at  kynde  techi}?  Goddis 
creaturis ;  but  angels  crien  afer  bi  spiritual  vois,  and  j^ei  may 
not  ceese  herof,  sij)  J^ei  ben  needly  blessid. 

Sanctus,  Sanctus,  Sanctus,  Dominus  Dens  Sabaotli; 
Pleni  sunt  cell  et  terra  majestatis  glorie  tue : 

pis  is  ))e  first  song  seid  to  fe  Trynyte,  and  ]?erfore  is  })is 
word,  holy,  seid  Jjries,  and  it  bitokenej?  stablenes  in  God  in 
bigynnynge  of  hise  werkis,  in  kepinge,  and  eendynge.  And  as 
God  is  myche  and  glorious  wiJ?oute  mesure,  and  in  ech  part  of 
]>is  world,  so  it  is  soj)li  seid  ]?at  he  fillij?  boj^e  heven  and  er]?e ; 
and  al  if  he  have  in  himsilf  glorie  of  his  magiste,  in  as  myche  as 
he  is  God,  naj?elees  he  schewij)  it  out  in  mesure,  noumbre,  and 
wei3t,  as  him  fallij)  for  to  do, 

Te  gloriosus  Apostolorum  chorus:  Te  prophetarum 
laudabilis  numerus :  Te  martiruin  candidatus  laudat 
exereitus  :  pese  j)re  cumpanyes  of  |?e  two  testamentis  herien 
J)ee  God ;  and  first,  p^  glorious  cumpany  of  Cristis  apostlis,  sij>, 
fie  worschipful  noumhre  ofprophetis;  and  si}>,/^  oast  of  viariirs 
maad  whi^t  in  her  blood. 

SiJ>  Crist  is  heed  of  holy  Chirche,  and  hise  apostlis  sueden 
him  next,  manye  supposen  })at  ])ei  ben  in  hevene  bifore  oJ?ere. 
And,  for  fadris  of  ]?e  oolde  lawe  weren  grounde  ^  of  men  of  Jie 
newe  lawe,  bi  resonable  ben  })ei  putt  bitwixe,  and  next  hem 
suen  martirs  of  )?e  newe  lawe. 

Te,  per  orbem  terrarum,  sancta  conJS.tetur  eeclesia: 
Holy  Chirche  knowlechip  pee  God,  poru-out  al pe  world. 

And  as  J)e  Trinyte  is  heried,  so  holy  Chirche  ha})  J>re  partis. 
pe  hi^este  ben  angels  of  hevene,  fe  secunde,  seintis  slepinge  in 
purgatorie,  }?e  J^ridde  is  folk  \2X  schulen  be  saved,  here  fi3tinge 
in  erfe.  Of  ])ese  and  noone  o)?ere  is  holy  Chirche  maad.  And 
j?is  schulde  be  bridil  in  us,  to  booste  not  \2X  we  ben  of  holy 
Chirche.  And  so,  for  mysterie  of  jje  Trinyte,  ben  confessours 
and  virgyns  taken  in  ]je  Jjridde  part. 

Patrem  immense  majestatis  ^ :  Venerandum  tuum 
verum  et  unicmn  Filiujn :  Sanctum  quoque  paraclitum 
Spiritum.     pis  Chirche  J)at  J)us  is  scaterid  in  ])e  brode  world, 

^  corrected ;  U  has  gronde,  T  groundid.  ^  So  in  U ;  magestatis,  T. 


54  WFCLIF'S  WORKS, 

knowlechip  pe  fadir  ofmajesie  wipouien  eende,  and  knowlechij?  )je 
secunde  persone,//  oonli  worJ?i  verri  sone ;  and  it  knowlechi]? 
])e  Jjiidde  tyme, /^  Holi  Goosi  cumforiour ;  and  alle  ]?es  )?re 
persoones  ben  o  God  in  his  kynde.  And,  as  clerkis  seyn, 
magiste  acoordij)  to  fe  Fadir,  for  he  is  in  sum  maner  first  of 
alle  Jjre  persoones ;  wisdom  acordi]?  to  J?e  Sone,  si]>  he  is  wis- 
dom of  J)e  Fadir,  and  made  and  bou^te  mankynde ;  ])e  Holy 
Goost  is  cumfortor,  for  he  maki))  a  parfi^t  eende  of  brennynge 
charite  in  alle  fe  seyntis  ))at  he  wolde  have,  bo]?e  here  and  in 
heven,  in  sorowe  and  in  joie. 

Tu  rex  glorie  Criste :  Tu  patris  sempiternus  es  Filius : 
Tu  ad  liberandum  suscepturus  hominem  non  liorriiisti 
virginis  uterum :  Tu  devieto  mortis  aeuleo  aperuisti 
credentibus  regna  celorum:  Tu  ad  dexteram  Dei  sedes, 
in  gloria  patris:  Judex  crederis  esse  venturus:  X^ou, 
Crist,  art  Kyng  of  glorie,  and  hast  take  mannys  kynde ;  ^ou  art 
everlastynge  sone  of  pe  fadir,  pou,  to  take  mafikynde  for  to  de- 
lyvere  it,  hidousist  not  pe  virgyns  wo??ihe  to  he  closid  in  it,  pou^ 
for  pou  over  earnest  pe  scharpenes  of  deep,  openidist  to  men  pat 
hileeveden  in  pee  pe  kyngdoms  of  hevenes,  pou,  aftir  pin  assen- 
cioun,  sittist  on  Goddis  ri'^t  side.  And  si]?  ))0U  art  God  bi  \i 
hi^er  kynde,  and  best  man  bi  J?i  o]?ir  kynde,  pou  art  bileeved  to 
come  for  tojuge  at  pe  laste  day. 

And  in  Jjes  articlis  of  bileeve  is  myche  fair  clergie,  but  we 
schulden  not  bileeve  of  ]?e  Fadir  of  hevene  ])at  he  ha})  a  ri^t 
side,  or  partis,  as  a  man  ha]?,  but  }?at  \%  manheed  of  Crist  is 
blisful  in  hevene,  and  next  his  Godheed  in  glorie  among  alle 
creaturis. 

Te  ergo  quesumus,  famulis  tuis  subveni,  quos  preeioso 
sanguine  redemisti:  Eterna  fae  cum  Sanctis  tuis  in 
gloria  munerari:  Salvum  fae  populum  tuum,  Domine, 
et  benedie  hereditati  ^  tuae.  Et  rege  eos,  et  extolle 
illos  usque  in  eternum.  By  Jjese  two  kyndis  m  Crist 
ben  we  hardy  to  preie  him,  and  perfore  we  preien  pee,  helpe 
pou  pi  servauniis,  whiche  pou  hast  bow^t  wip  pi  precious  blood. 
Do  pis  grace  wip  pi  seintis,  pat  pei  be  rewardid  in  hlis  wip  ever- 

^  corrected  from  U  ;  hereditatis,  T. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC. 


6S 


lasiinge  glorie.  Lord,  make  J?i  peple  saaf,  and  blesse  to  }?in  eritage; 
and  gov  erne  hem  here^  and  My  hem  into  pe  Mis  wipouien  eende. 

Cristen  men  schulden  take  J>e  wordis  of  Goddis  lawe,  as 
Ambrose  and  Austin  and  ofere  bifore  us  ban  do,  and  drede  not 
to  graunte  ]jat  Crist  was  deed,  and  lesse  Jjan  his  fadir,  and 
herwi])  was  God.  But  heretikis  seyn  here  {?at  auctor  of  Goddis 
lawe  was  rade  in  his  logiik,  and  ofte  spak  fals,  and  so  Jjei  wolen 
ne}?ir  holde  hym  ne  sue  him.  But  sey  we  booldly  to  })es 
eretikis,  )?at  Jjei  cannot  amende  J)is  auctor,  ne  reprove  noone  of 
hise  wordis  bi  her  newe  logyk,  and  but  if  \€\  holden  J>is  auctor 
J?ei  schulen  not  be  saved. 

Per  singulos  dies  benedicimus  te :  Et  laudamus  nomen 
tumn  in  seculiun  et  in  secnluni  seculi.  We  ben  maad  to 
serve  God,  and  in  ))at  have  blis,  and  herfore  we  syngen  to  God 
and  seien,  pat  we  hlessen  him  hi  ech  daies  ]?at  we  lyven  in  J?e 
world,  and  we  herien  his  name  hi  lasiynge  of  pis  world  and  ofpe 
iopir  hope, 

Whanne  oure  soule  was  maad,  )?anne  God  made  a  newe 
world,  and  by  al  j)is  world  we  schulden  herie  God,  on  o  maner 
})e  while  we  lyven  here,  and  on  anojjir  aftir.  As  Jjere  ben  two 
lastingis  J>at  God  3eve)?  to  })is  world,  oon  is  wi]?out-forJ?,  fat  men 
clepen  tyme,  anoJ)ir  is  wi{)inne,  betere  })an  J?is  tyme,  and  J?is  is 
clepid  often  tymes  world  of  world. 

Bignare,  Domine,  die  isto  sine  peccato  nos  custodire : 
Miserere  nostri,  Domine,  miserere  nostri:  Piat  miseri- 
cordia  tua,  Domine,  super  nos,  quemadmodtim  speravi- 
mus  in  te:  In  te,  Domine,  speravi,  non  eonfundar  in 
eternnm.  Here  we  preien  to  oure  God  by  hope  ]?at  we  han 
gaderid  in  hym,  and  seyn,  Lord^  vouchesaaf  to  kepe  us  pis  day 
wipouien  synne.  Lord,  have  viersy  on  us.  Lord,  he  pi  mersy 
maad  upon  us,  as  we  han  hopid  in  pee.  Lord,  I  have  hopid  in 
pee  J  he  J  not  schent  wipoute  eende. 

In  J)ese  foure  versis  ben  manye  faire  truj?is.  In  fe  firste  vers 
we  preien  God  to  kepe  us  fro  greet  synne  J?at  nevere  schal  have 
eende ;  and  ech  day  we  han  nede  to  preie  herfore ;  and  so  Crist 
techij?  us  to  sey  in  oure  Pater  noster  jjat,  and  God  delyvere  us 
fro  })is  yvel.  pus  we  han  nede  ech  day  to  preie  fis ;  but,  as 
seint  Joon  sei]>,  if  we  se}Ti  }>at  we  han  no  synne,  we  disseyven 


S6  WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 

us  silf,  and  tnijje  is  not  in  us.  But  as  longe  as  we  dwellen 
here,  we  asken  Goddis  mersi  for  oure  mischevous  bodi,  but 
moost  for  oure  soule ;  but  in  fe  to])ir  world  ])is  myscheef  goo]> 
awey.  And,  for  ech  man  schulde  wyte  j>at  he  ha])  ful  hope  in 
God,  ]?erfore  in  )?e  Jjridde  word  we  preie  to  God  of  his  mersy 
as  we  hopen  in  him,  and  moore  may  we  not  axe.  In  \q  fourjje 
word  we  turnen  us  in  o  persoone,  of  ]?e  Chirche,  and  seien  in 
persoone  of  J)is  Chirche,  J?at  we  han  hope  in  ])is  Lord,  and  for 
Jjis  hope  we  axen  to  be  not  schent  wi))OUten  eende.  For  as 
Crist  techi])  us  to  axe  generaH,  so  ]?ese  seyntis  casten  to  close 
Jjer  preier  in  charite,  and  to  aske  J)is  eende  in  \e  name  of  holy 
Chirche.  And  Jjis  is  eende  of  oure  asking  Jjat  mai  falle  in  ]?is 
world.  For  ))is  yvel  and  J?is  scheending  is  moost  of  alle  oj^ere, 
and  so  ])is  is  a  grete  grace  to  wante  ]?is  scheendyng  wi])OUten 
eende ;  for  )>anne  we  schal  not  come  to  helle,  but  algatis  go  to 
heven.  And  no  peyne  is  yvel  but  ])is,  or  to  regarde  of  ])is, 
as  no  joie  is  good  but  blis,  or  ellis  wey  to  blis.'  pis  witt  schulde 
men  undirstonde  of  J)is  holy  song,  and  leve  worldli  chauntynge 
jjat  here  is  usid  wickidly,  for  it  distracti]?  often  tymes  fro  joie 
of  ])e  to})ir  world.  And  it  is  hard  ])at  it  profite  evene  as  myche 
to  mennys  soule  as  it  likif  to  mennis  eeris ;  and  certis  ellis  it 
profiti])  not,  for,  as  Austin  knowlechi]?,  he  synnej)  grevousli 
whanne  evere  J)e  song  liki]>  him  more  J)an  doo]?  J>e  witt  of 
]5e  song  a 

[BENEDICTUS.] 

[Luke\  68.] 

Benedictus  Dominus  Deus  Israel,  quia  visitavit  et 
fecit  redempcionem  plebis  sue,  pis  psalm  is  of  moore 
auctorite  ))an  }>e  song  bifore,  for  it  is  bileeve  of  ])e  gospel,  as 
Seint  Luk  tellij?;  and  Zacharie,  Baptistis  fadir,  seide  first  ])is 
salme  aftir  J?at  he  was  dombe,  as  Gabriel  toolde  him.  And  as 
myracle  was  bifore  in  dombnes  and  3evynge  of  speche,  so  in 
seyinge  of  })is  salm  was  more  myracle,  whanne  God  li3ted  )?is 
profete  and  teelde  him  hid  tru]^is.  pis  profete  bigynne]?  J?us, 
and  sei])  to  holy  Chirche, — Blessid  be  J?e  Lord  God  of  Israel, 
for  he  hap  visited  and  maad  biggyng  of  his  peple. 
^  S.  Aug.  Cotifessiones,  Lib.  X,  cap.  33. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC. 


51 


It  is  seid  comounli  jjat  |)ere  ben  }>re  salmes,  maad  of  Marie 
and  of  Symeon  and  of  }?is  Zacharie,  and  ]>t\  ben  ordeyned  of 
Jje  Chirche  to  be  songun  in  tymes  accordynge  to  Jjese  persones, 
and  witt  after  whiche  J>ei  weren  seid.  pis  salme  is  songen  in 
Jje  Chirche  at  |)e  eende  of  mateyns,  for  Joon  Baptist  was  lan- 
tirne  bifore  ]?e  sunne,  to  make  redy  to  take  Jje  li^t  of  ]?is  sunne, 
as  ])is  salm  is  sungun  bifore  Jje  sunne  rising,  pis  profete  knew 
in  spirit  J^e  grace  J>at^  God  hadde  maad  here,  and  ])erfore  he 
biginne]?  at  ]?e  heriyng  of  God,  and  clepi]?  him  fivst.  Lord  of 
alle  men  of  ]?e  world.  He  clepij?  aftir,  God  of  Israel,  for  God 
in  o  sense  is  seer  of  al  ]?ing ;  and  Israel  is  as  myche  as,  men 
]?at  seen  God  a,  and  bitokene]?  Jacob  wi))  men  J>at  camen  of 
him ;  and  it  is  takun  comounli  for  seyntis  in  hevene.  And  first 
]?ei  feelen  his  lordschip  ^  and  aftirward  his  godheed.  pis  God 
visitide  his  peple  bi  myraclis  of  J?e  oolde  lawe,  but  now  late  in 
bir])e  schewide  in  Seynt  Joon  Baptist ;  and  soone  aftir  God  ha|) 
maad  biynge  a^ein  of  mankynde ;  for  whanne  Crist  was  maad 
man,  ]?is  priis  was  ^ovun  of  God,  and  whanne  Cristis  sufFringe 
suede  aftir,  J)is  priis  was  in  tellynge.  And  here  he  schewide  him 
a  profete  in  seiynge  J)is  as  passid,  for  profetis  han  ]?is  maner, 
for  certeynte  of  her  witt,  to  seie  her  wordis  as  passid  al  if  ]?ei 
ben  to  come. 

Et  erexit  cornu  salutis  nobis  in  dome  David  pueri 
sni :  And  God  hap  rerid  pe  horn  of  heelpe  to  us,  in  pe  hous  of 
Davip  his  child. 

Oft  tymes  an  horn  bitokene))  bi  manye  propirtees  a  power 
schewid  to  ]?e  peple.  And  for  Crist  cam  of  DaviJ?  ]?at  was 
Goddis  child,  J)is  horn  was  arerid  in  DaviJ)is  hous ;  and  Crist 
was  King  of  pees,  as  DaviJ?  was  a  meke  king ;  and  ojjer  liif  of 
Davi})  figuride  Jesus  Crist. 

Sieut  locutns  est  per  os  sanctornm,  qtii  a  seculo  sunt, 
prophetarum  ejus :  As  God  hap  spoken  hi  pe  moup  of  seiniis, 
whiche  hen  fro  pe  world,  Goddis  owne  propheiis. 

pis  biinge  of  mankynde  by  Goddis  owne  sone  was  ofte  pro- 


1  SoinU;  T  has  o/))af. 


2  So  in  U;  lord.T, 


a  St.  Jerome  {De  Nominibus  Hebraicis)  says,  *  Israel,  est  videre  Deum, 
sive  vir  aut  mens  videns  Deum.' 


58  WFCLIF'S  WORKS, 

fecied  fro  bigynnyng  of  J>e  world,  and  also  )?ese  profetis  weren 
drawen  fro  J>e  world,  and  alle  ))ei  spaken  wi]?  o  mou]?  bi  o  spirit 
J)at  whistlide  in  hem. 

Salutem  ex  inimicis  nostris,  et  de  manu  omnium  qui 
oderunt  nos :  Heelpe  of  oure  enemy es,  and  of  pe  hond  of  alle 
pes  pat  han  hatid  us, 

Ffor  )?is  ha]>  God  spoken  bi  profetis  bifore  seid,  how  we 
schulden  have  heeljje  bo))e  of  men  and  fendis,  and  be  delyverid 
of  ])e  hond  of  alle  \o  )?at  hatiden  us. 

Ad  faciendam  miserieordiam  eiini  patribus  nostris, 
et  memorari  testamenti  sui  saneti :  God  ha)>  bihi3t  ^  bi  his 
profetis  bifore,  io  do  mersy  wip  oure  fadris,  and  have  mynde  of 
his  holy  tesiameni, 

God  hadde  hi^t  to  Abraham  in  ])e  oold  lawe,  ])at  he  schulde 
multiplien  his  seed  as  sterris  of  hevene,  and  as  gravel  of  J)e  see ; 
and  many  o]?ere  J?ingis  God  bihi^te  to  Abraham  and  ojjere  holy 
fadirs,  )?ing  J)at  ]?ei  hadden  not  fulfillid  here  in  erjje.  And  j?us 
bileve  techi]?  us  ))at  ]?is  was  seid  in  figure  of  goodis  ]?at  j>ei 
schulden  have  in  ))e  to]?er  world,  as  }>e  er)?e  ]?at  Abraham 
slepte  inne,  ])at  God  5af  to  him  and  to  his  seed,  figuride 
hem  hevene,  Jjat  is  clepid  in  Goddis  lawe  ]?e  lond  of  men 
lyvynge.  And  so  it  is  of  ojjere  goodis  l?at  weren  bihi^t  oure 
fadirs,  for  God  teelde  but  litil  of  er)?eli  riches,  for  bo])e  it 
felde  to  J)is  Lord  and  to  his  trewe  children  to  ^eve  hevenli 
goodis  and  reste  in  hevene. 

Jusjxtrandum  quod  juravit  ad  Abraham  patrem  nos- 
trum, daturum  se  nobis.  Whanne  Abraham  schulde  have 
ofFrid  Isaac,  his  owne  sone  of  his  wiif,  he  hadde  a  greet  oo|? 
to  God,/^/  he  swoor  to  him  pat  he  schulde  i^eve  him  to  us,  for  to 
bigge  mannys  kynde. 

Pe  story  is  knowen  how  God  temptide  Abraham,  and  baad 
him  rise  and  take  his  owne  sone  wij?  him  }>at  he  love  J?,  Isaac, 
and  offre  him  on  an  hil.  And  Abraham  dide  jjus  as  God  baad 
him  do,  and  herfore  God  bihi^te  him  l>at  he  schulde  ^eve  himsilf 
for  J?e  worschip  of  God  and  savynge  of  mankynde.  And  her- 
fore was  Crist  borun,  as  Isaie  tellij?. 

XJt  sine  timore,  de  manu  inimicorum  nostrorum  libe- 
1  From  U ;  om.  T. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC,  59 

rati,  serviamiis  illi  in  sanetitate  et  justicia  coram  ipso 
onmibus  diebus  nostris.  pe  eende  whi  J>at  God  bou^te  us 
so  costly  and  so  kyndeli  was  \\%,—pat  we  wipouie  drede,  de- 
lyverid  oute  ofpe  hond  of  our e  enemy es,  serve  to  God  in  holynes  and 
rv^twisneSj  in  whiche  we  schulden  lyve  io-fore  him  in  alle  oure  dayes* 

And  here  may  we  seen  how  unkynde  we  ben,  sij>  God  dide 
])is  kyndenes  for  J)is  eende  to  mankynde,  and  it  were  so  profit- 
able and  honest  to  man,  and  ^it  man  leve]?  it,  and  goo]?  a  wrong 
wey,  for  drede  of  ]?e  world  or  love  of  his  flesch,  and  so  bicomej? 
servaunt  to  hem  fro  whom  God  ha]?  delyverid  him.  And  so 
man  forsaki]?  God,  and  taki]?  him  to  ]?e  fend. 

Et  tu,  puer,  propheta  Altissimi  vocaberis ;  preeibis 
enim  ante  faciem  Domini,  parare  vias  ejus,  ad  dandam 
seienciam  salutis  plebi  ejus  in  remissionem  peccatomm 
eorum.  Here  ]?e  prophete  turne]?  his  speche  to  his  sone,  and 
seij?  ]?ese  so]?e  wordis  unto  Joon  Baptist :  pou,  child,  schalt  he 
clepidj?e  pro/eie  of  alper-hiyst ;  and  perfore  pou  schalt  go  hifore 
pe  face  of  pe  Lord,  for  to  make  redy  pe  weies  of  him,  and  for  to 
^eve  kunnyng  of  heelpe  unto  his  peple  infor^ifnes  of  her  synnes. 

And  al  }?is  was  schewid  in  ])e  liif  of  Joon  Baptist,  for  he 
forsook  ]?e  world  and  chastiside  his  flesch,  and  wente  not  to 
scoole  to  bigile  his  nei^bore,  but  helde  ]?e  staat  of  innocense 
in  deseert  placis.  And  oure  relegiouse^  })at  seien  \€\  suen  him, 
gaderen  hem  in  coventis,  and  lyven  contrarye  liif;  for  in  ]?e  stide 
of  innocence  ]?ei  han  chosun  flockis;  instide  of  deseert  placis 
J?ei  han  chosun  citees ;  instide  of  greet  penaunce  aftir  ]}e  staat 
of  innocence  ]?ei  han  chosen  lustful  Hif  for  to  feede  her  flesch. 
And  where  Jjei  schulden  forsake  craftily  bildyngis,  \€\  chesen 
housis  and  cloistris  to  huyde  ]?er  richessis.  And  ]?us  ]?ei  maken 
a  wey  to  }?e  prince  of  ])is  world,  and  fi3ten,  and  maken  redy  his 
wey  to  resseyven  hise  servauntis;  and  J?ere  as  J)is  prince  is 
contrarye  to  Crist,  so  ]?ese  religious  ben  contrarie  to  Baptist; 
and  ^it  \€\  feynen  falsli  -sumwhat  of  Crist  and  sumwhat  of 
Baptist  to  disseyve  Jje  peple.  But  as  in  conjurisouns  ben  teeld 
manye  goddis  names,  to  disseyve  ])e  peple  and  robbe  of  her 

a  AH  that  follows  down  to  the  in  the  Magdalen  MS,  though  not 
end  of  the  Canticle,  so  far  as  it  so  effectually  but  that  the  writing 
relates  to  the  friars,  has  been  erased      remains  partially  visible. 


6o 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


goodis,  so  in  J)es  ordris  ben  feyned  manye  holynessis  for  a  fals 
eende,  to  disseyve  pe  peple  and  to  souke  her  blood  for  feynyng 
of  her  heeljje. 

Per  viscera  misericordiae  Dei  nostri,  in  quibus  visi- 
tavit  nos,  oriens  ex  alto,  Illiuninare  Ms  qui  in  tenebris 
et  in  umbra  mortis  sedent,  ad  dirigendos  pedes  nostros 
in  viam  pacis.  Here  we  preien  ]>is  child  J)at  is  ^even  to  us, 
and  is  bo]?e  God  and  man,  and  so  ful  of  witt  and  grace,  hyj^e 
inward  power  of  mercy  pat  he  hap^  and  cam  from  hv^  heruen  to 
visyte  his  folk,  pat  he  sende  li^t  to  us  pat  sitten  in  derknessis  and 
in  schadowe  of  deep  ^  for  to  dresse  our e  feet  into  pe  wey  of  pees. 

Here  we  preien  not,  as  freris,  neij?er  of  Crist  ne  Baptist,  to 
lyve  worldli  liif  and  likinge  to  oure  flesch,  ne  go  to  fe  wey  of 
werre  to  fi^te  wij)  oure  enemyes,  ne  to  spoile  j?e  peple,  and 
gadere  her  goodis  to  oure  castels,  ne  bi  J)e  craft  of  lesyngis  to 
plese  to  ])e  world ;  but  to  lyve  evere  contrarie  liif,  as  dide  Crist 
and  Baptist.  For  bi  wandringe  of  siche  weies  men  may  wel  se 
whos  children  siche  ben,  and  to  whom  J)ei  maken  redy.  For 
king  of  alle  )>e  children  of  pride,  jjat  is  Anticrist,  leedi])  siche 
cloisteris,  and  techij?  hem  siche  cautelis.  And  herfore  seyn 
sum  men,  as  Lyncolne  and  ojjere,  )?at  J>ei  ben  dede  careynes 
cropen  of  her  sepulcre,  wlappid  in  clo]?is  of  deeP,  and  dryven  of 
J?e  devel  for  to  drecche  men^.  And  ))us  ]?ei  ben  baggid  wi]> 
signes  of  ipocrysie,  J)at  it  were  lasse  harme  to  men  of  Cristis 
scoole  to  dele  wi])  a  legioun  of  feendis  of  helle  Jjan  wi]>  a  litil 
covent  of  siche  qwike  devels.  For  sum  men  )?ei  robben,  and 
sum  men  ]?ei  maken  wode;  and  bi  )7er  feyned  ipocrisie  and 
cautelis  of  ]?e  fend  j?ei  bigilen  mo  men  )?an  doon  o})ere  feendis. 
Lord  delyvere  his  folk  for  siche  perels  of  fals  freris,  for  if  j)is 
laste  be  pressid  out,  })e  sevene  bifore  ben  li^tir.  And  ceertis 
jjese  religiouse  J?us  bounden  to  fe  fend  passen  wickide  wommen, 
whos  tracis  Jjei  folowen,  for  liknes  of  holy  men  disseyve]?  myche 
folk. 

^  In  the  parallel  passage  at  p.  230,  the  word  is  written  *  deul/  i.e. 
mourning.     U  has  dole. 

^  See  the  opening  of  the  tract  *  Lincolniensis,'  infra,  p.  230. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC. 


6i 


[NUNC    DIMITTIS.] 
[Luke  ii.  29.] 

pis  is  J?e  Jjridde  salm  songun  of  prestis  a^ein  J)ei  goon  to  Jjer 
bed,  late  upon  ny^tis;  and  figure]?  desier  fat  Cristen  men 
schulden  have  in  hour  of  her  dee]).  For  profi3t  of  Cristis 
Chirche,  J)e  gospel  tellij)  ])er  was  an  oold  man,  jjat  was  clepid 
Symeon,  and  hadde  answere  of  God  ])at  he  schulde  not  se  dee]? 
bifore  he  say  Crist.  And  whanne  Crist  cam  into  J)e  temple, 
he  took  him  in  his  armes,  and  songe  joifully  J?is  song  to  God, — 

IJunc  dimittis  servum  tuum,  Domine,  seciindum  ver- 
bum  tuiim  in  pace;  qiaia  viderunt  occuli  mei  salutare 
tuum^;  quod  parasti  ante  faeiem  omnium  populorum; 
lumen  ad  revelacionem  gentium,  et  gloriam  plebis  tue 
Israel:  Lord,pou  levest  now  pi  servaunt  in  pees  afiirpi  word 
pat  J)OU  hast  seid  bifore,  for  now  I  am  riip  to  dye ;  for  myn  iyn 
han  seen  J)in  owne  sone  Crist  ])at  is  J)ine  owne  heelpe  to  men,  pat 
pou  hast  maad  redy  to  sette  hi/ore  pe  face  of  alle  folk  pat  schal  be 
saved,  pe  which  heeljje  is,  li'^t  to  pe  scheming  ofhepene  men,  and 
also  to  glorie  of  pi  folk  of  Israel, 

pis  oold  man  was  cumfortid  in  soule  bi  bileeve,  for  he 
trowide  jjat  hevene  schulde  soone  aftir  be  openyd,  and  Crist  wi]? 
hise  membris  schulde  entre  into  hevene;  and  J?erfore  he 
coveitide  fanne  to  be  deed,  and  in  haaste  to  be  wij)  Crist,  for 
}>at  he  hopide  truly,  sij?  he  hadde  answere  of  God  ))at  was  eernes^ 
herto.  And  ])us  ben  manye  men  moved,  \2X  wolde  J?at  Cristis 
Chirche  were  sumwhat  amendid  after  Cristis  ordenaunce,  \2X 
J>ei  schulden  not  dye  bifore  J>at  fis  come,  ])at  Crist  were  schewid 
sumwhat  in  his  Temple,  and  bifore  J^at  he  were  borun  as  a  pore 
5ong  child.  And  if  J)is  venym  of  dowynge  were  sumwhat 
aslakid,  Jeanne  were  J^ei  riipe  to  dye  to  Crist ;  for  ])ei  hopen  \2X 
Crist  is  li^t  here  unto  schewe  to  hem  his  wille,  as  his  lawe  techi}), 
and  so  he  schal  be  glorie  to  hem  in  hevene.  Amen. 

pe  song  of  oure  Lady  in  which  sche  love]?  God  is  sungen  at 

^  corrected  from  U  and  Vulg. ;  vieum^  T.  ^  ermu,  U. 


6% 


WYCLIF'S  WORKS. 


even-song,  ])at  is  oure  first  hour,  for  sche  was  byginnyng  of 
heel)?e  of  mannys  kynde.  And  J^es  Jjre  salmes  ben  of  even 
autorite,  si]?in  ))ei  ben  alle  ]?re  ]?e  fei]?  of  Jje  gospel. 


[THE  SONG  OF  THE  THREE  CHILDREN.] 
[Dan.  iii.  g7— 88a  ] 

Benedicite  omnia  opera  Domini  Domino ;  laudato 
et  superexaltate  eum  in  secnla. 

pis  salme  was  maad  aftir  a  myracle  J)at  God  dide  in  tyme  of 
Nabugodnosor,  whanne  he  savede  ]?re  Jewis  for  stablenes  of  her 
bileeve  fro  J)e  brennyng  furneis,  ])at  was  hat  ^  to  brenne  hem. 
pese  }>re  persoonys  ben  of  double  name,  by  dyverse  langagis ; 
J)ei  ben  clepid  Ananyas,  A3arias,  and  My^ael;  and  })ei  ben 
clepid  on  o])er  maner,  Sydrak,  Mysaac,  and  Abedenago.  pis 
song  heerij)  ^  God,  and  speki]?  to  alle  hise  creaturis,  and  biddi}> 
hem  love  God,  sil)in  alle  ben  maad  for  J)is  eende.  And  })us  fe 
first  vers  biddi]), — ^e  alle  werkis  ofpe  Lord,  blesse  y  io  pe  Lord, 
herie  y  and  overe-hiy  '^e  him  in  al  tyme, 

pes  ben  J?re  wordis  in  ]?is  vers  jsat  schulden  be  J>us  undir- 
stonden.  Si]>  ech  creature  sei]?  kyndely  ]>at  God  made  it  of 
nou^t,  ech  creature  schulde  by  kinde  blesse  God ;  and  so  if  it 
do  wel,  servynge  God  as  it  schulde,  ]?anne  it  sei]>  wel  to  God, 
and  graunti]?  J)at  God  is  blessid  over  al  ]?ing.  And  ])is  wel 
seiinge,  J)at  is  wel  servynge,  is  blessing  J?at  God  spekij?  of 
here ;  and  J)us  alle  J)ingis  blessen  God,  but  oonli  yvele  men  and 
feendis.  pe  secunde  word  of  })is  vers  seij?  J?at  J^ingis  blessen  to 
})e  Lord,  and  ])is  word,  Lord,  by  himsilf,  is  taken  for  God,  Lord 
of  Lordis.  pe  )?ridde  tyme  we  schulden  undirstonde,  ]?at  by 
maner  of  Greek  speche,  J?at  J^ing  overhi^ij?  ano]?er  J)ing  ]?at  seij> 
it  passi)>  alle  o)?ere  creaturis;  and  so  overhi3inge,  propirly,  is 
lovynge  proprid  to  God.  And  })us  ]?ese  J?re  fingis,  blesse,  and 
loove,  and  overbite,  bitokenen  j^e  Trynyte,  and  Jjei  ben  oon 
in  substaunce,  ])at  is,  heriinge,  apperinge  ^  to  God. 


1  hete,  U ;  hat,  Q. 
must  have  been  '  heriej>.' 


2  heri^,  FF,  U ;  heyes,  Q.    The  original  word 
^  appropryd,  Q. 

In  the  Vulgate  version. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC.  63 

Benedicite  angeli  Domini  Domino :  Benedicite  cell 
Domino :  ^e  angels  of  pe  Lord  blesse  to  pe  Lord;  y  hevenes 
hlesse  to  pe  Lord. 

pis  vers  bigynnej?  )?e  ordir  of  blessinge  \2X  creaturis  schulden 
blesse  to  God.  But  pere  ben  two  maner  of  creaturis,  spiritual 
and  bodily,  pe  beste  creature  of  God  is  good  angel,  ]?at  is 
namyd  generali  here.  And  ]?us  J^ese  angels  ban  a  maner  to 
blesse  God  bi  witt  and  wille.  And  among  bodily  creaturis 
hevenes  generali  ben  Jje  best. 

Benedicite  aque  omnes,  quae  super  celos  sunt.  Domino: 
Benedicite  omnes  virtutes  Domini  Domino :  ^e  watris  alle, 
pat  hen  above  hevenes,  hlesse  y  to  pe  Lord ;  y  alle  vertues  of  pe 
Lord  hlesse  to  pe  Lord, 

Here  jjinken  men  ))at  bi  Jjese  watris  whiche  ben  above  hevenes 
ben  undirstonden  alle  partis  of  hevenes,  above  sunne,  planetis, 
and  sterris.  For  jjes  }>re  partis,  for  ])e  li^t,  ben  clepid  hevenes 
comounly,  and  ]?ese  o])ere  partis  of  hevene  \2X  ben  cleer  as 
watir  ben  clepid  watris  above  hevenes,  for  in  hem  ben  J)ese  jjre 
partis  picchid.  And  it  is  licly  to  trewe  men  ))at  ]?es  watris  ben 
of  \^  same  kynde  ]?at  ben  J)es  watris  bine)?e  )?e  moone,  but  Jjei 
dyversen  in  propirtees ;  for  watris  ]?at  ben  above  J)e  moone  ben 
stable  and  cleer  and  everlastinge ;  but  watris  fat  ben  binej>e  J)e 
moone,  remuynge,  freele,  and  partable.  And  so  watris  jjat  ben 
above  moun  wel  be  preised,  for  \€\  ben  sotil,  but  watris  bynej^e 
may  be  dyvyded,  for  |?ei  ben  bo)?e  hevy  and  groos ;  and  dy- 
versyte  of  siche  qualitees  stondij?  in  substaunce  of  o  kynde. 
And  vertues  ])at  ben  in  hevenes  ben  powers  ))erof  to  rule  J)is 
erj)e,  as  ech  part  ))at  is  in  hevene  ha]>  vertu  to  move  erj^eli 
J>ingis. 

Benedicite  sol  et  luna  Domino :  Benedicite  stelle  celi 
Domino :  \>e  sunne  and  pe  moone  hlesse  y  to  pe  Lord ;  pe  starris 
of  hevene  hlesse  y  tope  Lord, 

pe  sunne  and  ]je  moone  ben  passinge  li^tis,  and  after  hem 
ben  ]>e  sterris,  and  summe  of  hem  ben  clepid  planetis,  as  fyve, 
wij)  }e  sunne  and  moone ;  ]>e  whiche  men  of  astronomye  clepen 
sevene  planetis  of  hevene,  and  stonden  in  ]?is  ordir :  Saturnus  is 
)je  hi^este  planete,  sij)  Jubiter,  and  si})  Mars.  But  )>e  sunne  is 
as  a  kyng,  and  stondij?  in  ]>e  myddil  of  alle  planetis,  and  haj? 


64 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


])es  ]?re  above  him,  and  oJ)ere  J)re  bynej^e  him ;  J?e  whiche  ben 
clepid  of  filosofris,  Venus,  Mercurius,  and  ^Q  moone  is  lowiste 
planete,  and  takij>  li^t,  wij>  o]?ere,  of  j^e  sunne.  And  alle  fese 
sevene  ben  erraunt  stems,  for  chaungeable  movynge  \2X  j^ei 
han,  for  fei  ben  sumtyme  joyned  togidere,  and  sumtyme  oon 
a^ein  ano})er.  And  ]?is  ^  falli))  for  fese  alle  for  propir  movynge 
in  her  whelis,  but  above  Satui^nus  ben  sterris  ]?at  ben  alle  in  o 
wheel,  and  ])es  ben  evere  iliche  fer,  and  maken  o  figure  in  her 
wheel. 

Benedieite  ymber  et  ros  Domino:  Benedieite  omnes 
spiritus  Dei  Domino :  Reyn  and  deew  blesse  y  to  J?e  Lord ; 
alle  wyndis  of  God  bless  5*?  toj^e  Lord, 

Here  jjes  ])re  children  of  Jewis  nemen  creaturis  bynej^e  j?e 
moone,  but  })ei  nemen  not  J?es  foure  speris  bi  ]?e  ordir  ])at  filoso- 
fris doon.  pei  seyn  ]>at  undir  J^e  moone  is  a  spere  of  sotil  fier, 
and  in  Jjat  is  a  spere  of  ]?e  eir,  and  in  eij?er  spere  of  )?e  watir, 
and  in  J>e  myddil  of  ]?e  world  and  lowiste  ^,  spere  of  Jie  erj^e. 
pis  resoun  moved  ^  fes  clerkes  to  putte  a  sotil  spere  of  fier ;  J^ei 
seyn  \e  gros  fier  among  us  is  bojje  hoot  and  drie  and  li^t, 
movynge  upward ;  and  al  f)is  Jjing  it  doo]?  bi  kynde ;  and  J>us 
a  cleene  fier  in  his  kynde  mut  be  moore  li^t  hoot  and  drie. 
And  alle  J>e  speris  ben  brokely*,  but  so  ben  speris  above  Jje 
moone.  Clerkis  seyn  jjat  reyn  comej)  ])us;  ))e  planetis,  and 
algatis  J)e  sunne,  drawen  up  of  \e  watir  and  of  oJ?ere  moist 
placis  a  sotil  body  fer  into  \q  eir ;  and  in  ]?e  myddil  of  J?e  eir  is 
it  kyndely  cooldid  a-ny3tis,  for  ]>is  matir  is  kyndely  coold,  and 
J?ere  wanti)?  heete  of  fier  and  li^t,  and  ])us  coold  maki]?  J^is  moist 
matir  renne  togidere  in  smale  dropis,  and  ])us  jjei  geten  hevynes, 
and  come  doun  in  foorme  of  rein.  But  sumtyme  Jjese  planetis 
of  hevene,  a^ein  ]?e  tyme  J)at  )?e  sunne  goo]?  doun,  liften  up 
a  sutil  matir  but  a  litil  space  fro  ]?e  erjje ;  and  fro  J?e  tyme  J^e 
sunne  be  hid,  ]?e  coold  of  ]?e  ny^t  engrosij?  ))is  matir,  and  so  it 
comeJ>  doun  anoon  in  moore  sutil  foorme  ]?an  reyn.  pere  lien 
manye  wyndis  here;  as  summe  wyndis  ben  in  beestis,  and 
summe  ben  closid  wij)inne  fe  erj^e,  and  summe  blowen  frely 

^  So  in  Q  and  FF ;  T  and  U  read  \>ese.  ^  lowest,  Q,  U ;  lowers, 

FF.  3  So  in  u ;  7novyd,  Q,  FF ;  moveden,  T.  *  brokel,  U ; 

broken,  FF. 

WYCLIF. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC,  65 

bitwene  jje  er))e  and  stems  of  hevene ;  and  }?is  wynd  is  clepid 
here,  spirit  of  God,  for  dyversyte  of  o]?ere.  pis  wynd  is  in  his 
kynde  eir  medlid  wij>  watir  J>at  come]>  of  ]?e  erj^e.  And  planetis, 
wij)  sterris  of  hevene,  and  hurtlinge  of  cloudis  moven  ])is  wynd 
now  to  o  place,  now  to  ano]?er,  after  jje  chaungyng  of  ]?e 
mover. 

Benedieite  ignis  et  estxis  Domino:  Benedieite  fdgus 
et  estas  Domino :  Fier  and  swiinge  blesse  5^  to  pe  Lord ;  coold 
and  somer  hlesse  5^  to  pe  Lord. 

It  is  knowen  by  bileeve  how  al  J?is  world  prpfitij?  to  man  J?e 
while  he  serve]?  in  grace  to  God,  and  ellis  it  fi^tijj  a^ens  man. 
pus  come]?  j5er  ])at  we  usen;  and  ])e  brennynge  Jjerof  heetij> 
men  in  coold  tyme,  and  helpij?  to  di3te  her  mete  and  drinke. 
And  ]?us  coold  in  his  tyme  doo]?  cumfort  to  mannys  body,  and 
heete  of  somer  bringi}?  for]?  fruyt,  ]?at  man  schulde  not  lyve  but 
if  ]?is  were. 

Benedieite  rores  et  pruina  Domino ;  Benedieite  gelu 
et  frigus  Domino :  Dewis  and  hoor  frost  hlesse  5^  tope  Lord; 
frost  and  coold  bksse  5^  tope  Lord. 

Summe  ben  dewis  ]?at  moisten  ]?e  er]?e  til  for]?^  dayes^  in 
hoot  tyme ;  and  whanne  ]?e  coold  ha]?  frozen  ]?is  matir,  }?anne  it 
is  clepid  hoor  frost.  Frost  is  moore,  and  lasti]?  lengir;  and 
coold  is  comoun  to  manye  l?ingis.  And  as  j?ese  tempren  mannis 
body,  so  })ei  tempren  er]?e  and  fruyt. 

Benedieite  glacies  et  nives  Domino :  Benedieite  noctes 
et  dies  Domino :  Fzse  and  snow  hlesse  5<?  to  pe  Lord ;  ny^tis 
and  dayes  hlesse  3^  to  pe  Lord. 

No  dreede  yis  helpi]?  manye  men  to  passe  overe  watirs  to 
manye  cuntrees.  Snow  helpi]?  to  tempre  ]?e  er]?e;  for  a  good 
snow  is  worj?  a  dungyng,  for  it  holdij?  heete  wi]?inne  ]?e  er]?e,  ]?at 
it  crepe  not  out  bi  smale  hoiis ;  and  so  it  qwikene]?  ]?e  roote  of 
growinge  ]?ingis  wi]?inne  J?e  er]?e.  It  is  knowen  ]?ing  to  clerkis, 
j?at  snow  is  gendrid  hi^  in  ]?e  eir,  whanne  watry  matir  mych  in 
quantite  to  regard  of  ]?e  substaunce  is  frozen  and  so  falli]?  doun, 

^  tilforlpe  dates,  U;  til  forth  dayes,  Q;  til  fro  \>e  dayes,  FF. 

a  The  expression  '  til  forth  dayes  '  seems  to  mean,  till  far  on  in  the  day, 
*  dayes '  being  in  the  genitive  case. 

WOEKS.      VOL.   III.  F 


66  WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 

and  ha]?  wlii3tnes  for  cleer  and  stable  matir.  And  si]?in  ^  men 
mai  not  evere  traveile,  God  haj?  ordeyned  ny^t  and  day,  ny^t  for 
to  reste,  and  day  for  to  traveile ;  and  no  drede  eir  in  J^ese  tymes 
temperij?  ]?e  er]?e  and  qualitees.  And  alle  )jes  ])ingis  techen  men 
bo]?e  of  virtues,  and  of  vicis,  and  of  hevene,  and  of  helle,  to 
desire  J?at  oon  and  drede  }>e  tojjir. 

Benedieite  lumen  et  tenebrae  Domino;  Benedicite 
fulgur  et  nubes  Domino :  Li^t  and  derknes  blesse  y  to  pe 
Lord  ;  ley  lis  ^  and  cloudis  hlesse  y  to  pe  Lord. 

Li^t  cumforti]?  mannis  si^t,  and  qweme]>  bodies  here  in  erj?e, 
and  makij?  hem  finke  on  verri  li^t,  J?at  is  God  ]?e  first  liif. 
Derknessis  doon  good  to  si^t,  and  tempren  mennys  wittis,  to 
take  her  reste,  and  figuren  derknes  of  synne,  and  ))ereaftir 
derknessis  of  helle.  And  derknes  is  Goddis  creature,  si]?  God 
ha]j  ordeyned  it  among  ojjere ;  and  so  not  ech  creature  is  sub- 
staunce  Jjat  may  dwelle  by  himsilf  Clerkis  knowen  j^at  cloudis 
hurtlyn  and  bringen  for]?  fier  of  ]?er  partis;  as  whanne  ]?ei 
breken  bi  violence  ]3at  werun  fast  togidere  bifore,  }?anne  ]?ei 
maken  a  greet  noise,  which  noise  men  clepen  Jje  ]?undir.  And, 
for  si3t  is  swiftir  j?an  heeryng,  as  li^t  come]?  sonner^  ]?an  eir 
trembli}),  ]?erfore  men  seen  li^tnynge  bifore  and  aftir  ]?ei  heeren 
Jje  ]?undir  of  cloudis.  And  al  J?is  serve]?  Cristen  men  to  mysti 
comownynge  of  Cristis  lawe. 

Benedieat  terra  Domino,  laudet  et  superexaltet  eum 
in  secnla:  Blesse  pe  erpe  to  pe  Lord,  herie  and  overhiy  it  him 
for  evere, 

pe  er]?e  serve]?  wel  to  God  whanne  it  holdi]?  ))e  myddil  of  }?e 
world,  and  gaderi]?  plenteuously  li^t  of  hevene,  and  bringi]?  for]? 
fruyt  as  God  biddi]?.  And  for  ]?is  cause  ha]?  God  ordeyned 
er]?e  to  be  ]?icke  and  stable,  to  turne  a^ein  ]?e  li3t  of  hevene,  and 
feede  fruyt  J?at  growi]?  ]?ereinne.  And  for  stablenes  of  J?e  er)?e, 
]?at  schal  laste  after  doomesday,  and  blesse  God  above  tyme, 
seyen  *  ]?ese  childrin  ]}at  }?e  er]?e  blesse  ^  God. 

Benedieite  montes  et  coUes  Domino :  Benedicite  uni- 
versa  germinancia  in  terra  Domino :  l>e  hillis  hope  moore 

1  So  in  FF ;  siche,  T,  U;  for,  Q.  ^  i^^^^^^  -jj.  l^y^Q^  -^y. 

3  So  in  U ;  sunner,  Q,  FF ;  sanner,  T.  *  So  in  U  and  Q ; 

se'^n,  FF ;  si>m,  T.  ^  6/gssz>,  U ;  hlksi\,  FF ;  hUzse,  Q. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC.  67 

mid  lasse,  blesse  to  fie  Lord ;  alle  pat  hurio7un  in  erpe  blesse  y  to 
pe  Lord, 

It  is  knowen  })mg  )?at  hillis  holden  stoones  and  metal-oor, 
and  bryngen  for]?  manje  eerbis  ]7at  woldin  not  so  wel  growe 
in  valeis.  And,  for  cause  J?at  ]?es  ^  ])ingis  schal  have  no  stide 
at  doomesday,  J?erfore  seij?  Goddis  lawe,  fat  hillis  and  valeis 
schulen  be  playned,  and  er))e  schal  take  a  round  figure,  and 
hevene  and  er]?e  and  watir  schulen  reste. 

Benedicite  fontes  Domino:  Benedicite  maria  et  flu- 
mina  Domino :  Wellis  blesse  5^  to  pe  Lord;  sees  and  floodis 
blesse  y  to  pe  Lord, 

Men  fynden  opinly  what  good  doon  welHs  to  mannys  kynde, 
for  manye  tymes  men  schulden  wante  drinke,  ne  were  })e 
servise  ]?at  \€\  take  of  wellis.  And  comounly  in  hoot  somer 
wellis  ben  coolde,  and  hoot  in  wyntir.  It  is  knowen  ]?ingis  to 
clerkis  ))at  in  poris  ^  depe  imdir  ]je  erjje  is  watris  gendrid  and 
rennynge  and  springynge  up  at  a  place,  so  myche  j)at  in  manye 
placis  where  no  watir  seeme]?  to  be,  men  moun  so  depe  hole  J?e 
er]?e,  J^at  good  watir  and  plenteuous  wole  springe.  And  for  J)is 
watir  renne]?  in  somer  up  cold  er]?e,  whanne  poris  ben  opin, 
]?erfore  watir  comounly  is  moore  coold  in  somer  XyvciQ,  In 
wyntir,  whanne  it  is  frost,  J?e  poris  of  ]?e  erjje  ben  closid ;  and 
heete  in  J?e  erfe  of  somer  bifore  is  lettid  to  come  out  by  smale 
holis.  perfore  J>e  watir  |?at  come})  bi  siche  pooris  ha]?  heete  in 
wyntir,  and  smoke  come]?  out  and  wellij?.  For  sich  a  cause 
eten  men  betere  in  coold  tjmie  ]?an  ]?ei  doon  in  hoot  tyme, 
whanne  heete  is  scaterid  wi]?oute-for]?.  Sees  in  dyverse  cuntrees 
han  dyverse  propirtees ;  as  oure  sees  of  Yngelond  flowij? 
twies  in  ])e  day  and  in  ]?e  ny^t,  for  \t  moone  ]?at  move]?  ])es 
watris  lokij?  so  til  oure  Brytayn  see,  ])at  what  bi  ri^t  H^t  and 
reflectid,  in  ny^t  and  day,  it  move]?  it  twies.  Summe  o]?ere  sees 
flowen  nevere,  and  summe  but  oones  flowen  in  a  mone]?e,  and 
aftir  ]?at  heven  loki]?  upon  hem,  \€\  han  dyverse  propirtees. 
Sees  gendren  manye  fischis  to  substaunce  of  mankynde,  so  ]?at, 
bi  manye  mennis  cast,  J?ere  ben  mo  and  moore  fischis  in  ]?e  see 
]?an  ben  beestis  upon  londe,  for  \^  space  and  matir  is  moore. 

^  So  in  U ;  of  pingis,  T.  ^  poQ^gs,  U. 

F  2 


68 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


PS,  cviL  23. 


And  }>erfor  sei)  DaviJ)  in  J?e  salme,  }?at  men  }>at  weenden  to  j?e 
see,  J)ei  seen  ])ere  ])e  wondir  werkis  \2X  God  haj)  maad  in  ])is 
world ;  for  no  man  suffisij)  in  J?is  liif  to  telle  fully  J?e  kynde  of 
fyschis.  And  Jje  see  conseyvej?  wij)  fischis  manye  ojpere  pre- 
sciouse  ]?ingis,  as  ben  salt  and  margaritis,  and  many  oj^ere 
presciouse  stoonys.  Clerkis  seyn  j?e  see  is  salt,  for  )?e  kynde 
salt  is  )?us  gendrid ;  whanne  gravel  is  hatt  wi]?  ]?e  sunne,  and 
sokid  longe  wij?  J)e  watir,  it  taki])  kyndeli  a  savour  )?at  men 
clepen  saltnes.  And  herfore  in  summe  londis  han  men  salt  for 
gravel.  And  si|>  |)e  see  ebbi]?  and  flowi]?  fro  })e  sou)?  into  ]?e 
nor]),  it  is  needful  ])at  salt  be  medlid  wi])  manye  sees,  and  not 
al  oonli  wi]?  sees,  but  wi]?  watris  where  fe  see  flowi)?.  And 
here  may  men  se  causes  ])at  ben  axid  in  ])is  matir.  It  is  axid 
comounli  whi  floodis  in  lond  ben  not  salt ;  and  here  men  seien 
comoimly  ]?at  floodis  and  wellis  ben  salt  whanne  ful  cause  of 
saltnes  is  founde  in  ))es  wellis,  but  ]?e  see  is  comounly  salt,  for 
it  taki])  moore  ^q  li^t  of  hevene;  for  it  is  moore,  and  neer 
hevene,  and  moore  disposid  to  take  li3t ;  but  bankis  and  manye 
o])ere  causis  letten  flodis  to  take  Jjus  li^t.  Also,  gravel  of  ]je 
sou])  see  is  neer  \e  sunne,  and  moore  hoot,  and  J)is  is  medlid 
wi])  o])ere  sees,  and  maki])  hem  salt  bi  rubbinge;  so  ])at  ful 
cause  of  saltnes  maki]?  fulnes  of  salt.  And  herebi  may  men  se 
whi  salt  is  boJ)e  whi^t  and  cleer ;  for  salt,  for  greet  part  ])erof, 
is  of  })e  kynde  of  watir,  and  watir,  whanne  it  turne])  to  sadnes, 
mut  be  cleer  by  kynde.  And  sich  watir,  medlid  wij)  erj)e,  mut 
nede  be  whi^t  in  ])e  same  kynde.  But  ^it  men  axen  comounly, 
whi  salt  is  dissolved  ])us,  but  cristal  and  oJ)ere  stoones  ben  not 
loosid  as  o])ir  salt.  Here  seien  clerkis  ])at  dyverse  bodies  ben 
maad  sad  in  dyverse  degrees,  and  summe  bodies  may  be  dissolved 
and  summe  not,  as  manye  stoones.  And  of  ])e  firste  clerkis 
5even  a  rule,  ])at  ])0  bodies  J)at  ben  hardid  by  coolde  ben  loosid 
by  hoot,  and  hardid  by  hoot  ben  loosid  by  coold.  As  iys  and 
leed  ben  hardid  bi  coold,  and  ])ei  ben  neischid  ^  a^ein  by  hoot. 
But,  for  salt  is  hardid  bi  hoot  and  drie,  J)erfore  it  is  kyndely 
neischid  bi  body  of  contrary  qualite,  as  ben  bodies  coold  and 
moist.  And  ])us  salt  is  hoot  bi  kynde,  and  haJ)  hise  virtues 
by  ])is  ground. 

^  iieschid,  U. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC,  69 

Benedicite  cete  e.t  omnia  qui  movent  ia  aqua  Domino : 
Benedieite  omnes  volueres  celi  Domino :  Whallis  and  alle 
pmgis  moved  in  watris,  blesse  y  to pe  Lord,  Alle /oulis  0/ kevene 
blesse  y  to  pe  Lord, 

It  is  comounly  seid  ]?at  a  whal  is  J)e  moost  fisch  in  ]?e  see ; 
and  so  by  ]?is  greet  fisch  ben  undirstonden  alle  o|?ere  fischis, 
bo]?e  schel  fische  and  scalid  fisch,  or  of  what  kynde  J?at  evere 
]?ei  ben.  Alle  fei  turnen  to  mannis  help,  and  doon  jje  office  }?at 
God  ha]?  ordeyned.  And  ])iis  as  beestis  upon  ])e  lond  drawen 
in  erjje  to  tempre  her  body,  so  fischis  in  j^e  flood  drawen  in 
watir  to  tempre  hem.  But  as  beestis  ben  sotiler  ]>an  ben  fischis 
in  her  schap,  so  J?ei  ben  moore  venemouse,  mo  ore  anoyouse 
unto  man;  and  ]?us  fischis  ben  neer  to  elementis,  and  more 
rehgious  for  to  ete,  J?an  ben /oulis  or  beestis  of  erjje,  for  J?ei  ben 
neer  mannys  kynde.  And  ^it  fe  first  book  of  holy  writt,  ])at 
men  clepen  Genesis,  sei]?  ]?at  boJ?e  fischis  and  foulis  comen  of 
substaunce  of  Jje  watir.  And  ^it  God  schewi])  his  craft  to  putt 
hem  so  fer  a  twynne,  for  ]?is  lord  can  ordeyne  of  alle  ]>ingis  as 
him  liki]?.  But  watir  is  neer  hevene  in  kynde  fan  is  erjje,  of 
which  ben  beestis ;  and  )?us  boJ?e  fisches  and  fouHs  kepen  sum 
propirte  of  watir. 

Benedicite  omnes  bestie  et  peeora  Domino :  Benedicite 
filii  hominum  Domino:  Alle  kynde  0/ beestis  and  wandringe 
beestis  blesse  5^  tope  Lord;  and  mennys  sones  blesse  5^  to  pe  Lord, 

Here  may  we  wyte  J?at  jjes  beestis  weren  werkis  of  ]?e  sixte 
day ;  and  man  was  maad  on  jje  same  day,  and  of  slyme  of  j?e 
erJje,  as  fischis  and  foulis  weren  bojje  maad  of  God.  On  ]je 
fif]?e  day  beestis  ben  moore  general  ])an  beestis  )?at  goon  on 
her  feet ;  si])  wormes  and  addris  ben  beestis,  but  \€\  helpen  not 
to  mannis  werk,  but  oj)ere  beestis,  ])at  drawen  in  ])e  plou^,  and 
helpen  to  here  men,  as  hors.  And  it  is  needful  to  teche  men 
to  blesse  to  God  bi  gode  werkis,  as  J^ese  beestis  taken  lore,  of 
men,  and  serven  to  hem  to  mannis  worschip. 

Benedicat  Israel  Domino :  laudet  et  superexaltet  eum 
in  secula :  p^  folk  of  Israel  blesse  y  to  pe  Lord;  herie  it  and 
overhiy  him  for  evere. 

Men  ben  holden  to  serve  God  by  double  servise  here  in  erj)e. 
Summe  ben  laboreris,  as  beestis  Jjat  J)is  song  ha])  spoken  of; 


70  WYCLIF'S  WORKS. 

and  summe  ben  moore  witti,  as  angels,  and  |?ese  schnlen 
serve  God  moore  hi^ly.  And  for  ]>is  servise  stondi]?  moore  in 
spirit,  }?erfore  it  lastij?  aftir  doomesday.  And  Israel,  Jjat  is,  man 
seinge  God  ^  is  not  taken  oonli  for  Jacob,  but  for  al  his  kynde 
])at  come]>  of  him,  and  algatis  for  his  goostli  kynde. 

Benedicite  sacerdotes  Domini  Domino:  Benedieite 
servi  Domini  Domino :  Prestis  of  pe  Lord,  blesse  ^e  to  pe 
Lord ;  servauntis  ofpe  Lord,  blesse  y  to  pe  Lord. 

Among  alle  folk  )>at  serven  God  as  doon  Jje  children  of  Israel, 
preestis  schulden  moost  serve  him,  and  teche  oJ>ere  men  to 
serve  him.  pei  shulden  large  Goddis  servauntis,  boJ>e  in  hem 
and  in  ofere  men. 

Benedieite  spiritus  et  anime  justorum  Domino :  Bene- 
dicite sancti  et  humiles  corde  Domino :  Spiritis  and  soulis 
of  just  men  blesse  y  to  pe  Lord.;  Holy  and  meke  men  of  herte 
blesse  5^  to  pe  Lord. 

In  ]?is  vers  may  56  se  how  no  men  but  just  men  serven  God 
meedfully,  for  to  wynne  ])e  bhs  of  hevene.  We  moun  se  more 
in  Jjese  wordis  how  just  men  han  two  lyves ;  contemplatif  and 
actif;  and  in  bo])e  |)es  ]?ei  shulden  serve  God.  We  may  se 
fur]?ir  how  J?es  men  ])at  God  ha]?  ordeyned  to  blis  ben  here  holy 
and  confermyd,  and  meke  algatis  of  herte. 

Benedieite  Anania,  Azaria,  Misael  Domino;  laudate 
et  superexaltate  eum  in  seciila:  Ananye,  Azan'e,  Mysael, 
blesse  y  tope  Lord ;  herie  5^  and  over  My  y  him  for  evermore. 

SiJ?in  gode  deedis,  in  Goddis  myraclis,  oblischen  men  moore 
to  serve  God,  ]>ese  ))re  children  schulden  specialy  serve  God 
for  hise  ^iftis.  God  sente  his  angel  to  hem  and  ledde  hem  saaf 
in  ])e  furneys,  and  made  )?e  er]?e  coold  and  good,  and  brente 
])e  Caldeys  wijjoute.  What  man  schulde  blesse  God  but  jjese 
J)re  ])at  weren  }>us  holpen  ? 

Benedicamus  patrem  et  jaiiiun  cum  sancto  spiritu; 
laudemus  et  superexaltemus  eum  in  secula :  p^  fadir 
and  pe  sone  and  pe  holy  goost  herie  we,  and  overhiy  we  him 
wipouten  eende. 

pis  vers  han  Cristen  men  doon  to,  over  jjat  it  is  in  Danyelis 

^  See  note  at  p.  57. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC,  7i 

book,  to  teche  fat  |jei  shulden  herie  God  as  })ese  \rt  chilclren 
of  Israel ;  and  special/  ]?ese  Cristen  men  {>at  have  ]?us  grace  of 
God  ])at  ]?ei  qwenchen  ]je  flawme  of  synnes,  as  J^ese  ]?re  children 
bi  myracle  of  God  qwenchiden  ]?e  flawme  of  firis.  For  J>is 
brennyng  wi]?  synne  of  soule  is  moore  perelous  ]>an  ])e  to])ir, 
and  ]?erfore  men  schulden  moore  herie  God  for  savyng  fro 
])is  brennyng.  And  oure  Chirche  ha))  wittily  specified  first  ])e 
Trynyte,  and  aftir  by  a  syngular  name  toold  \t  oonheed  of 
God. 

Benedictus  es  Domine  in  firmamento  cell ;  laudabilis 
et  gloriosus  et  exeelsus  in  secula :  Blessid  artow  Lord 
inpe  firmament  of  hevene  ;  and  worpi  to  he  heryed  and  glorious 
and  overhh^ed for  evermore, 

pis  vers  makij?  a  knott  to  }>is  song  of  ]?es  children,  where  we 
maken  an  opin  schrift  ]?at  God  is  passingli  blessid.  Not  J)at 
God  ha}>  nede  to  be  blessid  of  us,  for  God  is  blessid  in  himsilf 
as  myche  as  ony  ]?ing  may  be,  and  oure  word  and  oure  blessing 
may  not  alarge  ]?is  blessing  of  God;  but  by  J)is  meke  con- 
fessioun  and  joie  of  Goddis  blessing  we  hopen  ]?at  God  wole 
blesse  us,  bo))e  here  and  in  hevene. 


[QUICUNQUE   VULT:     COMMONLY    CALLED    THE 
ATHANASIAN  CREED.] 

Quieunque  vnlt  salvns  esse  ante  omnia  opus  est  ut 
teneat  Catholieam  fidem.  It  is  seid  comounli  J^at  fere  ben 
])re  credis.  pe  first  is  Apostlis,  ])at  men  knowen  comounly. 
pat  o}?ere  is  crede  of  ]?e  Chirche  J)at  declari]?  ]?e  former  crede. 
pis  ]?ridde  crede  is  of  Jje  Trynyte,  ]?e  whiche  is  sungun  as  a 
salme,  and  was  made  in  Greek  speche  of  oon  ])at  is  clepid 
Athanasie,  and  was  aftir  turnyd  to  Latyn,  and  sum  deel 
amendid,  and  ordeyned  to  be  seid  at  J^e  first  hour  \     pis  Salme 


»  With  reference  to  the  statement  of  the  Thirty-nine  Articles),  may  be 

in  the  text,  the  following  summary  not  out  of  place, 
of  the  account  given  of  this  creed  in  Ecclesiastical  writers,   down   to 

the  learned   work  of  Dr.  Harold  and  including  Baronius,  assigned  the 

Browne,  Bishop  of  Ely  {Exposition  creed  to  Athanasius  without  hesita- 


7^  WFCLIF'S  WORKS, 

tellij>  myche  of  j^e  Trynyte,  and  it  is  no  nede  ech  man  here 
to  know  it,  si)?  a  man  may  be  saved  if  fat  he  bileeve  in  God, 
and  hope  ]>at  God  wole  teche  him  aftirward  ])at  is  needful 
And  so,  as  men  seyn  comounly,  men  bileeven  in  two  maners. 
Summe  bileeven  expresly  \qX  Jjer  is  but  o  God;  and  summe 
bileeven  confusely,  howevere  God  wole  ]?at  j^ei  trowen;  and 
if  J>ei  lyven  on  o})er  syde  ri3tly,  as  God  wole  ]>at  Jjei  lyven,  ]?ei 
ben  in  good  wey  aftir  to  come  to  blis.  For  our  crede  schulde 
be  medelid  wi))  love  and  bileeve,  so  \dX  bileeve  tau3te  oure  witt 
how  good  J)at  oure  God  is,  and  si]?  ]?e  Holy  Goost  tau^te 
how  we  schulden  love  oure  God.  And  herfore  sei]?  }?is  ^  salm, 
whiche  is  iesse  J^an  gospel,  })at,  Whosoevere  wole  be  saaf,  it  is 
needful  hifore  alle  opere  pingis  pat  he  hoolde  pe  comoun  bileeve,  for 
]?erbi  is  man  saved.  And  it  seemej?  not  inow^  men  to  sey  bi 
word  J)at  J)ei  trowe  fulli  as  hooly  Chirche  trowij? ;  for  ])us  seyn 
Paynyms  and  manye  out  of  Jje  bileeve ;  si)>  men  seien  comounli 
}>at  all  han  sich  bileeve.  And  so  love  and  good  liif  ben  needful 
to  ri^t  bileeve.  And  God  forbede  }?at  men  bileeven  jjat  ech 
man  fat  schal  be  saaf  mut  trowe  expresly  ech  word  fat  here 
is  seid;  for  feue  or  noone  ben  in  fat  staat,  or  Grekis  or 
Lateyns.  And  5it  to  us  fallif ,  Englisch  to  telle  fat  litil  fat  we 
bileeven;   for  bileve  is  of  trufe,  fat  is  bifore  oure  langagis ; 

^  So  in  U  and  Q ;  T  has  ])e  first  salm, 

tion.  His  authorship  was  first  dis-  variety  of  indications  point,  (as  we 
puted  by  Vossius  and  Ussher  in  the  saw  was  the  case  also  with  the  Te 
middle  of  the  seventeenth  century.  Deum,)  to  the  Church  of  Gaul  as 
The  Frenchman,  Quesnel,  writing  the  source  of  its  composition.  The 
in  1675,  gave  it  to  Vigilius  Thap-  internal  testimony,  afforded  by  the 
sensis,  an  African  bishop  of  the  peculiar  cast  of  doctrine,  and  by 
latter  end  of  the  fifth  century  ;  and  significant  omissions  no  less  than 
to  this  hypothesis  Cave,  Pagi,  Bing-  significant  statements,  is  said  to  fix 
ham,  and  others  assented.  In  1693,  the  date  at  a  period  before  the 
a  French  divine,  named  Antelmi,  spread  of  Nestorianism,  and  after 
made  out  a  case  of  considerable  the  appearance  of  St.  Augustine's 
strength  in  favour  of  assigning  its  works  on  the  Trinity,  i.e.  between 
composition  to  St.  Vincent  of  Lerins.  416  and  431.  But  if  composed  at 
Lastly,  Waterland,  writing  a  few  that  particular  period,  and  com- 
years  later,  strongly  and  most  ably  posed  in  Gaul,  it  is  not  likely  to 
advocated  the  claim  of  Hilary,  have  had  any  other  author  than  one 
bishop  of  Aries  in  429,  to  be  con-  of  two  men,  Hilary  of  Aries,  and 
sidered  the  author.  St.  Vincent  of  Lerins ;— and  Water- 
Direct  external  testimony  to  the  land  argues  very  ingeniously  for  the 
authorship  there  is  none.     But  a  former. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC,  73 

and,  as  we  seyn,  God  ^evej?  bileeve  bo]?e  to  children  and  to 
men,  alif  \€\  ben  not  of  power  to  lerne  bileeve  of  her  brij^eren. 

Quam  nisi  qiiisque  integram  inviolatamque  serva- 
verit,  absque  dubio  in  etemnm  peribit:  pis  comyn  i€\\ 
is  of  ()is  kynde,  pat  hut  if  ech  man  kepe  it  hool  and  unfilid,  wip- 
oute  doute  he  schal  perische  wipouten  eende. 

pere  ben  summe  j^at  trowen  to  oon  article,  and  of  anoJ)er 
article  J?ei  trowen  J)at  it  is  fals,  as  Jewis  and  Paynyms  trowen 
to  o  bileeve,  and  trowen  not  to  anoj^ir,  and  ]?erfore  Jjei  failen 
in  hool  bileeve.  And  it  is  al  oon  a  man  to  have  noon  ^  armes  ^, 
and  to  be  woundid  to  ])e  dee}>  on  oon  hoole  of  hise  armes. 
And  here  may  we  se  how  bileeve  is  taken  here  for  tru]?e  )>at 
men  bileeven,  gromidid  in  God.  And  on  two  ojjere  maners 
men  taken  bileeve.  Smn  tyme  bileeve  is  clepid  a  qualite,  by 
which  a  man  is  namyd  a  trewe  man  in  God,  and  ]?is  bileeve  is 
a  maner  of  a  trewe  soule.  On  ]?e  J^ridde  maner  is  bileeve  take 
for  a  jjou^t  J)at  a  man  haj?  in  deede  of  J?e  first  bileeve.  And 
J)us  bileeve  is  li^tist  to  falle  fro  a  man.  But  we  schulen  undir- 
stonde,  ]?at  manye  men  neden  not  to  have  opin  knowleche  of 
alle  pointis  of  bileeve,  but  ]?ei  moten  nedis  bileeve  ]?at  Jjer  is  o 
God,  and  love  him  and  serve  him  wi|»oute  synne  dampnable. 
And  )7us  men  trowen  generaly  al  jjat  is  to  bileeve,  and  failen 
in  no  poynt,  as  doon  untrewe  men.  0}>ere  ])at  have  moore 
witt  of  God,  schulden  trowe  moore;  and  algatis  ech  man 
schulde  kepe  him  fro  fals  bileeve,  ])at  he  trowe  not  contrarye 
to  oure  fei}?. 

Mdes  autem  Catholiea  hec  est,  ut  unum  Denm  in 
trinitate,  et  trinitatem  in  unitate  veneremur:  'pis  is 
comoun  bileeve,  pat  ech  ma7i  schulde  trowe,  pat  we  worschip  o  God 
in  trynyte  of  persoones,  ]?e  which  God  is  trinyte  in  oonheed  of 
godheed ;  ]jat  is  to  seie,  we  schal  trowe  ]?at  J?ere  is  but  o  God, 
]je  which  God  is  Jjre  persones,  and  Jjcs  )?re  persoones  ben  J?e 
same  God. 

ITeque  eonfundentes  ^  personas,  neque  substantiam 
separantes.  And  ])us  schal  we  trowe,  n>eper  medlynge  pese  pre 
persoones,  ne  depar tinge  pe  substance,  of  God  in  j?ese  persoones. 

^  So  in  U ;  none,  Q  ;  o«,  T.  ^  armys^  .U.  ^  So  Q,  U  ;  con- 

fundantes,  T. 


74  WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 

pat  is  to  seiC;  we  schal  not  trowe  ]?at  fe  Fadir  mai  be  Jje 
Sone,  ne  J)e  Sone  ]>e  Holy  Goost,  ne  };e  Holy  Goost  }?e  Fadir ; 
but  ]?es  ben  Jjre  persoones,  J>at  noon  is  anojjir,  ne  part  of 
ano]?ir ;  and  alle  ]?ese  ]jre  persoones,  and  ech  bi  himsilf,  be  Jje 
same  substaunce,  and  so  \q  same  God. 

Alia  est  enim  persona  patris,  alia  filii,  alia  spiritus 
sancti;  sed  patris,  et  filii,  et  spiritus  saneti  una  est 
divinitas,  equalis  gloria,  coeterna  majestas  ^ :  'pere  is  opir 
persoone  of  pe  fadir,  and  opir  of  pe  sone,  and  anopir  of  pe  holy 
goost ;  but  of  pes  pree  persoones  is  o  godheed,  and  evene  glorie, 
and  comyn  magiste  wipouten  eende. 

We  schal  trowe  }>at  ])e  Fadir  is  ]>is  persoone  of  J?e  Fadir ;  and 
so  ])es  o]?ere  two  persoones  ben  persoone  of  ))e  Sone  and  per- 
soone of  ])e  Holy  Goost.  So,  alle  if  J^ese  persoones  ben  oj^ere, 
and  ech  is  o])ir  fro  ]?e  tojjir,  najjelees  noon  of  hem  is  ojjere 
fro  ]?e  toJ?ir  in  kynde,  si]>  ]?ere  is  o  kynde  comoun  to  hem  alle. 
And  so  is  o  Godheed  comoun  to  hem  alle,  si}?  ech  of  ])ese 
and  alle  j?es  ben  ]?e  same  God.  And  bi  jje  same  skil  alle  Jjes 
ben  even  in  glorie,  and  magiste  of  hem  alle  is  lastinge  wi]?- 
outen  eende,  for  fis  glorie  and  magiste  is  not  but  J?is  Godheed. 
And  so  if  men  seiden  J>at  ]>is  same  glorie  and  magiste  were  of 
Jjree  persoones,  )>ei  seiden  so]?li  and  not  contrarie  herto.  But 
glorie  and  magiste  seyn  sum  tyme  relacioun,  whiche  clerkis 
seyn  ben  dyverse  in  resoun. 

Qualis  pater,  talis  filius,  talis  spiritus  sanctus  :  Whiche 
is  pe  fadir,  sich  is  pe  sone,  and  sich  is  pe  holy  goost. 

In  |)is  holy  Trinyte  is  noon  sich  qualite  as  is  in  creaturis ; 
but  on  sum  maner  mut  we  speke,  to  telle  }jis  maner  of  God, 
which  maner  is  not  oJ?ir  ]>an  God ;  for  tungis  fallen  in  tellinge 
of  God  for  ]?e  excellence  of  him.  And  so  it  is  toold  aftirward, 
what  is  ])is  qualite  of  God,  in  which  \t%  ]?re  persoones  ben  ech 
evene  to  o]?ir. 

Inereatus  pater,  increatus  filius,  increatus  spiritus 
sanctuLS :  Unmaad  is  pe  fadir,  unmaad  is  pe  sone,  and  unmaad 
is  pe  holy  goost. 

For  alle  J^es  ))re  persoones  ben  ]>e  same  God,  which  is  wij>- 

^  So  Q,  U ;  magestas,  T. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC,  75 

oute  bigynnyng  and  also  wijjouten  eende ;  and  so  noon  of  jjese 
l)re  persoones  may  be  maad  of  noT:^t. 

Immensus  pater,  immensus  filius,  immensus  spiritus 
sanctus :  p^  fadir  is  wipoute  mesure  myche,  and  eke  pe  sone^ 
wip  pe  holy  goost. 

For  ]?er  is  a  comyn  greetnes  of  alle  ])es  ]?re  persoones,  and 
it  sei])  no  quantite,  ne  streechinge  of  Goddis  partis.  For  jjis 
holy  Trinitye  is  wijjouten  ony  part,  but  at  ech  part  of  ])is  world 
is  fe  holy  Trinyte,  and  if  })is  world  were  more,  J)ere  were  \q 
Trinyte,  for  God  may  not  faile  to  be  in  place,  ne  to  ))ing  \2X  he 
ha))  maad.  But  if  J?ere  were  a  voide  place  wij?outen  hevene 
wijjoute  mesure,  God  were  everywhere  in  ])is  place;  but  jjer 
is  no  sich  voide  place. 

Eternus  pater,  etemus  filius,  etermis  spiritus  sanctus : 
"^e  fadir  is  wipoute  bigynnyng,  and  also  wipoute  eending,  and  so 
hen  pe  topir  two  persones. 

And  so  al  ])is  Trynyte,  si]?  ech  of  Jjese  is  J)e  same  God,  ])at 
may  not  be  mesurid  ne  maad. 

Bt  tamen  non  tres  eterni,  sed  unus  eternus ;  sicut  non 
tres  inereati,  nee  tres  immensi,  sed  unus  inereatus  et 
unus  immensus :  And  napelees,  if  God  be  sich,  pere  hen  not 
pre  Goddis  siche  ;  for  fere  is  but  o  God,  of  what  kyn  maner 
Jjat  he  be ;  and  so  pere  hen  not  pre  unmaad,  ne  pre  J?us  grete, 
ne  ]?re  wi))Outen  eende ;  hut  alle  pes  pre  persoones  hen  o  God, 
\dX  is  sich. 

But  here  may  men  betere  sey  in  Latein  ]?e  sotilte  of  J)is  matere, 
for  articlis  wij?  case,  gendre,  and  noumbre  helpen  here  for  to 
speke.  For  alle  })ese  ])re  persoones  of  God  ben  ]?us  myche 
wijjoute  eende ;  but  jjei  ben  not  J^re  Goddis  J^at  han  siche  quali- 
tees,  but  J^ei  ben  J?re  persoones  ])at  han  sich  propirtees. 

Similiter  omnipotens  pater,  omnipotens  filius,  omni- 
potens  spiritus  sanctus ;  et  tamen  non  tres  omnipotentes, 
sed  unus  omnipotens :  Also  almy^ii  is  pe  fadir,  almy^ii  is 
pe  sane,  almy^ti  is  pe  holy  goost ;  and  Ttapelees  not  pre  Goddis 
hen  almy^ti,  hut  o  God  is  almy'^ti. 

We  schal  bileeve  of  oure  God  ])at  he  is  a  sovereyn  spirit, 
o  kynde  and  o  substaunce,  o  God  and  o  beinge;  ai.-d  he  is 
wi]?out  part,  and  fulli  sich  as  we  han  seid;  and  |?is  God  haj? 


7^  WFCLIF'S  WORKS, 

power  to  knowe  himsilf,  and  to  willen  himsilf.  pis  power  is 
))e  first  persoone,  J)is  wisdom  is  ]?e  secunde  persoone,  and  J?is 
wille  is  )?e  J^ridde  persoone  ;  and  alle  ]?es  Jjre  ben  o  God.  And 
so  J?es  names,  ]>at  moten  nedis  acoorde  to  al  ]?e  Trinyte,  ben 
seid  singularly  of  oure  God  wi|)Outen  part.  And  ^it  ))es  ]?re 
persoones  of  God  ben  Almy^ti,  and  alle  God,  si]?  ech  of  hem 
is  Almy^ti,  but  }?e  same  Almy^ti  God.  And  clerkis  seyn  ]?at 
God  is  Almy^ti,  for  if  he  wil  J>at  ou^t  be  doon,  he  doo])  it  in  his 
tyme,  and  ]?is  may  no))ing  do  but  God,  for  angels  wolen  ]?at 
J>ei  ben  made,  but  ^it  ]?ei  mai  not  make  hemsilf.  But  alle  fese 
persoones  ben  o  kynde,  |)at  is  })us  my^ti  as  we  han  seid.  And 
}?us  sei]?  ]?is  crede  aftir, — 

Ita  Deus  pater,  Deus  filius,  Deus  spiritus  sanctus ;  et 
tamen  non  tres  dii,  sed  unus  est  Deus.  Ita  Dominus 
pater,  Dominus  filiuB,  Dommus  spiritus  sanctus;  et 
tamen  non  tres  domini,  sed  unus  est  Dominus :  So  pe 
fadir  is  God,pe  sone  is  God,  fie  holy  goost  is  pe  same  God ;  and 
napeless  per  hen  not  pre  goddis,  but  o  God  is  alle  Jese  ])re.  And 
so  pe  fadir  is  Lordjpe  sone  is  Lord,  and  pe  holy  goost  is  Lord ; 
and  '^itpere  hen  not  pre  lordis,  hut  o  Lord  is  ech  of  ]?ese. 

And  ]?is  roten  resoun  of  men  J?at  foolis  maken  wijjouten  witt, 
is  not  wor]?i  to  be  teeld  for  J^e  lewidnes  j^erof ;  if  J)is  God  be  ]?is 
Fadir,  and  J^e  same  God  be  his  Sone,  ]?anne  is  ]jis  Fadir  )?is 
Sone,  for  o  God  is  )?ei  bo)?e.  pese  foolis  moten  lerne  filosofye, 
and  how  manye  J?ingis  may  be  a  comoun  ]?ing. 

Quia  sicut  singillatim  unamquamque  personam  Deum 
ac  Dominum  eonfilteri  Cristiana  veritate  compellimur, 
ita  tres  decs  aut  dominos  dicere  Catholica  religione 
proMbemur.  And  to  fis  witt  speki]?  ]?e  crede,  ))at  we  ben 
nedid  bi  Cristen  trou))e  to  graunte  ])at  ech  of  J?ese  ]?re  persoones 
is  ful  God  and  ful  Lord,  and  he  ))e  same  J?at  ech  oone  is ;  and 
3it  we  ben  forfendid  of  God  to  sey  }?at  Jjere  ben  J>re  goddis, 
or  ]?at  ])ese  ])re  persoones  ben  ))re  lordis,  bi  general  religioun. 
For  o  God  and  o  Lord  is  comowne  to  ]?ese  ]?re  persoones. 

Pater  a  nullo  est  faetus,  nee  creatus,  nee  genitus.  Wijj 
])is  sentence  ]?at  is  seid,  is  ordir  bitwixe  })ese  persoones.  But 
]>e  Fadir  is  maad  of  noon,  ne  maad  of  nou^t,  ne  bigeten ;  sij?  |>e 
Fadir  is  Jje  first  persoone,  J^at  may  have  no  principle  of  his  being. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC.  77 

FiHus  a  patre  solo  est;  nee  faetns,  nee  ereatus,  sed 
genitus :  pe  sone  is  ofpe  oon/adir,  not  maad,  ne  maad  ofnou^t, 
hut  hortm. 

And  here  clerkis  mooten  wake  her  wittis,  and  undirstonde 
two  bir])is.  pe  first  is  not  makynge  of  l^ing,  but  cause  ])erof 
wi]?outen  eende ;  as,  if  ))e  sunne  were  nevere  maad,  as  errour 
of  clerkis  ha]?  seid  ofte,  ^it  J)e  sunne  wolde  cause  his  li^t  ei))er 
wi]?inne  or  wi])0ute.  So  fe  first  persoone  of  God  bringi]?  for)? 
)?€  secunde  persoone  as  God,  for  power  to  knowe  himsilf  knowij? 
himsilf  fulli.  And  fis  j?ing  was  wijjoute  bigynnyng,  and  it  may 
have  noon  eende  aftir.  And  J?is  birj^e  or  beringe  is  Jje  first  ]?at 
may  be,  and  of  }?is  comej)  bodili  bigetinge,  whanne  0  kynde 
bringij)  for]?  ano]jir. 

Spiritus  sanctus  a  patre  et  filio ;  non  factus,  nee  crea- 
tus,  nee  genitus,  sed  procedens.  And  here  moten  men 
wake  wel,  to  knowe  how  J)is  jjridde  persoone  come]?  al  oonli  of 
]?e  firste,  and  we  seyn  J)is  Holy  Goost  come]?  bojje  of  J?e  Fadir 
and  of  J?e  Sone.  For  ]?is  Fadir  and  l?is  Sone  ben  o  principle 
of  ]?is  ]?ridde  persoone ;  and  herfore  we  seien  in  ]?is  crede  ]?at 
)?e  Holy  Goost  come]?  of  ]?e  Fadir  and  of  ]?e  Sone,  not  maad,  ne 
maad  of  nou^t,  ne  bigeten,  but  comynge  for]?.  For  as  we  teelden 
of  double  bir]?e,  so  ]?ere  ben  two  comyngis  for]? ;  ]?is  comynge 
for]?  ]?at  we  tellen  here  is  wi])OUte  bigynnyng  and  eending,  but 
it  is  a  bringinge  ^  for]?  wilful  of  two  persoones.  And  ]?us  ]?ei 
may  not  be  o  fadir,  ne  ]?is  ]?ridde  persoone  her  sone ;  but  bileeve 
techi]?  us,  ]?at  as  God  knowi]?  himsilf,  for  he  may  knowe  him- 
self, so  for  ]?ese  two  ]?ingis  God  restij?  in  his  owne  wille,  si]? 
God  ha]?  good  wille  to  himsilf,  bi  ]?is  power  and  ]?is  knowing. 
But  undirstonde  we  not  ]?es  persoones  as  ]?re  bodies,  or  ]?re 
substaunces,  but  as  o  symple  substaunce  ]?at  is  comoun  to  hem 
alle. 

TTnus  ergo  pater,  non  tres  ;  nnus  Jilius,  non  tres  filii ; 
unus  spiritus  sanctus,  non  tres  spiritus  sancti.  And 
herfore  we  moten  nedis  confesse,  ]?at  ]?ere  is  0  fadir,  not  pre 
fadir s,  0  sone,  not  pre  sones,  oon  holy  goost,  not  pre  holy  goostis. 

And  ]?us  }?er  ben  but  ]?re  persoones  wi]?inne  in  ]?e  Godheed, 
al  if  manye  ben  wiJ?oute. 

1  So  in  U ;  hrynggyng,  Q ;  brbig,  T. 


78  WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 

Et  in  hac  trinitate  nichil  prius  aut  posterius,  niehil 
majus  aut  minus;  sed  tot©  tres  persone  eoeterne  sibi 
sunt  et  eoequales:  And  in  pis  irinyte  is  nowi,t  hi/ore  ne  of  fir, 
moore  ne  lesse,  hut  alle  pre  persooms  hen  evene  wipoute  higynnyng 
and  eende,  and  evene  in  power  and  in  godheed. 

Here  moten  men  knowen,  for  heretikis,  how  ))ere  ben  two 
furferhedis  and  two  hyndirhedis  also,  ])at  men  speken  of  in  ])is 
matir.  For  ]?e  first  fur]?erheed  is  forjjerhed  ^  of  comynge  for]?, 
and  pe  tojjer  for]?erheed  is  furjjerheed  of  kynde.  And  in  J)is 
trinyte  is  ]?e  firste  furj^erheed  Jjat  here  is  spoken,  si]?  o  per- 
sone comeJ>  of  ano]?ir,  and  j?ere  is  ordir  in  })ese  persooneSe 
pe  secunde»i  furj>erheed  is  not  here,  si]?  o  kynde  is  also  J)ese 
})re,  and  \e  same  godheed;  and  ]?e  same  godheed  is  togydere 
Fadir  and  Sone  and  ]?e  Holy  Goost.  And  God  wolde  ]?at  we 
Lateins  amendide  Grekis,  suynge  ]?e  Sone,  as  we  have  amendid 
hem  in  J?is  point,  addynge  J?e  Sone  to  J?e  Fadir,  and  seyn 
soo]?  }?at  ]?ei  ben  o  principle,  bringynge  for]?  ]?e  Holy  Goost. 
But  we  failen  to  Goddis  Sone  in  suynge  ]?e  manheed  of  hinu 

Ita  ut  per  omnia,  sieut  jam  supra  dictum  est,  et^  unitas 
in  trinitate,  et  trinitas  in  unitate  veneranda  sit.  Qui 
vult  ergo  salvus  esse,  ita  de  trinitate  seneiat:  And  so  we 
gaderen  hem,  as  it  is  hifore  seid,  pat  hope  oonheed  in  godheed, 
and  trinyte  in  persoones,  and  trinyte  in  pis  oonheed,  he  to  he  wor- 
schiped  overe  opere  pingis.  And  whosoever e  wole  he  saaf,  pus 
feele  he  ofpe  trinyte. 

If  he  feele  not  ]?us  expresly,  loke  ]?at  he  feele  ]?us  in 
comoun. 

Sed  necessarium  est  ad  eternam  salutem,  ut  inear- 
nacionem  quoque  Domini  nostri  Jesu  Cristi  fideliter 
<3redat :  Bisyde  pe  godheed  of  pes  pre  persoones,  is  needful 
to  knowe  pe  manheed  of  pis  secunde  persoone,  and  so  trowe  it 
truli. 

For  Crist  is  giaunt  ^  of  two  substauncis,  of  godheed  and  of 
manheed,  and  bigynnyng  of  oure  bileeve,  of  oure  heel]?e,  and 
oure  blis ;  for  hadde  not  Crist  ])us  be  man,  we  schulen  nevere 
]?us  han  be  saved.    And  in  Crist,  bo]?e  God  and  man,  is  heel]?e 

1  From  Q ;  om.  T,  U.  2  go  in  Q  ;  ut,  T,  U.  ^  go  in  U; 

gyaunti  Q ;  T  has  graunt. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC.  79 

of  mannys  k)mde.  And  it  is  hard  to  bileeve  ]?e  Trinyte,  but 
it  is  moore  hard  to  manye  to  bileeve  two  kyndis  in  o  persone ; 
for  ri3t  as  in  ]?e  Trinyte  Jjre  persoones  ben  in  o  kynde,  so  in  ))e 
incamacioun  two  kyndis  ben  o  persone.  And  herfore  techi]> 
oure  bileeve, — 

Est  ergo  jB.des  recta  ut  credamus  et  confiteamur,  quia 
Dominus  noster  Jesus  Cristus  Dei  filius,  Dens  et  liomo 
est.  Deus  est,  ex  substantia  patris  ante  seeula  genitus  ; 
et  homo  est  ex  substantia  matris  in  seculo  natus.  Per- 
feetus  Deus,  perfeetus  homo,  ex  anima  rationali  et 
humana  carne  subsistens  :  'per/ore  it  is  ri^t  bileeve  pat  we 
bileeve  and  knowleche^  pat  oure  Lord  Jesus  Cristy  Goddis  sone,  is 
bope  God  and  man.  He  is  God  of  his  fadris  substaunce,  borne 
spiritualy  bi/orepe  world,  and  he  is  man  of  his  modirs  substaunce, 
born  and  maad  man  in  pe  world. 

And  so  he  is  parfi^t  God,  as  he  was  bifore  J)e  world,  and  he 
is  parfi^t  man,  maad  of  a  resonable  soule  and  of  mannis  flesch. 
And  so  he  is  bicomen  oure  bro)?ir,  not  maad  of  godheed  and 
of  flesche,  wiJ?oute  mannis  soule  in  J?is  fleisch,  ne  of  godheed  and 
of  his  soule  wi}»outen  verri  body  of  man ;  but  Crist  ha]?  verri 
bodi  and  soule  as  o))ere  bri])ren  ])at  he  ha]?,  of  ]je  same  kynde 
]?at  \€\  ben,  al  if  he  my^te  not  synne  as  ]?ei. 

Equalis  patri  secundum  divinitatem,  minor  patre  se- 
cundum humanitatem.  Here  moten  men  lerne,  for  heretikis, 
how  ]?ei  schulen  speke  in  ])i&  matir.  For  as  trynauntis  ^  bigilen 
foolis  in  matir  of  ]?e  Trinyte,  so  \€\  bigilen  o]?ere  trynauntis  ^ 
in  ]?e  incarnacioun  of  Jesus  Crist.  And  herfore  bileeve  techij? 
us  w^hat  we  schulden  trowe  of  Crist,  and  how  we  schulden 
graunte  of  him  j?at  fallij?  to  his  clene  manheed,  and  also  to  his 
clene  godheed;  si}>  Crist  is  boj?e  })es  two  togidere,  and  so, 
evefu  to  pe  fadir  bi  his  godheed,  and  lesse  pan  pe  fadir  bi  his 
manheed. 

And  sij?  Crist  is  j?es  two  kyndis  bi  myracle  and  dyvers  resoun, 
graunte  we  boJ?e  Jjese  of  him,  as  we  graunten  of  ]}es  two  kyndis. 
And  si]?  Crist  is  bo]?e  God  and  man,  graunte  we  ]?at  he  is  evere 
wi]?  ]?e  Fadir,  and  }>erewij)  lesse  ]?an  |?e  Fadir,  for  his  godheed 
and  his  manheed  is  sich,  and  })ese  two  ben  not  contraries. 
^  truantes,  U. 


8o  WYCLIF'S  WORKS. 

Crist  is  evene  wij>  Jje  Fadir,  and  Crist  is  lesse  fan  ]?e  Fadir, 
*  si]j  Crist  is  boJ?e  )?ees  kyndes ;  but  ^if  Crist  were  evene  wi)?  \q 
Fadir,  and  J)erwi])  lesse  ])an  ]?e  Fadir,*  ^  bi  J?e  same  kynde  of 
Crist,  J?anne  two  contraries  folowiden  him.  And  J?us  grauntij? 
Crist  in  J?e  gospel,  wi]?oute  cloutinge  of  ojjere  wordis,  \2X  jje 
Fadir  is  moore  ]?an  he,  and  al  J)at  J?e  Fadir  ha})  is  his.  And  if 
we  graunten  to  ])is  witt  fat  Crist  is  not  evene  wij)  J?e  Fadir,  for 
his  manheed  is  not  evene,  fis  is  not  contrarie  to  fe  tofer ;  as, 
sum  man  rennej),  sum  man  renne]>  not. 

Qui  licet  DeuB  sit  et  liom.o,  non  duo  tamen,  sed  unus 
est  Cristus  :  But  if  Crist  be  God  and  7nan,  and  so  two  kyndis, 
and  hope  of  hem j  haj?elees  Crist  is  not  two  persoones,  but  oon, 

pat  is  bojje  God  and  man,  and  fis  persoone  is  godheed,  and 
ferto  it  is  manheed.  And  so  schal  we  graunte  of  Crist  wifouten 
drede,  bi  J?ese  two  kyndis,  bofe  J?at  fat  falli]?  to  his  godheed, 
and  f erwif  fat  fallif  to  his  manheed. 

TJnus  autem,  non  conversione  divinitatis  in  carnem,  sed 
assumpcione  humanitatis  in  Deum :  Crist  is  o  persoone,  not 
by  turnynge  of  Godheed  into  flesch,  but  bi  takynge  of  manheed  into 
godheed. 

For  Crist  took  manheed  fat  he  bifore  was  not,  and  lefte  not 
godheed  fat  he  was  evere.  And  ^it  godheed  may  not  be  man- 
heed, al3if  f  ei  ben  o  persoone. 

Unus  autem^,  non  eonfusione  substantiae,  sed  unitate 
persone :  And  f us,  Crist  is  algatis  oon,  not  by  confusioun  of 
his  subsiaunce,  hut  hi  oonheed  of  his  persoone,  fat  is  foj^e  fes  two 
substaimces. 

And  so  Crist  bigan  to  be  f  is,  but  he  bigan  not  to  be  per- 
soone, as  Crist  was  not  twies  persoone,  ne  ^  twies  man  by  his 
deef .  And  so  f  e  godheed  of  Crist  is  not  medlid  wi]?  his  man- 
heed, ne  nef  er  of  f  ese  kyndis  turnef  into  of  ir,  but  Jjese  kindis 
ben  hool  in  Crist. 

Nam  sicut  anima  raeionalis  et  caro  unus  est  homo,  ita 
Deusethomo  unus  est  Cristus:  For  whi?  as  a  resonable 
soule  andflesch  is  hope  o  man,  so  in  Crist  hope  God  and  inan  is  o 
persoone  in  Crist. 

1  The  words  between  asterisks  are  supplied  from  U  :  they  are  found  also 
in  Q,  but  om.  in  T.  ^  Unus  ovmino,  Q.  ^  So  U  and  Q ;  not,  T. 

WYCLIF. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC. 

And  so  {)is  soule,  J)at  is,  ]?is  man,  is  no  part  but  al  j)is  man, 
and  )?us  soj^li  a  man  is  spirit,  and  schal  \j^q  aftir  }?at  he  is  deed. 

Qui  passus  est  pro  salute  nostra,  descendit  ad  inferos, 
tertia  die  resurrexit  a  mortuis. 

And  J)us  we  graunten  to  enemyes  ))at  Crist  suffride  for  oure 
heel]?e,  wente  doun  into  helle,  and  on  })e  J?ridde  day  roos  fro 
dee]).  First  he  suffride  bi  his  flesch,  and  wente  to  helle  by  his 
soule,  and  roos  bo])e  bi  his  Godhede  and  bi  his  manheed  J)at 
he  quikenede.  But  Crist  left  nevere  to  be  J>is  spirit,  al  if  he 
left  oonys  to  be  flesch.  And  }?us  he  ha|?  power  to  put  his  liif,  and 
to  take  it  a^ein. 

Aseendit  ad  celos ;  sedet  ad  dexteram  Dei  Patris  omni- 
potentis ;  inde  venturus  est  judieare  vivos  et  mortuos : 
And  pus  Crist  stiede  to  kevenes,  sit  tip  on  pe  ri'^t  side  of  pefadir 
almy'^ti,  and  fro  pens  he  is  to  come  to  deeme  qwike  men  and  dede. 

Crist  stiede  bi  his  manheed,  ])at  was  moved  bi  his  godheed, 
and  passide  manye  hevenes,  and  restij)  evermoore  in  glorie,  and 
at  ])e  day  of  doom  schal  come  to  juge  bojje  qwike  and  dede,  fe 
whiche  han  served  him  truly,  and  doon  unkindeli  a^ens  him. 

Ad  cujus  adventum  omnes  homines  resurgere  habent 
exim  corporibus  suis,  et  reddituri  sunt  de  factis  propriis 
rationem  :  To  pis  comyng  at  pe  lasie  day  schal  al  maner  men 
arise,  andyve  resoun  to  Crist  of  her  owne  dedis  here. 

Et  qui  bona  egerunt,  ibunt  in  vitam  eternam ;  qui  vero 
mala,  in  ignem  eternum :  And  pes  7nen  pat  han  do  goodis 
schulen  go  to  liif  wipouten  eende,  and  pes  men  pat  han  doonyvelis 
schulen  go  to  fier  wipouten  eende. 

And  we  speken  here  of  good  and  yvel,  by  hem  j^at  dyen  here 
in  Jjese. 

Hec  est  fides  catholiea,  quam,  nisi  quisque  fideliter 
firmiterque  erediderit,  salvus  esse  non  poterit:  pz>  is 
general  bileeve,pe  which  butifech  man  trowe  truly  and  siidefasily, 
he  may  not  herewip  he  saaf 

And  al  if  \\%  crede  accorde  unto  prestis,  na]?elees  fe  hi^er 
prelatis,  as  [popes  cardinalis]  ^  and  bishopis,  schulden  moore 
specialy  cunne  J)is  crede,  and  teche  it  to  men  undir  hem.  Amen. 

»  The  words  have  been  erased  in  Bodl.  288,  but  I  have  supplied  them 
from  U  and  Q. 

WORKS.      VOL.    III.  G 


82 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


IL 


pE    TEN    COMAUNDEMENTIS. 


[The  following  tract  on  the>Ten  Commandments  is  found  in  at  least  two 
different  forms,  beginning  alike,  but  soon  diverging.  The  one  here  printed 
is  that  found  in  the  beautiful  MS.  Bodl.  789.  The  other  may  be  seen  in 
the  following  MSS.,  Laud  524,  and  Univ.  Coll.  97.  There  are  two  other 
MSS.^  according  to  Shirley's  Catalogue,  at  Dublin  and  in  the  British 
Museum ;  but  I  have  not  examined  either  closely. 

The  version  found  in  the  Laud  and  Univ.  Coll.  MSS.  is  considerably 
fuller  than  that  here  printed ;  but  it  is  at  the  same  time  tamer,  and  less 
characteristic.  It  might  have  been  written  by  any  well-meaning  priest 
hving  at  the  time,  but  the  Bodl.  MS,  contains  quite  different  touches. 
The  attack  upon  non-preaching  priests  at  p.  87,  the  assertion  of  the 
ultra-Puritan  doctrine  of  dominion  being  founded  in  grace  (p.  88),  and 
the  exhortation  to  the  reading  of  the  Scriptures  (p.  90),  if  they  do  not 
prove  the  tract  to  have  been  by  Wyclif,  at  any  rate  show  it  to  be  of  Wycliffite 
or  Lollard  origin.  Now  not  one  of  these  passages  is  found  in  the  mild  and 
colourless  commentary  of  the  Laud  MS.  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  the 
author — and  I  see  no  reason  why  it  should  not  have  been  Wyclif — found  a 
pre-existing  commentary,  which  he  used  as  the  vehicle  for  the  introduction 
of  his  views.  The  tract  is  ascribed  to  WycHf  by  Bishop  Bale,  under  the 
title  '  Compendium  Decern  Praeceptorum.'] 

Alle  manere  of  men  schulde  holde  ]?e  comaundementis  of 
God,  for  wijjouten  holdynge  of  hem  may  no  man  be  savyd. 
And  so  ])e  gospel  ^  telli]?  how  oon  askide  Crist  what  he  schulde 
do  for  to  come  to  hevene.  And  Crist  seide,  3if  J'ou  wolt  come 
to  blisse,  kep  myn  comaundementis. 

Prmium  Mandaium^ 

pis  is  pe  firste  maimdement  of  God.  God  spak  alle  J>iise 
wordis:   I  am  Lord  Jji  God,  ]>at  ladde  ])e  out  of  Egipt,  and 

1  So  in  BB ;  V  has  as  \e  gospel. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC. 


83 


brou^te  Jje  out  of  servage,  })ere  })0U  servedist  men.  pow  schalt 
not  have  bifore  me  alyen  Goddis.  pow  schalt  noon  ymage 
have,  graven  wi}?  mannys  hoond,  ne  no  leeknesse  in  hevene  ne 
in  erj?e  ne  in  watris ;  J70U  schalt  not  loute  hem,  ne  worschipe 
hem,  for  I  am  fe  Lord  \\  God,  a  stronge  gelous  lovere ;  I  visite 
wickidnesse  of  fadris  into  Jje  sones,  ]?e  ]?ridde  and  J?e  ferj?e  of 
hem  J)at  hatiden  me,  and  I  do  merci  mito  ])0usandis  of  hem  })at 
loven  me  and  kepen  myn  hestis. 

But,  for  manye  men  wenen  ]?at  Jjei  kepe  ]?iise  maundementis, 
and  ^it  ]>ei  lyven  Jiere-a^ens,  J^erfore  men  schulden  wite  J>at  what 
maner  ]?ing  Jat  a  man  love]?  moost,  he  makij?  his  god ;  and  so, 
sy]?]3e  al  synne  stondij)  in  love,  everi  heed  synne  is  brekynge  of 
]>is  heeste.  And  so  {)iise  ten  hestis  ben  as  ten  mirouris  ]?at  men 
may  se  hemsilf  ynne.  And  si]?en  \€\  ben  J?re  synnes,  as  Seynt 
Joon  sei]?,  J?at  enwrappe}?  alle  o}>ere,  in  ]?re  maneris  may  a  man 
breke  J)is  maundement, — in  J?es  J?re,  love  of  fleische,  and  love  of 
ei^e,  and  pride  of  liif.  And  so  glotouns  and  lecchouris  brekeli 
])is  heeste ;  as  Poul  sei]>,  J?at  J^es  glotouns  makyn  hire  beK  hire 
god.  For  God  biddi]?  ]?e  feede  ])e  in  mesure,  and  ^it  ])0u 
passist  ])is  mesure  for  lust  of  ]?i  beli ;  ]>i  fleische  stirij?  \^  moore 
to  do  fat  ]?i  fleische  aski]? ;  and  so  Jjou  makist  falsli  ]?i  beli  ])i 
god.  And  on  ]?e  same  wise  J)e  coveytous  man  makij?  his  maw- 
^  met  Jje  temporal  goodis,  as  Poul  sei]>  ]?at  averyce  is  service  of 
mawmetis.  And  so  J^e  proude  man  makiJ?  })e  feend  his  god. 
Pus  it  is  in  dede,  howevere  oure  mou]?  blabre.  And  so  preestis 
]?at  prechen  moore  to  have  a  loos,  o]?ir  for  wynnynge  of  worldli 
goodis,  o})ir  lustis  of  hire  beli,  makyn  fals  leeknesse  in  hevene 
and  er})e  and  water.  And  ])us  mai  men  knowe  how  ])ese 
maundementis  ben  brokyn,  bo]?e  of  preestis  and  of  seculeres. 
And  so  in  trust  of  ymagis  many  ben  disceyved,  in  hope  of 
help  or  helj>e  in  a  maner  neede,  as  ]?e  olde  lawe  and  ])e  newe 
witnyssen.  pe  Dedis  of  Apostlis,  in  \%  seventen]?e  chapiter, 
seij)  })us ;  SiJ>en  God  is  Lord  of  hevene  and  of  er]?e,  he  wonej? 
not  in  templis  maad  wij)  hondis,  ne  he  is  worschipid  wi])  mannys 
honde,  for  ]3at  he  ha]?  neede  of  any  })inge  \zX  man  do}?,  sijjen  he 
5ive]>  unto  alle  liif,  and  \vynde  enspirynge,  and  al  o})ir  ])ing. 
And  of  o  ]?inge  he  made  al  mankynde  for  to  inhabite  on  al  ])e 
face  of  ])e  er])e,  and  tymes  and  termes,  or  habitatioim ;   for  to 

G  2 


Phil.  iii.  19. 


84  WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 

seeke  here  God.  For  in  him  we  liven,  and  in  him  we  stiren,  and 
we  ben  also  his  kyn,  as  poetis  seyn.  And  si])J?e  we  ben  ]?e  kyn 
of  God,  us  au^te  not  suppose  ]>at  J^at  perteyne])  unto  God  is 
like  unto  gold  or  silver  or  ston,  of  J?e  craft  of  gravynge,  or  of 
mannis  hond-worchynge.  For  ])at  J)ing  J)at  is  hi^e  to  men,  is 
abhominacioun  bifore  God.  But,  for  we  knowyn  him  litil,  we 
loven  him  J?e  lesse.  And  ^if  we  undirstoode  J?e  mi^t  of  ]?e 
Fadir,  \q  wisdoom  of  ])e  Sone,  and  ]>e  goode  wille  or  grace  of 
]?e  Holi  Goost,  we  schulden  be  war  to  kepe  hem  soundeli,  for 
bodeh  ]>ingis  distracti]?  men  to  kepe  hem  ri^t.  And  )?is  is 
sumdeel  }>e  resoun  ^  of  jje  firste  maundement. 

2   Comaundement, 

pe  secounde  maner  maundement  of  God  perteyne]?  to  J?e 
Sone.  pow  schalt  not  take  ]?e  name  of  ])i  Lord  God  in  veyn, 
nej)j)er  in  word  nei]>er  in  lyvynge.  Eche  man  takij?  Goddis 
name  in  veyn,  J?at  sweri]?  bi  his  name  more  ))an  is  need.  Crist 
techi)>  in  ]?e  gospel  to  have  oure  wordis  ]?us,  ^he,  ^he,  and  nai, 
nay,  wi}>outen  ony  oo]?.  pere  he  doublij?  his  wordis,  as  if  he 
wolde  seie, — ^\i  ^e  seie  ^he  in  ^oure  soule,  seie  ^he  wij>  ^oure 
mou]?,  and  be  ^e  trewe  men.  For  God  techi})  bi  Jeremie  ]?e 
prophete,  wi))  ]?re  condiciouns  it  is  leefFul  to  swere.  First  })at 
)?ei  be  war  ]?at  fei  swere  treuj^e,  and  ])at  ]?e  cause  of  hire  oj?  be 
to  schewe  ri^t,  and  si]?en,  ]?at  in  jugement  be  it  need  to  swere ; 
and  ellis  schulde  alle  men  kepe  hem  from  o])is.  For  it  is  writen 
in  Ecclesiasticus,  ])e  ])re  and  twenti  chapitre,  Jjere  he  seij?  ]>us ; 
A  man  much  sweringe  schal  be  fulfilled  with  wickidnesse,  and 
veniaunce  schal  not  go  awey  fro  his  hous.  For  soj^e  wi]>  werst 
^eldinge  schal  be  fulfillid  J?e  hous  of  him.  But  we  schullen  wite 
afterward,  ])at  everi  man  beri]?  ]?e  name  of  God  printid  in  his 
soule,  for  ellis  he  mi^te  not  be,  as  Seynt  Austyn  sei]?; — in  )>re 
]?ingis,  mynde,  resoun,  and  wille,  and  alle  ben  o  substaunce. 
And  so  ]>e  gospel  techi]?  j>at  ]?ou  schuldist  on  j?re  maners  wor- 
schipe  l?e  name  of  J?i  God,  Jjat  Jjou  hast  wij)  J)ee.  pow  schuldist 
love  ))i  God  of  al  ))in  herte,  of  al  \\  soule,  and  of  al  J>i  mynde. 

^  corrected ;  rosoun  in  Bodl.  789. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC. 


85 


panne  })0U  lovest  Jji  God  of  al  )?in  herte,  whanne  ])i  witte  and  \\ 
power  is  oonli  set  on  him,  }>at  everi  eende  of  \\  werk  is  worschip 
to  \\  God.  pou  lovest  God  of  al  \\  soule,  whanne  Jjou  ordeynest 
al  ]?i  lif  to  worschip  of  ]?i  God.  Also  ]?ou  lovest  \\  God  of  al  ])i 
mjmde,  whanne  J?ou  for^etist  not  ))us  to  J)enke  on  ]?i  God ;  but 
jjenkinge  is  in  dede  as  it  is  in  mynde.  On  ]?is  wise  schulde  men 
worschipe  ])e  Trinite.  And  whanne  a  man  do]?  ]?at  he  schulde 
not  do,  or  leve]?  J>at  he  schulde  do,  he  takij?  in  veyn  ]?is  hije  and 
holi  name.  For  no  man  is  maad  but  to  serve  God,  in  doynge 
his  wille  or  sufFrynge  peyne. 

///  Mandatuvi, 

In  J?e  ]?ridde  maundement  God  biddi]>  have  mynde  to  halwe 
])in  holiday.  In  sixe  dales  )?ou  mi5te  worche,  and  in  j?e  sevenjje 
day  is  reste  of  Jje  Lord  God.  In  })at  day  ]?ou  schalt  do  no 
servile  werk,  ne  no  werk  of  synne,  ])0U,  ne  \\  sone,  ne  ])i 
doubter,  ne  \\  servaunt,  ne  ]?in  hand-mayden,  ne  ]?i  werk-beest, 
ne  ]?e  straunger  in  \m  hous.  For  in  sixe  dales  God  made 
hevene  and  erjje,  and  al  Jjat  is  j^erinne,  and  restide  in  j?e  sevenj>e 
day. 

Now  it  were  to  wite  how  men  schulen  halwe  and  kepe 
here  holi  dai.  And  sij?  ]?e  moost  servile  werk  is  worchinge  of 
synne,  eche  man  schulde  on  J?e  holiday  kepe  him  out  of  synne, 
si]>J?e  Crist  himsilf  sei]?  Jjat  hosoevere  do]?  synne  maki]?  himsilf 
servaunt  to  synne.  And  no  J?inge  is  worse  ]?an  Jje  occasioun. 
For  we  schulden  spende  J?e  holiday  in  heriynge  of  God,  and 
ellis  we  synnen  greetli  in  faylinge  of  his  service ;  for  J)e  moost 
hi^e  service  ]?at  man  can  serve  God  ]?erinne,  schulde  he  schape 
him  to  do  on  ]?e  holidai.  But  God  wole  })at  freedom  of  his 
lawe  be  kept,  and  specialli  as  Poul  techi]?.  But  be  war  ]?at 
])0u  kepe  ]?iise  four  feestis  principalli,  Christemasse  and  Estre, 
Ascension  and  Whitsountide,  and  })e  Soneday  Jjour^  \%  ^eer. 
For  no  feeste  ne  service  is  plesynge  to  God,  but  in  as  myche 
as  it  scharpi]?  a  man  to  love  oure  Lord  Jesus  Crist.  For  upon 
jje  Sunday  God  made  \%  worlde,  and  on  ]?e  Sunday  God  roos 
fro  dee])  to  lyve,  and  on  \%  Sunday  he  sente  ]?e  Holi  Goost ; 
and,  as  clerkis  seyn,  upon  J?e  Sundai  schal  be  ])e  laste  jugement 
jjat  ever  man  schal  have.     And  Cristene  men  schulde  leerne 


Commentary. 


86 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


bi  techinge  of  priistis,  and  bisie  hem  devoutli  on  l>e  holiday 
to  studie  on  virtues,  and  on  ])e  ten  comaundementis,  and  on  \e 
sevene  dedis  of  merci,  bodih  and  goostli,  and  speke  wi])  men, 
and  specialli  wi]?  hem  of  hevenli  ]?ingis,  and  putte  awai  giles  and 
wrongis  and  o]?ir  synnes ;  and  leerne  we  to  love  God  in  parfit 
charite,  and  eende  ]?erynne. 

p^  ////  Comaundemeni. 

pe  fourjje  comaundement  is  ])is.  pou  schalt  worschipe  ]>i 
fadir  and  ]>i  nioder,  })at  ]?ou  be  longe  lyved  upon  er]?e,  and  ]>i 
nei^bore  as  ]>i  self.  And  whoevere  lovej?  his  nei^ebore,  love]? 
his  God,  and  dwelli]?  in  God  and  God  in  him.  And  so  ])es 
twei  braunchis  of  charite  mowe  not  be  departid,  as  Seynt  Joon 
sei])  in  his  firste  pistil.  He  ]?at  love]?  not  his  bro]?ir  ]>at  he  see]? 
wij?  ei5e,  how  love]?  he  his  God  }?at  he  see]?  not?  So  as  God 
ha])  more  resoun  of  love,  for  he  made  ]?e  of  nou^t,  and  kepi]? 
]?e,  and  medi]?  ]>e.  And  herfore  sei]?  Crist, ,  He  >at  love]?  his 
eldris  moore  ]?an  him  is  not  wor]?i  of  him.  And  he  worschipi]? 
his  fadir  and  moder  as  he  schulde  do,  ]?at  kepi]?  hem  in  nede, 
bo]?e  bodili  and  goostli.  So  schulde  ech  man  understonde  J)is 
worschip  as  Poul  techi]?.  3if  J?ei  ben  nedi,  helpe  hem  in  resoun, 
but  make  not  ]?i  kyn  riche  to  gete  ]?e  a  name,  if  ))ei  sujSice  to 
fynde  hemsilf  bi  hir  owene  travail.  For  Crist  cam  of  poore 
men,  and  leet  his  modir  be  poore,  and  his  poore  cosynes ;  and 
whanne  ]?ei  askiden  worschip  and  richesse  of  ])e  world,  he 
denyede  hem  ]?at,  and  ordeynede  hem  passiouns;  and  bileve 
techi]?  us  ]?at  he  dide  al  for  ]?e  betere.  And  so  schulde  we 
serve  him,  5if  we  been  his  children,  and  love  him  moore  ]?an 
]>e  worlde  or  oure  veyne  name. 

pG  fifpe  Comaundement. 

pe  fif]?e  comaundement  of  God  biddi]?,  pow  schalt  not  sle 
]?i  bro])ir;  and  it  is  undirstonden  of  unskilful  sleynge.  And 
here  men  seyn,  ]?at  men  ]?at  be  killid  bi  mannis  lawe  been  not 
slayn  of  men,  but  ])e  lawe  slee]?  hem,  and  hire  owene  dedis. 
But  wite]?  wel,  ]?is  maundement  is  sibbe  to  many  synnes.     For 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC. 

Se}Tit  Joon  sei|>,  he  ]?at  hati]?  his  brofir  is  a  mansleer,  ^he,  ofte  j 
tymes  moore  to  blame  fan  he  ]?at  slee])  his  bodi,  for  jje  synne  \ 
is  moore.  And  bi  J)is  skile  a  bac-bitere  is  a  man-sleer.  But,  | 
as  clerkis  seyen,  upon  sixe  maneris  is  J)is  consent  doon,  and 
men  schulden  wel  knowe  it.  He  consentij)  to  ])e  yvel  ])at  wirchi}) 
wi]?)?erto;  he  ]?at  defendi]?  and  conseili})  ]?erto;  he  J?at  bi  whos 
auctorite  is  ]?e  yvel  don ;  or  he  J?at  wij?drawi|}  his  helj^e  or  scharp 
reprevynge,  whanne  he  mi^te  don  it  and  schulde  bi  Goddis 
lawe.  And  among  alle  synnes  bi  whiche  j^e  feend  bigile]?  men, 
noon  is  moore  sutil  fan  such  consent.  And  ferfore  fe  pro- 
phetis  of  fe  olde  lawe  tolden  men  hire  periles,  til  fei  suffriden 
deef;  and  in  jjis  cause  ]?e  apostilis  of  Crist  weren  martrid,  and 
we  schulde,  ^if  we  were  trewe  men.  But  cowardise  and  de- 
faute  of  love  of  God  makif  us  sterte  abac,  as  traytours  don. 
And  what  trowen  we  of  fe  Cherche,  fat  sellen  men  leve  to 
synne,  and  ^iven  hem  leve  to  last  ferinne  for  an  anuel  rente 
bi  5ere.?*  And  persones  fat  leeven  to  traveile  in  here  office, 
bi  power  of  lordis  and  ^yvynge  of  money,  ben  sufFrid  to  lyve 
fus  wif outen  prechinge.  And  so  ofte  tymes  ben  priistis  irre- 
guler,  for  fe  multitude  of  soulis  fat  fei  sleen  fus;  and 
fis  irregularite  is  moore  for  to  drede  fan  irregularite  chargid 
of  f e  worlde.  For  ofte  tyme  hit  fallif  fat  bi  a  medeful  dede 
men  been  maad  irreguler  bi  jugement  of  f e  world,  but  bi  fis 
irregularite  ben  priistis  dampned  of  God. 

P^  VI  ComaundemenL 

pe  sixte  comaundement  is  fis;  pou  schalt  do  no  lecherie, 
bodili  ne  goostli.  Goostli  leecherie  is  whanne  a  man  forsakif 
f e  love  of  his  God  for  love  of  a  creature ;  and  fis  leecherie  is 
moost  for  to  charge,  for  no  leecherie  is  synne  but  ^if  fis  be 
fere.  And  syf en  ech  mannis  soule  schulde  be  Cristis  spouse, 
what  leechour  fat  synnef  fus  synnef  in  avouterie,  for  he  brekif 
fe  marriage  fat  schulde  be  bitwixte  Crist  and  him.  But  bodili 
lecherie  is  hard  for  to  vencuse  or  maistir,  in  men  fat  norschen  ^ 
here  fleische  stronge  in  kynde,  for  kynde  mevef  to  f  e  dede, 

^  should  be  noriscben. 


87 


Commentary, 


WYCLIF'S  WORKS. 

but  not  to  ]?e  synne.  And  heer  seyn  clerkis  on  J?is  wise,  l)at 
specialli  in  }>is  synne  moot  a  man  be  coward,  and  fle  occasioun 
))at  mevej)  to  \is  synne,  and  truste  not  in  strenjie  ne  in  witte. 
For  what  man  was  strengere  |?an  Sampson  ?  or  who  wiser  ))an 
David  ?  or  hwo  moore  witti  ])an  Salomon  his  sone  ?  and  alle 
weren  brent  wi]?  ]?e  fier  of  lust.  And  if  ]?ou  wolt  be  Cristis  clene 
child,  fie  as  Godis  coward  |?e  cumpanye  of  wymmen.  pe 
secounde  medicyne  j^at  helpi]?  a^ens  ]?is  synne  were  to  kepe  \\ 
bodi  fro  lusti  fode,  for  fleisch  Jjat  is  yvel  fedde  delite]?  ])e  lasse 
to  J)is  synne.  pe  })ridde  medecyne  a^ens  ]?is  synne  were  a  man 
to  be  bisy  in  clene  occupacioun,  for  such  lust  come}?  not  but 
if  Jjou^t  go  bifore.  And  J^erfore  occupie  ]?i  jjou^t  and  J?i  bodi 
in  clene  occupacioun,  and  so  fle  j?is  synne,  and  be  Cristis 
spouse,  and  dwelle  Jjerinne. 

VI2  Mandatum. 

pe  sevenjje  comaundement  is  }>is ;  pou  schalt  do  no  J?ef|?e, — 
si]?J)e  God  \\  fader  is  treuj?e ;  and  ^if  he  be  \\  fadir,  j?ou  schalt 
not  noye  \\  broJ)ir  in  bodi  ne  in  godis ;  ne  })0U  schalt  not  desire 
no  godis  of  him  unskilfulli,  to  have  in  harmynge  of  \\  nei^ebore, 
pryve  ne  apeert.  As  comunes,  bi  false  o])is  in  chafFarynge  and 
in  questis,  up  trust  of  absolucioun,  or  on  feyned  pardoun,  ]?at 
dewe  restitucioun  fjenkej?  nevere  to  ^elde ;  and  marchauntis 
bi  usure,  under  colour  of  treuj^e  fat  J>ei  clepyn  chevysaunce, 
to  blynde  wi}>  J?e  puple, — for  ]?e  devyl  schamej)  to  speke  of  J)is 
])ef])e, — and  lordis,  J?at  bi  extorsiouns  oppresse  ])e  puple  wij? 
tyrauntrye  and  raveyne,  a^ens  Goddis  lawe,  not  dredynge  him 
]?at  is  Lord  of  alle.  So  eche  man  in  his  degree  is  boundoun 
to  serve  God.  And  3if  he  wante  ]>is  service,  he  is  no  lord 
of  goodis  bi  no  trewe  title.  For  he  Jjat  stondi]?  in  grace  is 
verrey  lord  of  ])ingis  a ;  and  whoevere  failij?  by  defaute  of  grace, 
he  failij)  ri^t  title  of  \m%  ]?at  he  occupie)?,  and  unablij?  himsilf 
to  have  ]?e  goodis  of  God.  And  so  curatis  of  J)e  Chirche 
stelen  J?e  goodis  of  God,  J)at  comen  in  bi  jje  roof,  and  not  bi 
J?e  dore,  \%t  is  Crist,  ben  ny^t  |?eves  and  dai  J?eves  of  simonie 

*  See  the  prefatory  notice. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC.  89 

of  benefices,  and  sillynge  of  sacramentis.  And  herefore  seij? 
Crist,  herde  of  alle  herdis,  ]?at  })iise  ben  stronge  feves  and  cursid 
of  God.  As  Zacharie  ]?e  prophete  seij?,  he  sau3  a  book  fleynge 
in  ]?e  eire,  ))at  was  of  twenti  cubitis  longe  and  ten  of  breede  ; 
and  he  axide  Jje  aungel  of  God  what  it  mi3te  be,  and  he  seide, 
It  is  J)e  curse  of  God  J>at  goj?  to  alle  Jjeves  houses.  And  si))})e 
)?is  was  sent  for  worldli  goodis,  ]?ese  Anticristis  clerkis  au^ten 
sore  to  drede,  ])at  J)us  lurken  under  lordis,  as  Jeeves  doon  in 
wodis.  Crist  sei]?,  }?at  may  not  lye,  fat  })iise  ben  ]?eves,  si})en 
J?ei  taken  ]}e  godis  of  Crist,  wi]?outen  his  leeve  ))at  is  cheef  Lord, 
if  ony  suche  been. 

p^  VIII  Comaundemeni, 

In  }>e  ei5t]?e  comaundement  Crist  forbedi])  alle  men  to  speke 
fals  witnesse  a^ens  here  nei^eboris.  And  )?is  is  needful  to 
execute  \q  lawe ;  for  Goddis  lawe  and  mannis  lawe  axen  wit- 
nesse, and  of  suche  witnesse  come}?  jugement  of  man;  and 
falshede  of  witnesse  makij?  fals  jugement,  and  so  errour  in  wit- 
nesse strecchij?  ful  fer.  For  many  been  diseritid  and  many  been 
hangid  by  suche  fals  witnessis;  and  of  )?is  spryngij?  mani  fals 
eyres.  Whoso  witnessij)  fals,  he  witnessi])  a^ens  treuj)e;  and 
si})]?e  God  himsilf  is  treu]?e,  he  witnessij?  a^ens  God.  And  so, 
whanne  he  witnessi]?  fals,  he  taki]?  God  to  witnesse  ]>at  ))at  J)ing 
J)at  he  seij?  is  trewe  and  of  God ;  and  sij>|)e  J>at  fing  is  fals,  as 
muche  as  in  him  is  he  makij?  his  God  fals,  and  bringij?  him  to 
nou^t;  for  God  may  not  be,  but  ^if  he  be  trewe.  And  ]?us 
berij?  noon  fals  witnesse  but  ^if  he  reverse  God.  And  alle  J?e 
seyntis  in  hevene  and  alle  creaturis  witnessen  of  here  God  a^ens 
him  ))at  lie}?.  But  her  seyn  wise  men,  bi  witnesse  of  seintis, 
)?at  J?e  craft  of  liynge  is  evere  moore  unleefful,  for  it  come}?  but 
of  )?e  feend,  j?at  first  made  lesynge.  And  if  it  were  leefful, 
it  worschipide  Crist,  };e  meene  persone  of  God  }?at  is  }?e  firste 
treu}?e.  And  j?erfor  I  dar  seie,  bi  witnesse  of  hevene,  }?at  no^t 
contrarie}?  Crist  moore  j?an  do)?  lesynge.  So  }?at  if  a  man  mi^te 
bi  a  prive  lesinge  save  al  )?is  worlde  J?at  ellis  schulde  perische, 
3it  schulde  he  not  lye  for  savynge  of  }?is  worlde. 


go  WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


pe  IX  ComaundemenU 

In  Jje  nyn])e  comaundement  God  forbede]?  j^e  to  covete  j)i 
nei^ebores  hous,  ne  noon  ojjere  )?ingis  J>at  ben  unmevable; 
as  ben  suche  J)ingis  as  ben  not  on  lyve,  ne  of  power  to  meve 
hemsilf  fro  o  place  to  ano])ir.  For  no  man  haj?  wrongli  eny 
suche  godis,  but  grounde  of  his  haVynge  be  fals  coveitise. 
And  as  a  weed  is  wel  purgid  of  a  loond  whan  |?e  roote  is 
drawyn  away,  so  J^iise  foure  maundementis  ben  wel  kept  whanne 
]3e  fals  coveitise  is  fulli  quenchid.  And  herfore  seij>  Seynt  Poul, 
])at  J)e  roote  of  all  yvelis  is  wickide  coveitise  in  a  mannys 
soule  ^. 

pe  X  Comaundement 

pe  laste  maundement  of  God  is  boden  in  Jjese  wordis ; — pou 
schalt  not  desire  J)e  wiif  of  \i  nei^ebore,  ne  his  servaunt,  ne  his 
maide,  ne  his  oxe,  ne  his  asse,  ne  no  J)ing  ])at  is  his.  And  so 
in  jjis  maundement  is  desire  forboden,  for  ofte  it  fallij>  j^at  j^e 
synne  is  moore  groundid  in  yvel  wille  ]?an  ]?e  dede  wi})OUtefor}). 
And  herfore  Crist  oure  hevenli  leche  forfendij?  suche  desire. 

And  J?us  ])ese  ten  maundementis  ben  lawe  surest  of  alle,  and 
moost  of  autorite,  and  eke  of  moost  nede.  And  si]?j?e  ])iise  ten 
lawis  techen  al  })e  wille  of  oure  Lord,  )?is  lawe  schulden  be 
holden,  and  oJ?ere  lawis  despisid,  but  if  it  be  groundid  in  J?is, 
and  declare  J?is  lawe.  And  so,  si}?j?e  lawe  of  ]?e  emperoure,  and 
lawe  of  ]?e  pope,  is  worse  bi  a  pousand  part,  })at  letten  know- 
ynge  and  doynge  of  Goddis  lawe  ^,  and  many  men  ))enken 
])at  Goddis  lawe  itsilf  schulde  be  redde  and  leerned  and  sued 
in  dede,  for  hope  of  hevenli  mede  and  drede  of  peyne  to  come, 
as  Jje  propHete  sei]?. 

If  a  ])ou  kepe  ]>iise  maundementis  Jjat  God  haj?  bedyn  I?ee, 
]3e  Lord  schal  make  J>e  heifer  ]>an  alle  folkis  of  kynde,  and  }?ere 
schuUen  come  upon  |3e  al  ]?iise  blessyngis.   pou  schalt  be  blessid 

^  The  space  of  rather  more  than  a  page  is  here  left  vacant  in  the  MS. 
2  dele  and. 

^  What  follows  is  an  abridged  not  agree  exactly  with  either  of  the 
translation  of  the  twenty-eighth  Wycliffite  verions,  but  is  nearer  to 
chapter  of  Deuteronomy.     It  does       the  earher  one  than  to  the  later. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC.  91 

in  citie  and  in  felde^  and  )?ou  schalt  be  blessid,  and  ])e  fniyt  of 
J>i  wombe,  and  fe  fruyt  of  J?in  erjje,  and  ))e  fruyt  of  \\  bestis. 
Blesside  schullen  be  ])i  bernes  and  \\  rekis  ^ ;  jjou  schalt  be 
blessid  in  goynge  and  out-goynge ;  ]?in  enemyes  }?at  risen  a^ens 
])e  schullen  falle  in  ]?i  si3t.  Bi  o  wei  J?ei  schullen  come  a^ens 
)>e,  and  bi  sevene  J?ei  schulen  flee  fro  \\  face.  And  upon  J?i 
werkis  of  \m.  hondis  \t  Lord  schal  bless  to  J^ee.  And  J?e  Lord 
schal  opin  his  beste  tresour,  hevene,  fat  he  ^yve  reyn  to  \\ 
lond  in  his  tyme.  pou  schalt  leene  to  many  folkis,  and  J)0u 
schalt  not  borwe  to  o])er.  pe  Lord  Jji  God  schal  sette  J)e  in  ))e 
heed  and  not  in  pe  taile.  pou  schalt  be  evermoore  above,  and 
not  undir,  if  pou  kepist  pe  comaundementis,  and  bowist  noper 
to  pe  ri^t  side,  ne  to  pe  left  side,  ne  hast  not  folwid  alien  goddis, 
ne  heriede  hem,  ne  worschipid  hem.  And  ^if  pou  kepist  not 
pe  comaundementis  of  God,  as  I  have  seide  bifore  to  pe,  eursid 
pou  schalt  be  in  feelde  and  in  toun ;  cursyd  be  pi  bernys,  and 
eursid  be  pe  fruyt  of  pi  wombe,  and  pe  fruyt  of  pin  erpe,  and  of 
alle  pi  bestis,  ingoynge  and  out-goynge.  And  pe  Lord  schal  sende 
upon  pe  hunger  and  blamynge  in  to  alle  pi  werkis,  in  whiche 
werkis  pou  hast  forsakyn  him.  And  pou  schalt  have  pestilence 
and  fevere,  cold,  and  brennynge  hete,  and  corrupt  aier.  And 
pe  Lorde  schal  caste  pe  doun  bifore  pin  enemyes,  and  be  pi 
careyn  etyn  wip  beestis  and  foulis.  And  pe  Lord  schal  smyte 
pe  wip  biel^  of  Egipt  in  pe  part  of  pi  bodi  bi  whiche  pou 
seendist  out  pi  filpeheed ;  scabbe  forsope  and  5icche  c,  so  pou 
mowe  not  be  heuu.  pe  Lord  schal  smyte  pe  wip  maadnesse, 
and  blyndenesse,  and  woodnesse  of  p03t ;  and  pou  schalt  grope 
in  myddai,  as  a  blynde  man  in  derknessis.  In  alle  tyme  wrong 
chalenge  suffre  pou,  and  be  pou  born  doun  wip  violence,  ne 
have  pou  pat  delyvere  pee.  A  wiif  take  pou,  and  anoper  man 
slepe  wip  here;  an  hous  bilde  pou,  and  dwelle  pou  not  in  it. 
Plaunte  pou  a  vyne,  and  kite  pou  no  grapis  of  it ;  pin  oxe  be 
slayn  bifore  pee,  and  et  pou  not   of  it;   and  alle  pin  opere 


^  Probably  an  error  for  relihis ;  the  same  age,  has  here,  biel,  pat  is 

the  word   in   the   Vulgate   version  a  wounde. 

being    reliquiae.       Laud    524    has  ^  fhe  word   in  the   Vulgate  is 

releves.  prurigine. 

^  A  note  in  the  MS.,  in  a  hand  of 


9^  WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 

beestis  to  ))in  enemyes.  pi  sones  and  })i  dou^tris  be 
fei  takyn  of  oJ?ir  puple;  ))e  fruyt  of  ]?in  er]?e,  and  alle  Jji 
traveilis,  ete  |)e  puple  J?at  ]?ou  knowist  not.  And  be  J?ou 
evermore  wrong  chalange  sufFringe,  and  born  doun  alle  dales. 
And  )?e  Lord  schal  smyte  jjee  wi])  moost  yvel  biel.  in  knees  and 
in  sparljrveris  ^,  and  mowe  Jjou  not  be  helid  fro  ]?e  sole  of  Jje 
foot  unto  ]?e  nolle  ^.  And  ]ji  fadris  and  J^ou  schullen  serve  to 
alien  goddis,  of  tree  and  stoon.  Muche  seed  }?ou  schalt  J?rowe 
into  J)e  lond,  and  litil  ]?ou  schalt  gedre,  for  wormes  schulen 
devoure  alle  ])i  fruytis.  pe  Lord  forso])e  schal  ^yve  to  J?ee  a 
dreedful  herte  and  failynge  ei5.en,  and  a  soule  wastid  wi]?  privey 
sorwe ;  \o\x  schalt  drede  ni^t  and  day,  and  J?ou  schalt  not  trowe 
to  j)i  liif.  Eerli  }?ou  schalt  seie,  Who  5yve]?  to  me  eeven  ?  and 
at  eeven,  Who  ^ive]?  to  me  eerlich  ?  for  drede  of  ])in  herte  for 
Jje  ]}ingis  J?at  })0U  schalt  see  wij)  J)in  ei^en.  Fer]?ermore  all  \e 
veniauncis  ])at  ben  not  writen  in  \q  volym  of  fis  lawe,  ]?e  Lord 
schal  bringe  upon  ]?ee,  to  J^e  tyme  J^at  he  have  alto  trodyn  j^ee. 
And  ^e  schulen  leve  fewe  in  noumbre,  })at  weren  bifore  as 
sterres  of  hevene  for  multitude,  for  ]?ou  herdist  not  J)e  word  of 
J)i  Lord  God. 

^  The  first  Wycliffite  -version  reads  sparlyvers  and  noL 


0'^^%<^^^ 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC.  93 


III. 

THE    PATER    NOSTER. 


[It  has  been  shown  in  the  Introduction  to  this  volume  that  there  is  no 
valid  reason  for  connecting  this  tract,  or  the  short  commentary  on  the 
Ave  Maria  which  follows  it,  with  the  other  pieces  included  by  Dr.  Shirley 
under  the  general  title  of  Speculum  Vitae  Christianae,  the  authorship  of 
which  has  been  clearly  traced  to  Archbishop  Thoresby.  The  authority 
of  Bale,  such  as  it  is,  may,  I  think,  be  produced  in  favour  of  ascribing  this 
tract  to  Wyclif.  In  his  longer  list  we  find.  Super  Oratione  Dominica,  inc. 
'  Docet  nos  Dominus  Jesus  Christus/  This  conuoaencement  is  sufficiently 
near  to  that  of  the  tract  before  us  to  make  it  probable  that  the  same  work 
is  referred  to,  especially  as  it  is  immediately  followed  in  all  the  four  MSS. 
(V,  Y,  CC,  GG)  which  contain  it,  by  the  tract  Super  Salutatione  Angelica, 
or  on  the  Ave  Maria,  the  first  words  of  which,  as  given  in  the  Catalogue 
of  Bale,  manifestly  agree  with  those  of  the  extant  work.  Again,  the  tract 
on  the  Ave  Maria,  with  which  in  all  the  MSS.  this  tract  on  the  Pater  Noster 
is  so  closely  linked,  bears  in  the  Harleian  text  the  name  of  Wyclif.  No 
internal  evidence  points  to  Wyclif  or  any  one  else;  but  the  fine  con- 
cluding passage  proves  the  writer,  whoever  he  was,  to  have  been  a  man 
of  an  elevated  way  of  thinking. 

The  text  is  foimded  on  a  beautifully  written  MS.  in  the  Bodleian  Library 
(Bodl.  789).] 

We  schal  bileve  jjat  ))is  Pater  Noster,  J)at  Crist  himsilf  tau^te 
to  alle  Cristene  men,  passij?  ojjere  prayers  in  ]?ese  Jjre  J)ingis ; 
in  auctorite,  in  sotilte,  and  profit  to  Cristis  Cherche.  It  passij? 
in  auctorite, — for  Crist,  boJ)e  God  and  man,  made  it  for 
Cristene  men  to  usen  it ;  and  he  is  moost  of  auctorite,  as  oure 
bileve  techij).  And  heerfor  ]je  Gospel  of  Mathew  sei]>  l^at  Crist 
baad  us  praie  J)us.  It  passi]?  also  in  sotilte, — for  we  schal  un- 
derstonde  ]jat  in  ])ese  seven  askingis  is  ^  sotelli  conteyned  alle 

1  ar,  Y. 


94 


WYCLIF'S  WORKS. 


The  first  peti- 
tion of  the  first 
part. 


The  second 
petition. 


The  third 
petition. 


poyntis  of  Jje  worlde  in  whiche  lie])  any  witte ;  and  so  schortli  to 
comprehende  so  muche  witte  in  pleyne  wordis,  is  a  sotilte  of 
God  passynge  witte  of  men.  pe  J>ridde,  we  schal  suppose  J^at 
no  praier  in  ])is  world  be  moore  profitable  to  man,  si|)]3e  Crist 
himsilf  herij)  alle. 

pe  firste  askynge  of  })e  Pater  Noster  stoonde]>  in  |?ese 
wordis ; — 

Oure  Fadir  ])at  ert  in  hevenes,  halwid  be  ]?i  name : 

In  whiche  wordis  we  mowen  leerne,  J^at  men  worJ?i  to  be 
herd  moten  be  knyt  togidere  in  charite  and  meeknesse  of  herte. 
Sij)J)e  alle  ]?e  holi  Trinite  is  fadir  of  us  alle,  and  holi  Cherche  is 
oure  moder,  we  schulden  love  ase  bre]?eren.  And  si]?])e  God 
is  so  hi^e  in  hevene  above  alle  his  angelis  ^,  and  we  ben  so  lowe 
in  er])e,  wrappid  wi])  many  mischeves,  we  schulden  bi  resoun 
be  meeke  and  buxum  to  ]?is  Lord,  and  meekli  praie  to  oure 
fadir  ])at  halwid  be  his  name ;  so  as  his  name  is  holi  in  himsilf, 
so  be  his  name  halwid  and  stedefast  in  oure  soule.  For  whanne 
oure  soule  was  maad  to  J?e  leeknesse  ^  of  }?e  Trinite,  Goddis 
hi5e  name  was  preentid  jjerinne. 

pe  secunde  axynge  of  ]?is  praier  stoondi]>  in  J^ese  wordis ; 

pi  rewme  come  to  J^ee  ; 
into  Jje  blisse  of  hevene.  And  as  fe  ferste  axynge  answer!]? 
to  ])e  Fader,  so  ]?is  secunde  askynge  answer!]?  to  ])e  Sone.  For 
he  is  ])at  noble  man  ]?at  cam  doun  unto  ]?e  erj^e  to  gete  him 
a  rewme,  and  aftir  tournede  asen.  pe  rewme  of  ]?is  Fadir  is 
clepid  holi  Cherche,  fat  at  ]?e  day  of  doom  schal  go  hennys 
to  hevene. 

pe  ]?r!dde  askynge  sei])  })us ; 

pi  w!lle  be  doon ;  as  it  is  full!  doon  in  hevene,  so  be  it  doon 
and  ^  in  er])e  : 

And  ])is  ])ridde  askynge  answer!])  to  ])e  Holi  Goost,  for  he 
is  good  love  of  ])e  Fader  and  ])e  Sone.  And  al  ^if  ])ese  askyngis 
moten  needli  be  fuliillid,  ne])eles  mannys  soule,  lift  up  wi]) 
charite,  is  w!])  desire  hi^ed  wi])  God,  and  ]3at  is  a  praier.  pus 
we  seien,  blessid  be  God,  and  o])er  ]?ing!s  ]?at  nede  moten  be. 
And  J)es  ])re  askyngis  be  to  J)e  hoH  Trinite.  And  ])erfore  we 
schapen  oure  wordis  oonl!  to  God. 

^  So  Y ;  V  has  aunglis.  ^  lyknesse,  Y.  ^  om.  Y. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC. 


95 


pe  secunde  part  of  J?is  praier  contejTieJ?  foure  askyngis. 
First  we  prayen  oure  fader, — 

To  ^ive  us  oure  eche  days  breed  to  day  : 

And  ))is  may  be  understonden  wel  on  ]?re  maneris  togedre, 
as  Seynt  Austyn  sei]?  ^  bi  wit  of  God  Almi^ti.  First  we  asken 
oure  bodili  foode,  for  to  serve  oure  fader;  after  we  aske  ]?e 
sacrament,  to  have  mynde  of  oure  fader ;  and  after  we  asken 
Goddis  woord;  to  fede  m]>  oure  soule.  And  for  we  have  neede 
of  alle  J)es  eche  day,  j>erfore  Crist  clepe})  hem,  oure  eche  dayes 
breed.  And  for  we  shulden  be  trewe  and  ete  oure  owene 
breed,  and  not  wi]?  wrong  ete  oure  nei^eboris  breed,  ]?erfore 
Crist  techi]?  us  to  aske  of  him  oure  breed.  And  for  Crist 
wolde  })at  oure  hope  were  fresshid  in  him,  oure  ]?03t  and  oure 
mynde  and  al  oure  desiir,  {?erfor  he  biddij?  us  aske  J)is  mete 
of  him  to  day. 

pe  secunde  askynge  of  ]?is  part  is  seid  in  Jjese  wordis  ; 

For^if  us  oure  dettis,  as  we  forgive  to  oure  dettouris  : 

pe  dette  ^  ]?at  we  owen  to  God  ben  service  ]?at  we  owen  to 
him;  and  as  ofte  tyme  as  we  faylen  we  rennen  in  dette  of 
peynes ;  and  but  God  forgive  us  ])is  dette  of  oure  synne,  we  be 
not  wor]?i  to  have  ou^t  of  oure  fader.  And,  for  God  wole  jjat 
we  loven  oure  brej^eren,  he  knytti]?  to  a  condicioun  under 
whiche  we  asken  ]?is  boone,  J^at  he  schulde  for5ive  us  oure 
dette  as  we  for^even  to  oure  dettouris.  So  if  we  ben  unmer- 
ciful to  men  )?at  aren  oure  dettouris,  truste  we  to  oure  fader 
Jjat  he  wol  punysche  us;  and  so  we  prayen  oure  hi^e  juge 
a^ens  oure  owen  heed.  But  understonde  we  wel,  ))at  we  may 
leeifulli  aske  of  oure  brej?eren  dette  of  erjjeli  J^ingis,  but  J)is 
askynge  moot  be  in  resoun  and  charite,  and  ]?anne  it  is  for 
love  and  profit  of  oure  nei^ebore.  And  here  mote  we  fle  bo]?e 
rancour  and  hate  and  envye  to  oure  nei^ebore,  wi]?  ojjere 
schrewide  castis. 

pe  })ridde  askynge  of  J)is  part  sue]?  in  ];ese  wordis ; 

^  deitys,  Y. 


The  first  peti- 
tion of  the 
second  part. 


*  S.  Aug.  De  Sermone  Domini  in 
Monte,  lib.  ii.  cap.  7 :  '  Panis  quo- 
tidianus  aij.t  pro  iis  omnibus  dictus 
est,  quae  hujus  vitae  necessitatem 
sustentant,  de  quo  cum  praeciperet, 
ait,  Nolite  cogitare  de  crastino ;  ut 


ideo  sit  additum,  Da  nobis  hodie : 
aut  pro  Sacramento  corporis  Christi, 
quod  quotidie  accipimus :  aut  pro 
spiritali  cibo,  de  quo  idem  Dominus 
dicit,  Operamini  escam  quae  non 
corrumpitur.' 


96 


WrCLIF'S  WORKS. 


The  last. 


The  compre- 
hensiveness 
and  universal 
sigfnificance  of 
the  Lord's 
Prayer. 


Leed  us  not  into  temptacioun  : 

So]j  it  is  })at  Crist  was  temptid,  and  God  tempti]?  man  for 
love,  but  hard  it  is  and  grevous  peyne  to  be  lad  into  temp- 
tacioun. Whanne^  a  man  of  his  folie  fallij?  into  j^e  myre  of 
synne,  ri^tful  jugement  of  God  wol  make  him  synke  deppere. 
And  herfore  we  prayen  oure  fader  j>at  he  lede  us  not  in  to 
temptacioun,  leste  we  comen  nevere  out. 

And  herfore  Jje  laste  askynge  of  ]?is  part  is  seid  in  Jjiise 
wordis  ; 

But,  gracious  Fader,  dely vere  us  from  alle  yvel : 

Pe  werste  yvel  of  ]?is  worlde  is  wickidnesse  of  synne,  si]?]?e 
a  man  for  no  |>ing  schulde  willen  to  synne,  sij5]?e  for  J)is  worlde, 
ne  nou^t  Jjat  is  J^erinne,  schulde  any  man  do  synne.  But  si])]?e 
summe  synnes  ben  moore  worse  ^  Jjan  o]?ere,  in  ])is  last  askynge 
we  prayen  delyverement  ^  of  ]?e  worste.  pe  werste  is  ]?e  develis 
synne,  ]?at  man  die]?  ynne  wi]?outen  repentaunce,  ])at  evere  schal 
be  punysschid;  and  J;is  J)e  gospel  clepi]?  synne  a^ens  ])e  Holi 
Gost.  God  for  his  grete  merci  kepe  us  fro  J?is  yvel,  and  })anne 
schal  we  have  everlastynge  freedam. 

In  a  J)e  eende  of  ]?e  Pater  Noster,  Amen  is  the  signet  of  ]?e 
Lordis  praier,  whiche  word  J)e  Ebru  translatoure,  Aquyla^, 
interpretid,  '  and  ]?e  Lord  confermede.'  Ciprian  c  on  J^e  Pater 
Noster  sei]?,  whatevere  o])ir  wordis  ))e  desire  of  him  ]?at  praie]> 
fourme]?  in  bifore-goynge,  }?at  it  be  cleer,  o])ir  addij?  afterwarde, 
fat  it  encreesce,  we  seie  noon  oj^ir  j?inge  ]?an  ]>at  is  conteyned 


^  ffor  whan,  Y. 


^  moche  worse,  Y. 


delyveraunce. 


^  All  that  follows,  to  the  end  of 
the  tract,  is  wanting  in  the  Lam- 
beth MS. 

^  Aquila,  concerning  whose  life 
all  that  we  know  is  derived  from  the 
work  of  St.  Epiphanius  De  Ponderi- 
bus  et  Mensuris,  was  a  native  of 
Sin  ope,  who  became  first  a  Chris- 
tian, and  then  a  Jew,  and  to  please 
his  new  co-religionists,  made  an 
exceedingly  literal  translation  of  the 
scriptures  of  the  Old  Testament 
from  Hebrew  into  Greek,  about  the 
end  of  the  first  century  of  our  era. 
Of  this  version  unfortunately  only 
some  fragments  exist.   See  the  article 


•  Aquila '  in  the  Biographie  Generale. 
^  There  are  no  expressions  in 
St.  Cyprian's  treatise  De  Oratione 
Dominica,  as  found  in  modern  edi- 
tions, which  exactly  correspond  to 
those  quoted  in  the  text. — Since 
writing  the  above,  I  have  found  the 
passage  quoted  in  the  text  in  one  of 
St.  Augustine's  letters,  Epist.  CXXX. 
cap.  12.  '  Quae  libet  alia  verba 
dicamus,  quae  aflfectus  orantis  vel 
praecedendo  format  ut  clareat,  vel 
consequendo  attendit  ut  crescat,  nihil 
aliud  dicimus  quam  quod  in  ista 
Dominica  Oratione  positum  est,  si 
recte  et  congruenter  oramus.' 

WYCLIF. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC. 

in  j>e  praier  of  ])is  Lord,  ^if  we  praien  ri^tli  and  covenabli.  For 
whanne  a  man  sei]?,  Lord,  be  J>ow  glorified  in  alle  folkis  as  ))0w 
ert  glorified  in  us,  what  ojjer  J)ing  seij?  he  J?an  ])at,  pi  name  be 
halwid  ?  And  whanne  a  man  sei]?,  Lord,  schewe  J?i  face  to  us, 
and  we  schulle  be  saaf,  what  ofer  ]?inge  seij>  he  J?an  J)at,  pi 
rewme  come  ?  Whanne  a  man  seij?,  Lord,  dresse  my  steppis  up 
]>i  spechis,  what  o])ir  J^ing  sei])  he  ])an,  pi  wille'be  doun? 
Whanne  a  man  seij?,  Lord,  ^if  not  povert  ne  richessis  to  me, 
what  ojjer  J^ing  seij?  he  J)an  ]?is,  ^if  us  to-day  oure  eche  dales 
breed  ?  Whanne  a  man  sei}?.  Lord,  have  mynde  of  David  and 
of  al  his  myldnesse,  and,  5if  I  have  golden  yvelis  to  hem  }>at 
golden  yvelis  to  me,  falle  I  voyde  fro  myn  enemyes,  what  o\tx 
]?ing  seij)  he  Jjan  J>is,  Forgive  to  us  oure  dettis,  as  we  for3yven  to 
oure  dettoures  ?  Whanne  a  man  seij?,  Lord,  do  awey  fro  me 
]>e  coveitise  of  ]?e  wombe,  what  o\\x  \m%  sal]?  he  ]?an  ])is,  Leed 
us  not  into  temptacioun?  Whanne  a  man  seij).  My  God, 
delyvere  me  fro  myn  enemyes,  what  oJ?ir  ])ing  saij?  he  J?an  j?is, 
Delyvere  us  from  yvel  ?  And  ^if  J?ou  rennest  aboute  bi  alle  J)e 
wordis  of  holy  praieris,  J?ou  schalt  fynde  noJ?ing  whiche  is  not 
conteyned  in  ]?is  praier  of  jje  Lord.  Whoevere  seiJ?  a  J)ing  Jjat 
may  not  perteyne  to  j)is  prayer  of  J?e  gospel,  he  praiej?  bodili 
and  unjustli  and  unleeffuUi,  as  me  ]?enki]).  Whanne  a  man 
saiej)  in  his  praier.  Lord,  multiplie  myn  richesses,  and  encreese 
myn  honouris,  and  seij)  ])is,  havynge  )>e  coveitise  of  hem,  and 
not  purposynge  ]?e  profit  of  hem  to  men,  to  be  bettir  to  God- 
ward,  I  gesse  J)at  he  may  not  fynde  it  in  J>e  Lordis  praier. 
perfore  be  it  schame  to  aske  J?o  J?ingis,  whiche  is  not  leefful  to 
coveyte.  If  a  man  schame]?  not  of  ]?is,  but  coveytise  overcome]? 
him,  ]?is  is  askid,  J?at  he  delyvere  fro  J?is  yvel  of  coveytise,  to 
whom  we  seyn,  Delyvere  us  from  yvel. 


Here  endi]?  ]?e  Pater  Nosteb. 


97 


Ps.  Ixxx.  3. 


Ps.ixviL  7. 


I  Kings  iii  ix. 


V 


WORKS.      VOL,  III. 


98 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


Introductory. 


An  apolofify  for 
the  use  of 
English. 


IV. 


PE    PATER    NOSTER. 


[The  only  ground  for  ascribing  the  following  treatise  to  Wyclif,  besides 
internal  evidence,  is  the  fact  of  its  being  found  in  a  volume  of  Wyclif  s 
sermons  at  Wrest  Park.  (See  Shirley's  Catalogue,  No.  64,  English  works). 
The  style  much  resembles,  I  think,  that  of  Wyclif  There  is  a  remarkable 
passage  near  the  end,  where  the  writer  speaks  of  the  obstacles  thrown  in 
the  way  of  those  who  were  endeavouring  to  preach  the  gospel  generally 
among  the  people,  but  mentions  no  definite  forms  of  persecution.  Hence 
I  should  judge  that,  if  by  Wyclif,  this  treatise  is,  compared  with  most  of 
his  Enghsh  works,  of  early  date,  composed  after  he  had  sent  out  the  '  poor 
priests,'  but  before  persecution  had  commenced. 

Two  other  copies,  for  the  knowledge  of  which  I  am  indebted  to  Mn 
Bond  and  Mr.  Fumivall,  have  come  to  light  since  the  appearance  of 
Dr.  Shirley's  Catalogue;  one  at  the  British  Museum  (Harl.  2398),  the  other 
in  the  possession  of  Mr.  Corser.  The  present  text  is  taken  from  a  correct 
transcript  of  the  Harleian  MS.,  made  by  Mr.  Brock.] 

SYppE  Jje  Pater  Noster  is  ]>e  beste  prayer  Jjat  is,  for  in  it  mot 
alle  6]?er  prayers  be  closed  yf  ]>ey  schuUe  graciously che  be  hurde 
of  God,  ]>erfore  scholde  men  kunne  ])is  prayour,  and  studie 
fe  -wyt  jjerof.  And  syl?)?e  ]>e  treuj>e  of  God  stonde]?  nou^t  in  one 
langage  more  })an  in  ano]?er,  bot  whoevere  lyve])  best,  techej> 
best,  plese]?  most  God,  of  what  langage  evere  he  be,  ]?erfore  }?is 
prayere,  declared  en  Englyssche,  may  edifye  pe  lewede  peple, 
as  it  do]?  clerkes  in  Latyn.  And  syjjj^e  it  is  )?e  gospel  of  Crist, 
and  Crist  bad  it  be  preched  to  ]>e  peple,  for  ]>e  peple  scholde 
lerne  and  kunne  it  and  worche  ]?erafter,  why  may  we  nou^t 
wryte  in  Englyssche  ]>e  gospel,  and  oj^ere  ]?ynges  declaryng  ]?e 
gospel,  to  edificacion  of  Cristen  mennus  soules,  as  ]>e  precheour 
telle]?  it  trewelyche  an  Englyssche  to  ]>e  peple  ?    For  by  ]?e  same 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC, 

resoun  })at  it  scholde  nou3t  be  \\Tyte,  it  scholde  nou3t  be 
preched.  pis  heresye  and  blaspheme  scholde  men  putte  oute 
fro  here  hertes,  for  it  spryngej?  up  by  ])e  fende,  ])er  as  Crist 
sey)),  ]?e  fende  is  fader  of  lesynges.  And  so  jje  kynreden  of 
Pharyseys  is  cursed  of  God,  J>at  lovej)  nou^t  Jesus,  as  Seynt 
Poul  sey}),  bot  lette]?  J)e  gospel  to  be  lerned  of  ))e  peple.  For  yf 
j?er  be  any  sotilte  ly^tere  ])an  of>er,  for  to  kunne  a  crafte  J?at  is 
nedeful,  he  ]>at  can  ))is  sotilte  and  wol  nou^t  teche  ])e  lerner  able 
]?erto,  he  is  cause  of  his  unkunnyng.  And  so  wryt}Tig  of  Jje 
gospel  in  Englyssche,  and^  of  goede  lore  accordyng  J)erto,  is 
a  sotilte  and  a  mene  to  fe  commune  peple,  to  kunne  it  ])e 
betere.  Who  lovej?  lasse  Crist  ?  who  is  acursid  of  God,  bot  he 
})at  lette]?  ]?is  mene  ?  for  he  is  Sathanas  contrarie  to  Crist.  Bot 
})es  wyckede  kynrede  wolde  J^at  )?e  gospel  slepte ;  bot,  for  ])ey 
bere  J?e  name  of  Crist,  fey  preche  somwhat  jjerof.  And  ])us 
dude  Jje  Machamete  and  Surgeus  ]?e  monk,  whanne  ]?ey  made 
a  lawe  after  }>er  owene  malys  and  toke  somwhat  of  J»e  gospel  to 
a  fleschlyche  understondyng,  so  ]?at  jjurghe  ]?e  lore  of  hem 
he]?ene  folk  to  j)is  day  bej)  oute  of  here  byleve.  And  ])us  J)is 
evele  kynredene  ^  telle)?  nou3t  hollyche  ]?e  trujje  of  ]?e  gospel,  for 
]?ey  leve]?  contrariouslyche  jjerto  [as  her  dedes  shewen]  ^ ;  and 
Crist  byddej?  his  children  deme  after  J?e  werkes. 

Leve  we  now  J)is  mater,  and  speke  we  of  \t  Pater  Noster 
]?at  Jesus  Crist  made,  pis  holy  prayer  is  ful  of  \vyt,  and 
conteynej)  vij  axynges.  pe  Tyrste  axynges  answerej?  and  per- 
teynej?  to  ))e  worschep  of  \t  Godhede.  pe  firste  perteyne]?  to 
J>e  Fader,  to  whom  power  is  apropried,  of  whom,  as  sey]>  holy 
wryt,  is  alle  power  in  hevene  and  in  er)?e.  And  J)e  secunde 
answerej)  to  J?e  Sone,  to  ]?e  whiche  wysdom  is  apropried ;  as 
Seynt  Poul  sey]?.  In  him  bej?  alle  tresoures  of  kunnyng  and  of 
wysdomhud.  pe  ]?rydde  answere]?  to  J?e  Holy  Gost,  to  wham  is 
apropryed  love;  and  ]?erfore  sey]?  Seynt  Jon,  God  is  charite, 
and  he  J?at  dwelle]?  in  charite  dwelle]?  in  God,  and  God  in  him. 
And  }?e  o]?er  foure  axynges  perteynej?  to  profy3t  and  helj?e 
of  mankynde,  bol^e  gostlyche  and  bodylyche.  And  so  ]?is 
blessede  prayer  passe]?  alle  o]?ere  in  J?re  speciale  poyntes,  in 


I  FromEE;  om.  DD. 
EE :  om.  DD. 


"kynrede,  EE. 


From 


The  Lord's 
Prayer  contains 
seven  petitions, 
of  which  three 
relate  to  God, 
and  four  to 
man. 


CoL  iii.  3. 


I  John  iv.  16. 


H  2 


lOO 


WrCLIF'S  WORKS. 


Its  high  and 
unique  au- 
thority. 


It  should  be 
taught,  as 
Christ  taught 
it,  in  the  lan- 
guage of  the 
people. 


auctorite,  in  sotylte,  and  prof73t  to  Cristes  Churche.  In  auc- 
torite  it  passej?,  for  Crist,  bo)?e  God  and  man,  made  it,  and 
tau^te  it  his  disciples ;  and  syj>  he  is  )?e  wysdom  of  J)e  Fader, 
men  scholde  hertelyche  love  pis  prayer  by  cause  of  ]>e  makere, 
and  wyt  conteynede  ^  J?er-ynne.  In  sotylte  it  passej?,  for  in  so 
schort  a  prayer  is  conteyned  so  muche  wyt  j^at  no  tonge  of  man 
may  telle  it  al  here  in  erj?e.  And  sy]?)je  a  craft  of  gret  sotilte  is 
muche  y-preysed  of  worldlyche  men,  muche  more  scholde  ])is 
sotylle  gospel,  J?is  wor]?y  prayer,  be  loved  and  preysed  of  Cristes 
dere  chyldren.  It  passej?  o]?er  prayers  in  prophyt  to  holy 
Churche,  for  al  J?yng  Jjat  nede)?  to  a  man  gostlyche  and  body- 
lyche,  is  conteyned  in  ))is  prayer.  And  syj)]?e  it  is  so  schort, 
and  so  muche  medelyd  })er-ynne,  to  hem  ])at  bej>  of  goed  wylle, 
none  excusacioun  is  to  man  rekened  in  j?is  prayer. 

Wherfore,  whenne  ])e  disciples  axede  Crist  how  ]>ey  scholde 
praye,  Crist  seyde  to  hem,  j?ey  scholde  nou^t  wyine  to  speke 
muche  as  hel)ene  men  dope ;  }>ey  wene})  ^  to  be  yherde  in  here 
muche  speche.  Wille  ^e  nou^t  ])er-fore,  sey)>  Crist,  be  lyche  to 
suche  men.  Bot  whanne  ^e  schulle  praye,  seye|)  ]?us.  Fader 
our e  pat  art  in  hevenys^yhalwed  he  py  name.  And  so  he  tau3te 
hem  oute  ])is  prayer ;  bot  be  J)OU  syker,  nojjer  in  Latyn  no]?er  in 
Frensche,  bot  in  ]?e  langage  ])at  |?ey  usede  to  speke,  for  j?at  Jjey 
knewe  best.  And  here  is  a  reule  to  Cristen  men,  of  what  lan- 
gage evere  fey  be,  jjat  it  is  an  heye  sacrifice  to  God  to  kunne 
here  Pater  Noster,  J)e  gospel,  and  o]?er  poyntes  of  holy  wryt 
nedeful  to  here  soules,  and  )?ey  to  do  ])er-after,  whej^er  it  be 
ytolde  to  him  or  wryten  in  Latyn,  or  in  Englyssche,  or  in 
Frensche,  or  in  Duchyssche  ^,  ojjer  in  eny  o]?er  langage,  after 
])at  J?e  peple  haj>  understondyng.  And  j>us  clerkes  scholde  joye 
})at  J>e  peple  knewe  Codes  lawe,  and  travayle  hemself  busylyche, 
by  alle  )?e  goede  menes  J?at  J?ey  my^te,  to  make  \t  peple  knowe 
]?e  treu})e.  For  ]?is  was  |)e  cause  ))at  Jesus  Crist  bycam  man, 
and  suffrede  dej?  on  ]?e  croys,  so  J^at  by  kepyng  of  his  lore  J^e 
peple  my^te  ryse  fro  de}?,  and  come  to  ]?e  lyf  Jjat  ha|>  none  ende. 
And  yf  any  clerke  wolde  contrarye  |)is,  who  schal  be  dampned 
bot  suche  a  quyke  fende  ? 

1  So  in  EE ;  ]iat  cont^ynep,  DD.  2  ^^^  wbiche  weren,  EE. 

3  Ducbe,  EE. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC. 


lOl 


perfore  Jje  sevene  askynges  of  ]?is  prophetable  prayer  scholde 
men  leme,  and  reule  hemself  J^erafter. 

pe  firste  askyng,  ])at  is  answerying  to  J?e  Fader,  is  seyde  on 
]>is  maner,  Fader  oure  pat  art  in  hevenes,  yhalwed  he  py  name. 
Of  )>is  ^vytty  lore  of  Crist  may  be  meved  ]?re  questions,  pe 
firste,  why  we  seye  oure  Fader,  and  nou^t  my  Fader,  pe 
secunde,  why  we  seye,  ))at  art  in  hevenes,  ra))er  ]}an,  in  hevene. 
Pe  J?rydde,  why  we  seye,  halwed  be  )?y  name,  se])])e  ]?e  name  of 
God  in  himself  may  nou^t  be  appaired  no]?er  amended. 

As  to  J)e  firste,  we  schuUe  ywyte  ]?at  Crist,  whanne  he  tau^te 
ous  to  seye  oure  Fader,  he  betoke  ous  mekenesse,  and  bad  ous 
fle  pryde,  and  J^at  we,  so  lowe  and  so  synful  wrecches,  whanne 
we  hadde  mynde  of  heynesse  and  ]?e  power  of  oure  God,  and 
Jjerto  of  grete  grace  of  Jjis  ryche  Lord,  we  scholde  love  him  J^e 
more,  and  myldelyche  aske  of  him,  as  ]?e  childe  of  ]?e  fader, 
Jjyng  J?at  ous  nedej?.  For  jje  grettere  Jjat  a  lord  is,  and 
])e  more  gracious  ]?at  he  is  to  pore  men,  )je  more  he  is  to  be 
loved.  And  ]?erfore  sey)?e  Crist,  Lerne])  of  me,  for  I  am  meke 
and  mylde  of  herte,  and  ^e  schulle]?  fynde  reste  in  ^oure  soules. 
Wherefore  we  alle  scholde  be  meke,  and  specialyche  prestes, 
and  nou^t  boste  of  here  holynesse  and  goede  dedys  J>at  J)ey 
suppose)?  j?at  Jjey  have  ydo,  but  wylne  for  to  have  of  gode  dedys 
of  here  brojjeryne,  as  here  broj^eryne  desyre]?  to  have  part  of 
herys,  and  so  sulle  ])ey  nou3t  to  oJ?ere  part  of  here  meritys, 
namore  ])an  J^ey  wille  bye  part  of  oJ?er  mennes.  For  bol?e  it  is 
symonye,  and  also  it  longej?  to  God  to  partye  suche  meritys, 
and  it  is  nou^t  in  er))elyche  mannes  powere.  Late  God  Jjerfore 
dele  [hit]  as  him  lykej?.  pus  teche]?  God  in  ]?e  gospel,  and  sey]? 
]?us,  Whanne  ^e  have  do  alle  }?yng  wel,  seye}>,  we  be  unprofet- 
able  servant3.  And  J)us  knowynge  oure  owen  wyckednesses 
mekelyche  in  ]?is  prayer,  we  schulde  clepe  God  oure  Fader,  and 
nou^t  my  Fader,  by  stynkynge  pryde  holdyng  ous  self  wor}?yer 
to  God  )?an  oj^er  trewe  men. 

As  to  ]?e  secunde  poynt,  why  we  seye  jjat  art  in  hevenys, 
raj^er  Jjan  in  hevene,  we  schulle  understonde  J^at  hevenes  in  })is 
place  be])  understonde  Cristen  mennes  soules,  ))e  whiche,  as 
holy  wTyt  seyj?,  be})  J)e  seeles  of  God.  And  so  alle  j)ylke  \2X 
schulle])  be  in  blysse  after  j)e  dome,  ry^twyslyche  may  be  cleped 


The  first 
petition  of 
the  first  part ; 
three  points  of 
difficulty- 
First  point. 


Second  point. 


I0!2^ 


I  Cor.  iii.  13. 


Ps.  cxlix.  5. 


Third  point. 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 

holy  Churche.  But  now  holy  Churche  is  seyd  to  be  disposed 
on  dyvers  maners.  First  it  fy^t  here  in  erjje,  and  restej?  nou^t 
clerlyche  fro  synne,  bot  ^it  by  travaile  and  sorwe  of  herte 
desyrej)  to  come  to  blysse ;  wherefore  it  is  ry3tfunyche  yclepyd 
J?e  fy^tyng  Churche.  To  ])is  Churche  speke]?  Crist,  and  sey]?, 
Be})  stronge  in  bataille,  and  fy^tej)  wij?  j?e  olde  serpent,  \e  devel, 
and  5e  schulle  take  everlastyng  kyngdom.  On  Jje  secunde 
manere  is  Jje  Churche  yseyd  to  be  disposed,  for  ]?ulke  Jjat  be}) 
passed  out  of  })is  worlde,  and  ^it  be}?  nou^t  come  to  reste  of  lyf 
in  blysse,  bot  reste})  in  purgatorie,  and  sufFre})  peyne  for  synne, 
abyding  ^  })e  mercy  of  God  to  delyvere  hem  out  of  peyne.  And 
whanne  })e  Churche  is  })us  disposed,  it  is  ycleped  })e  restyng 
Churche;  and  her-of  speke}?  Seynt  Poul  whanne  he  sey}?  })at 
fuyr  schal  preve  })e  worke  of  everyche.  On  })e  })rydde  manere 
is  holy  Churche  yseyd  to  be  disposed,  for  })ulke  })at  be}?  ypassed 
fro  sorwe  and  payne  to  joie  everlastyng,  have  overcome  \e 
synne  and  sorwe  of  })is  worlde,  and  be})  passed  payne,  })at 
come))  bot  for  synne,  and  have  wonne  })e  reste  of  everlastyng 
blysse ;  and  herefore  it  is  ycleped  ))e  Churche  of  overcomyng. 
Of  ])is  ^  Churche  speke))  })e  prophete  and  sey|),  Seyntes  schulle 
joye  in  glorie.  And  so  al  holy  Churche  schal  be  overcomyng 
after  )?e  day  of  dome,  and  be  oute  of  myschef  of  })e  worlde  and 
alle  o})ere  paynes,  and  be  in  joye  wif)  here  spouse  Crist  Jesus, 
})at  teche})  man  to  be  meek,  and  to  suppose  o})ere  as  goed  or 
betere  })an  he,  by  })e  dedys  ))at  he  see})  reuled  by  Cristes  lawe  ; 
and  so  to  seye  mekelyche  in  prayer,  Oure  Fader  ))at  art  in 
hevenes,  and  nou^t  in  hevene,  as "  yf  he  suppose))  nou^t  his 
bro})er  as  goed  as  himself. 

As  to  )>e  ))rydde  questioun,  how  ))e  name  of  God  [may  be 
halo  wed,  we  shuln  under  stonde  })at  ))e  name  of  God]  ^  in  himself 
may  nou^t  be  holyer  )>an  it  is,  and  ^it  it  is  seyd  to  be  maad  holy 
whenne  Cristen  mannes  soule  *,  lyche  ))e  holy  Trinite,  is  reuled 
by  brennyng  love  after  Cristes  lawe.  For  take  a  befille-ston,  and 
holde  it  in  a  cleer  sonne,  and  so  ))at  ston  wol  take  hete  of  ))e 
Sonne,  and  ))anne  maist  })0u  ^\ij?  tendre  gete  fuyre  of  ))at  ston, 
to  do  })erwi))  what  ))e  nede}).     Ry^t  so  put  al  })y  mynde,  al  }?y 

^  So  in  EE;  ahyde\>,  DD.  ^  g^  j^  EE;  ])us,  DD. 

^  From  EE;  om.  DD.  ^  So  in  EE;  mennes  sonles,  DD. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC. 


103 


soule,  to  J>e  verray  sone  of  Crist  Jesus,  and  ]?ou  schalt  cacche 
hete,  and  brennyng  love  to  \j  God,  and  jjou  schalt  have  ly^t  of 
understondyng  by  Jje  techyng  of  his  lawe,  as  muche  as  is  nede- 
ful  to  ]?e,  and  ensample  of  goede  lyvyng  to  Jjy  ney^ebores 
bysyde.  And  ry^t  as  \^  berille-ston  take  nou^t  hete  for  to  ^eve 
ly^t  bot  by  ]?e  sonne,  and  ]?e  sonne  schyne  nou^t  m  ])e 
berilleston  for  to  make  himself  bry^tere  or  hattere,  bot  J>at 
]>e  beriUe  may  take  hete  and  ^eve  ly^t  by  ]?e  sonne,  ry^t  so 
Crist  techejje  ous  nou^t  to  praye  ]).at  his  name  be  halewed, 
for  ])at  we  scholde  make  him  more  holy  in  himself,  bot 
J)at  we  ]?m-ghe  presyng  of  him,  and  trewe  reulyng  after  his 
lawe,  mowe  be  maad  holy  and  brennyng  in  charite  to  God 
and  to  oure  even  Cristen;  as  ]?e  tendre^  wex  make]?  no 
preynte  in  J?e  seel,  bot  ]?e  seel  make])  a  preynt  in  tendere  wex. 
Also  )?es  proude  clerkes,  symoniours,  silleres  of  pardomi  and 
indulgences,  of  confessiouns  and  ojjer  holy  dedys,  false  law- 
yours,  wyckede  juriours^  and  cursede  advocat^,  disseyvable 
notaries,  and  alle  fals  aquestis^,  grete  swerers,  vengeable  fendes, 
proude  men,  and  coveytous  glotouns,  and  lecheours,  bacbiters, 
and  pursuers  of  Godes  trewe  servant^,  and  oJ?er  suche  lymes  of 
])e  fende,  may  nou3t  medefullyche  seye.  Fader  oure  ])at  art  in 
hevenes,  yhalwed  be  \y  name,  tylle  J^ey  amende  hem  of  here 
evel  lyvyng.  And  ]?erfor  seyj;  Crist  in  his  gospel,  Nou^t  every 
man  J?at  seyp  to  me,  Lord,  Lord,  schal  enire  into  pe  kyngdom  of 
hevenes,  hot  he  pat  dop  pe  wil  of  my  fader  schal  entre  into  pe  kyng- 
dom of  hevenes, 

pe  secunde  part  of  \\%  worjjy  prayer,  fat  in  a  maner  is 
apropried  to  \q  Sone,  is  seid  in  jjes  wordes,  Come  to  pe  py 
kyngdom,  pe  kyngdom  of  God  in  holy  wryt  is  understonde  on 
dyvers  maners;  and  so  here  it  may  ry^tlyche  be  take  for  \q 
fj^tyng  Churche,  \^  whiche  wolde  desyre  to  regne  in  blysse 
wi])  Jesu  Crist  her  spouse,  as  sone  as  it  is  his  wille.  For  upon 
]?is  condicion  we  scholde  desyre,  as  Seynt  Poul  teche}>e  ous,  to 
passe  out  of  ]?is  wrecchede  lyf  and  come  to  \t  blysse  evere- 
lastyng,  for  Jjat  is  muche  betere.  And  syj^J^e  Crist  is  >at  noble 
man  fat  cam  fro  hevene  into  fe  lowe  erfe,  to  take  ous  for  his  ^ 

^  So  in  EE ;  untendere,  DD.  2  juroiirs,  EE.  ^  guesiis,  EE. 

^  So  in  EE;/rofe  DD. 


The  second 
petition. 


PhiL  i.  23. 


I04 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


The  third 
petition. 


kyndom,  J^at  byfore  were  y-lost  J?urghe  Adamis  synnes,  and  ])at 
suffrede  de]?  on  ]?e  rode-tree,  and  bou^te  ous  alle  k^en  to  joye  of 
J?e  Fader,  for  savacioun  of  mankynde,  wel  may  })e  trewe  Cristen 
peple  be  clepyd  Godys  kyngdom.  And  ry^t  as  we  be]?  tau^t  in 
]>e  fyrst  axynge,  to  destroye  pryde  by  verraye  mekenesse, 
whanne  we  seye]>,  Fader  oure  |?at  art  in  hevenys,  halewede  be 
]?y  name,  ry^t  so  we  bej)  ytau^t  in  J?ys  secunde  axynge  to  de- 
stroye envye  a3ens  oure  evene  Cristen  wij)  parfite  charite, 
whanne  we  seye]?,  Come  to  ])e  ]>y  kyngdom.  And  as  it  is 
nedeful  in  })e  firste  axynge  specialyche  to  have  parfyt  fey]?,  ))at 
God  oure  Fader  is  in  hevenys,  so  it  nede])  specialyche  in  ]?is 
secunde  axynge  J^at  we  have  hope,  J>at  alle  }>ylke  ]?at  we 
suppose})  be  his  kyngdom  schulde  regne  wij>  him  in  blysse  of 
hevene. 

pe  Jjrydde  axynge  of  Jjys  holy  prayer,  jjat  is  answeryng  to  J)e 
Holy  Goost,  is  y-seyde  in  Jjese  wordes ;  Be  py  wylhydo  in  erpe 
as  it  is  in  hevene.  By  ]?ese  wytty  wordes  we  be]?  ytau^t  to  have 
goede  wille  to  oure  even  ^  Cristen,  and  to  reule  oure  soules  after 
Jje  Holy  Gost,  and  nou^t  after  ]?e  luste  of  ])e  fiesche ;  for  })e 
spiryt  coveytej)  contrarious  to  ])e  fiesche,  and  ])e  flesche  to  }>e 
spiryt,  as  Seynt  Poul  telle]).  And  ry^t  as  in  ])e  firste  axyng  we 
be})  ytau^t  to  have  parfy^t  fey]?,  and  in  ])e  secunde  goede  hope, 
so  in  })e  ])rydde  we  be]?  ytau3t  to  have  parfy^t  charite  to  God 
and  oure  even  Cristen.  For  J)e  most  of  ])ese  ])re  vertues,  as 
Seynt  Poul  teehe]?,  is  charite.  For  feyj?  and  hope  schulle  cesse 
in  man  whanne  he  come]?  to  blysse.  For  instede  of  fey]?  he 
schal  have  clere  sy^t  in  soule  of  ]?e  godhede  of  Crist,  and  clere 
bodyliche  sy^t  of  ^  ])e  manhede  of  Crist ;  and  instede  of  hope  he 
schal  be  syker,  and  have  parfyt  joye ;  and  so  fey]?  and  hope 
schulle]?  be  ychanged,  and  charite  schal  waxe  more  and  more, 
and  laste  wiJ?oute  ende.  And  ]?us  sey]?  Seynt  Poul,  ]?at  now  we 
see]?  God  by  myrrour  and  in  fer  sy^t,  by  Scripture  and  fey]? ; 
bot  t^anne  we  schulle  see  him  as  he  is,  whanne  we  come]?  to 
blysse,  wy]?  eye  of  body  and  eye  of  soule.  perfore  praye  we 
God  ]?at  his  wylle  be  don  here  in  erj?e  among  synful  men, 
]?urghe  amendement  of  here  lyf,  as  it  is  ydo  -^n  hevene  among 


1  From  EE;  om.  DD. 


2  SoEE;  m,  DD. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC. 


io5 


his  glorious  seyTit5  wijjoute  medlyng  of  synne.  Nou^t  ]?at  he  ne 
may  make  his  \vylle  to  be  do  in  erj?e  wi]>oute  oure  prayere,  hot 
J^at  we,  in  charite  J?us  prayenge,  mowe  be  corouned  in  hevene 
blysse.  But,  for  J^at  it  is  corrupt  ^  it  greve]?  ]>e  soule,  as  Seynt 
Poul  telle)?.  And  yf  we  seye  ])at  we  have  no  synne,  we  de- 
ceyvej)  ous  self,  and  treu]?e  is  nou^t  in  ous,  as  Seint  ^  Joon  telle]?, 
perfore,  whyle  we  bej?  in  \\^  world,  we  may  nat  so  parfytlyche 
do  ]?e  wille  of  God  as  seint^  in  hevene,  for  corrupcioun  of 
bodyliche  unstabehiesse  of  ly£  And  ]?erfore  Crist  teche]?  ous 
utterlyche  to  praye.  Be  J?y  wille  ydo  in  erj?e  as  it  is  ydo  in 
hevene ;  bot  nou^t  so  parfy^tlyche  in  erj?e  as  it  is  in  hevene. 
And  }?us,  as  we  be]?  ytau^t  in  ]?e  firste  and  in  ]?e  secunde  axynge 
to  destroye  pryde  and  envye  wi]?  mekenesse  and  charite,  so  we 
be])e  ytau^t  in  ]?is  ]?ridde  axynge  to  destroye  wra]?]?e  wij?  verray 
love  of  herte.  And  Jjerfore  sey]?  Crist,  /  it^eve  ^ou  a  newe  maunde- 
rneni pat  y  love  togedere  as  I  have  loved  "^ow, 

pe  secunde  partie  of  J?is  Pater  Noster  is  yordeyned  of  God 
for  ]?e  infirmite  of  man,  as  j?e  firste  perteynej?  to  J)e  worschepe' 
of  J?e  godhede ;  and  it  conteynej?  ]?re  peticiouns,  and  ]?ese,  wiJ? 
o]?er  foure,  make]?  sevene  axynges  in  ]?is  holy  prayer,  pe  firste 
of  J)es  foure  is  seyd  on  ])es  wordes.  Oure  echeday  bred  y/ous  to 
day,  pis  peticioun,  as  Seynt  Austyn  telle]?,  ry^tfulUche  is  un- 
derstonde  in  ]?re  maners.  Ferst  ]?at  ]?is  breed  betokene]?  oure 
sustinaunce,  and  alle  o]?er  sustinaunce,  and  alle  o])er  necessaryes 
nedeful  to  oure  body.  And  for  God  ^  made  alle  ]?ynges  to  help 
of  mankynde,  ]?erfore  we  scholde  axe  ]?es  ]?ynges  of  God  as 
wilfully che  for  oJ?er  as  for  ous  self;  and  ]?us  wi]?  goede  wille  and 
largenesse  of  herte  we  scholde  desyre  oure  ney^ebores  profy^t, 
as  we  wolde  ])at  hy  *  desired  oure.  And  ]?is  is  \t  remedye 
a^ens  ]?e  ^  cursed  covetyse.  And  for  man  nede]?  everyche  day 
bodilyche  sustinaunce,  ]?erfore  ]?ese  necessaries  may  well  be 
cleped  eche  dayes  breede.  Also  by  ]?is  breede,  in  ]?e  secunde 
manere,  ys  understonde  ]?e  lore  of  Godes  worde.  For  ry3t  as 
breede  save]?  a  mannes  herte,  and  make]?  him  stronge  to 
bodylyche  travayle,  so  Jje  worde  of  God  make]?  saad  a  mannes 


The  first 
petition  of  the 
second  part. 


1  for  the  body  that  is  corrupt,  EE. 
3  From  EE;  om.  DD.  ^  he,  EE. 


2  So  in  EE ;  seint^,  DD. 
5  om.  EE. 


io6 


WrCLIF'S  WORKS. 


soule  in  jje  Holy  Gost,  and  stronge  to  worche  after  ]?e  lore  ]?erof. 
And  ])is  breed  is  more  nedeful  ))an  J^at  o]?er  firste  breed,  as  }>e 
soule  of  man  is  worjjyere  ]?an  his  body.  For  whanne  ])e  body 
ly]?  stynkyng  in  Jje  grave,  Jeanne  ]?e  soule  is  parfy^tlyche  yclensed 
fro  synne,  and  joye]>  in  blisse  of  Jesus  Crist  here  spouse.  And 
))U9  yf,  ]?urghe  necligence  of  oure  byschopes  and  prelat^,  and 
o]3er  false  techers  Jjat  be]?  in  holy  Churche,  Jje  tru|)e  of  Godes 
word  be  nou^t  ysowe  in  \e  peple,  praye  we  Jesus  Crist  byschepe 
of  oure  soule,  }>at  he  ordeyne  prechours  in  ]?e  peple  to  wame 
hem  of  synne,  and  telle  hem  Jje  tru]?e  of  God.  And  he  J^at 
enspiryde  J?e  prophetes  wi]>  kunnyng  and  wysdome,  and  tau^te 
}>e  apostles  ]?e  weye  of  al  truj?e,  ly^te  oure  hertes  wi]?  under- 
stondyng  of  his  lore,  and  graunte  ous  grace  to  worche  }>eraften 
And  specialiche,  for  ous  nede}>  eche  day  ])is  breede,  ))erfore 
pray  we  mekelyche,  Oure  eche  dayes  breed  ^yve  ous  to-day. 
On  ])e  j^rydde  manere,  by  J)is  eche  dayes  breed  is  understonde  fe 
sacrament,  verray  Godes  body  in  forme  of  breed,  ]?e  whiche  was 
ybore  of  \e  mayde  Marye,  and  suifrede  harde  payne  and  de]> 
upon  ))e  croys,  to  delyvere  man  fro  payne  and  de)?  wijjouten 
ende.  And  ]>erfore  Seynt  Austyn  seyj>,  J)at  yf  we  have  resceyved 
oure  Creatour  dayes  of  oure  lyf,  ous  nede]?  to  have  |)is  byleve, 
and  so  every  day  resceyve  God,  and  ])us  every  day  to  praye, 
Oure  eche  dayes  breed  ^eve  ous  to  day. 

pe  secunde  peticioun  of  ]?is  secunde  part  of  ]?is  Pater  Noster 
is  seyd  on  ]?es  wordes,  For^eve  ous  oure  defies  as  weforyvep  oure 
detioures.  By  )?ese  wytty  wordes  of  oure  Lord  Jesus  Crist,  mowe 
malicious  men  and  vengeable  wrecches  knowe  Jjat  ])ey  be]?  in  ]?e 
weye  to  helleward,  as  longe  as  \ej  dwelle))  in  here  cursede 
malice.  For  by  J)es  dettes  be]?  understonde  ]?e  synnes  a^ens 
God ;  and  so  every che  day  ous  nede]?  to  praye  God  for^eve- 
nesse  of  oure  synnes.  And  Crist  teche]?  ous,  ]?at  we  schuUe 
praye  God  for^evenesse  on  ]?is  condicioun,  ]?at  we  for^eve  o]?ere. 
And  so,  yf  we  praye  God  to  for^eve  ous  oure  synnes  as  we 
for^eve  hem  j?at  trespasse}?  a^ens  ous,  and  ]?erto  holde  malice  in 
oure  herte,  we  be]?  oute  of  charite,  and  make]?  oure  synnes  more 
grevous  byfore  God,  and  axe]?  verray  vengeaunce  to  ous  self  of 
God  ]?e  hye  Justice.  And  ]jerfore  teche]?  Crist  and  sey]?,  Bot 
yf  5e  wolle  for^eve  oJ)er  men  ];e  trespasse  ]?at  ]?ey  have  trespassed 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC. 


107 


to  30W,  ne  my  Fader  of  hevene  shal  nou^t  for^eve  to  50W  ^oure 
synnes.  perfore  God  byddej?  ous  to  putte  awey  al  malice  of 
oure  hertes,  J?at  we  may  be  ysaved.  Lo  J)e  goednesse  of  God  I 
how  it  ous  to  penaunce  drawej),  and  teche]?  ous  to  flee  slou]?e 
for  to  turne  to  him.  And  ]?erfore  techej?  jje  bouke  of  Wysdom,- 
fat  we  scholde  nou^t  tarye  to  be  yturned  to  God ;  for  yf  we  do, 
we  sjTineJ?  in  sloujje  of  Godes  service, 

Lyft  up,  wrecches,  ))e  ey^e  of  joure  soules,  and  byholde}?  him 
J?at  no  spot  of  synne  was  ynne,  what  payne  he  sufifrede  for 
synne  of  man.  He  swatte  water  and  blood,  to  wassche  )?e  of 
synne ;  he  was  ybounde  and  ybete  wij)  scourges,  j)e  blod  ren- 
nyng  adoun  by  his  sydes,  ]>at  J?ou  scholdest  kepe  \y  body  clene 
in  his  service ;  he  was  corouned  wi]?  scharpe  J?ornes,  J)at  J?ou 
scholdest  j?enke  on  him  and  flee  alle  cursede  malice ;  he  was 
nayled  to  ]?e  croys  wij?  scharpe  nayles  ]?urghe  honden  and  feet, 
and  ystonge  to  }?e  herte  wij^e  a  scharpe  spere,  ]?at  alle  })yne  fyve 
wyttes  scholde  be  yreuled  after  him,  havynge  mynde  on  Jje  fyve 
precious  woundes  ])at  he  sufi'rede  for  man.  And  ry^t  in  al  ]?is 
grete  payne  ])is  innocente  prayde  for  his  enemy s  to  his  Fader, 
and  seyde,  Fader,  for3eve  hem  ])is  gylt,  for  ]?ey  wytej)  nou3t  what 
]?ey  doo]?.  Lat  ]>is  sterye  ^  ^owre  hertes  to  putte  awey  sloujje, 
and  to  serve  God  wiJ)  verrey  busynesse,  to  worche  after  his 
lawe,  and  so  mekelyche  praye  oure  Fader  to  for^eve  ous  oure 
trespasses,  as  we  for^evej?  oure  trespassours. 

pe  frydde  peticioun  of  jje  secunde  part  of  j?is  ^  holy  praier 
folwe]?  in  }?ese  wordes :  And  lede  ous  nou:^i  into  temptacton.  By 
jjese  wytty  wordes  may  we  lerne,  ]?at  \q  devel  tempte])  men  evere 
to  an  yvel  ende,  and  God  temptede  nevere  man  bot  to  a  goed 
ende ;  for  j?us  we  redej?  ]?at  he  temptede  Abraham,  and  it  was 
aritted  ^  to  him  into  ry^twysnesse.  Bot  J)e  devel  temptede  Crist, 
to  make  him  to  synne  in  glotenye  and  veynglorie  and  coveytyse. 
And  so  Crist  techej?  ous  nou^t  to  praye  j)at  we  be  nou^t 
ytempted  of  j)e  fende,  syj?j)e  j?at  temptacion  of  ]?e  fende  profyte]? 
muche,  yf  it  be  wiJ?stonde,  For,  as  Seynt  Jame  sey]?,  ]?at  man 
is  blessed  J?at  suffre]?  temptacion  for  whanne  he  schal  be  preyyd, 
or  whanne  J^at  he  is  prevyd,  he  schal  take  J^e  coroune  of  lyf  J^at 


^  stere,  EE. 


'  So  in  EE;  his,  DD, 


3  aretdd,  EE. 


Ecclas.  V.  8. 


James  L  is. 


io8 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS, 


2  Cor.  xil  7. 


Jer.  iv.4.(?) 


God  ha))  behey^t  to  hem  j>at  love]?  him.  And  ]jus  Seynt  Poul 
was  tempted  of  \q  synne  of  lecherye  ^,  wherefore  Jjryes  he  prayde 
God  )?at  he  my^te  be  delyvered  of  his  temptacioun.  And  God 
answerede  him  a^en,  My  grace  suffice})  to  ]?e.  And  he  himself 
knowelechej?  ]>at  J)is  temptacioun  was  nedeful,  laste  he  scholde 
have  had  vayn  glorie  of  \e  pryve  sy^tes  ])at  he  sawe,  whanne 
he  was  ravysched  into  jje  f>rydde  hevene.  perfore  praye  we 
nou^t  God  ]3at  we  be  nou3t  ytempted,  sy]?pe  it  is  so  profit- 
able, bot  praye  we  God  Jjat  we  be  nou^t  overcome,  and  j)at  he 
lede  ous  nou^t  into  temptacioun.  pat  man  is  yseyde  to  be  lad 
into  temptacioun,  }>at  ])urghe  his  wyckede  and  unrepentant  herte 
continuejje  ^  evere  in  his  wyckede  lyvyng,  and  so  is  overcome 
in  temptacioun.  And  ))us  it  is  to  be  understonde  ])at  God 
hardede  Pharaois  herte  for  fe  mysbyleve  ]?at  he  hadde  to  God, 
and  jje  malice  J>at  he  wrou^te  to  Godes  peple.  And  so,  as  we 
be]?  ytau^t  in  ])is  ojjer  prayere  and  axyng  to  destroye  sleu}>e  in 
]?e  service  of  God  in  verray  busynesse  of  herte,  to  knowe  his 
lore  and  worche  ]?erafter,  so  we  bej?  ytau^t  in  ]?is  peticioun  to 
destroye  glotenye  and  lecherye  wi]?  discrete  abstinence  and 
chastite  of  herte.  And  for  Jjes  two  bef>  synnus  of  ]?e  flesche, 
and  J?at  on  norysche]?  ]?at  o]?er,  is  ^  ]?e  more  perilous  yf  a  man  in 
him  falle.  perfore  praye  we  oure  Fader  J^at  he  lede  us  nou^t  into 
temptacioun,  ne  sufFre  ous  nou^t  to  be  overcome  in  ]?es  synnes, 
ne  in  none  o]?er.  For  yf  we  be]?,  oure  wyckede  lyvyng  and 
oure  wyckede  Jjou^tes  be]?  cause  ]?erof,  as  God  sey]?  by  Je^emye 
])e  prophete. 

pe  four]?e  peticioun  and  J?e  laste  of  ]?e  secunde  part  of  ]?e 
Pater  Noster  is  yseyd  in  )?is  manere  :  Bot  delyvere  ous  from  yvel. 
We  schulde  understonde  J?at  every  synne  is  yvel ;  and  so  of  alle 
synnes  ])at  be]?  yrekened  in  ]?is  praier  we  schuUe  praye  God  \2X 
he  delyvere  ous,  bo]?e  of  yvel  ]?at  we  do]?  in  ]?is  worlde  \;and  of 
yvel  of  payne  l?at  wyckede  men  schulle  have  onelyche  for  synne. 
For  payne  come]?  nevere  to  man  bot  because  of  synne.     And 

2  hitis^E'E,  3  So  inEE; 


1  So  in  EE ;  contey?ie]>,  DD. 
wordle,  DD. 

^  A  glance  at  the  commentary  of 
De  Lyra  will  show,  that  while  the 
Fathers  spoke  doubtfully  as  to  the 
exact    meaning    of    the    '  stimulus 


camis'  from  which  Paul  suffered, 
the  grosser  mediaeval  mind  inter- 
preted the  words  unhesitatingly  of 
the  temptation  of  sensuality. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC, 


109 


so  on  fyve  maneres  comej?  payne  for  synne.  Payne  come  to 
Crist  to  bigge  mannes  synne ;  and  payne  come])  to  dampnyde 
men  forto  venge  synne  in  ]?is  worlde;  and  payne  comeJ?  to 
Cristes  children  to  purge  hem  fro  synne ;  and  payne  come]?  to 
o})er  men  to  schewe  j^at  God  hate]?  synne,  and  to  kepe  hem  ])er- 
from;  and  payne  come]?  to  wycl^ede  men  to  punysche  hem 
evere  for  synne.  And  so,  as  God  is  ]?e  beste  ]?yng  in  ])e  worlde, 
so  synne  is  worse  ])an  any  o])er  ]?yng ;  and  J)us  men  scholde 
flee  synne  as  al  maner  of  yvel.  But  sithe  ^  synne  a^ens  ]?e  Holy 
Go  St  is  worst  of  alle  o])er,  for,  as  Crist  sey]?,  ]?at  schal  nou^t  be 
for^eve  in  J)is  worlde  ne  in  ]?at  o]?er  worlde,  ]?erfore  specialiche 
praye  we  God  to  delyvere  ous  from  }?is  yvel.  pat  man  synne]? 
a^ens  ]?e  Holy  Gost,  ]?at  to  his  lyves  ende  is  rebelle  a^ens  God, 
[and  so  dye]?e  in  dispeir,  and  go]7e  to  peyne  wi])eouten  ende.  And 
he  is  rebel  a5enes  God]  ^,  J?at  is  rebelle  a5enst  his  lore.  And  ]?er- 
fore  seij?e  Crist ^,  whoso  love]?  nou^t  me,  he  kepe]?  nou^t  my  word. 
And  ])us  everyche  man  ]?at  love]?  nou3t  Cristes  lore,  he  love)?  nou^t 
Jesus  Crist,  and  ]?us,  as  Seynt  Poul  sey]?,  he  is  acursed  of  God. 
And  ]?erfore  seyde  Crist  to  ]?e  Jewes  J?at  were  contrarie  to  his 
lore,  and  pursuede  him  for  tru5]?e,  ]?at  ]?ey  scholde  deye  in  here 
synnes.  And  so  ]?es  men  Jjat  contrarie]?  to  ]?e  gospel  and  to  ])e 
epistele,  and  wolde  lette  it  to  be  ypreched,  and  pursuwe  ]?e 
trewe  telleres  ]?erof,  love]?  nou^t  Crist,  and  j?us  ])ey  schulle  deye 
in  here  synne,  bot  yf  }>ey  amende  hem  whyle  ]?ey  have]?  tyme. 

Wei  we  wyte]?  ]?at  ]?e  scribes  and  ]?e  Pharyseus  and  ))e  princes 
of  ]?e  prestis,  in  Jesus  Cristes  tyme,  were  more  contrarious  to 
his  lore  ]?an  were  o]?ere  commune  peple ;  for  ]?orghe  ^  entyssyng 
of  hem  }?e  peple  cryde,  Do  him  on  ]?e  croos.  pe  scribes  were 
wyse  men  of  ]?e  lawe,  and  also  J?ey  were  \^  clergie  of  })e  Jewes. 
pe  Phariseus  were  men  of  religioun,  J?at  made  customs,  and 
kepte  hem  for  lawe ;  and  J?us  ]?ey  sette  more  by  here  lawes  J)at 
]?ey  hadde  maade,  ]?an  ]?ey  dude  by  ]?e  lawe  ]?at  God  jaf  to  hem 
and  to  ]?e  peple,  J?at  was  sufficient  to  be  reuled  by  ^  Bot  Jjus, 
under  colour  of  perfeccioun,  ]?ey  were  departed  in  customs,  in 
clo))3mgis,  and  in  many  o]?er  doyngis  fro  pe  commune  peple,  as 

^  So  in  EE  ;  DD  has  hy  synne.  2  -pj^g  passage  within  brackets  is 

from  EE  ;  om.  DD.  ^  These  three  words  are  from  EE.  *  From 

EE;  om.  DD.  ^  So  in  EE ;  DD  has  reuled  by  him. 


Sin  of  those 
who  obstruct 
the  preaching 
of  the  gospel ; 


they  are  com- 
pared to  the 
Scribes  and 
Pharisees. 


no 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


2  John  icx 


\e  maner  of  religious  is  nowe.  A  Pharise  is  as  mnche  for  to 
seye  as  departed  in  doynge;  j>ey  bere{>  here  names,  pes 
ypocrites  were  most  contrarie  to  Crist,  and  fe  peple  wrou^te 
muche  after  here  lore.  And  J?erfore  Crist,  as  ]?e  gospel  wyt- 
nessej?,  ey^te  tymes  seyde  wo  to  hem.  And  ones  ]?ey  reprevede 
Crist,  for  his  disciples  wesche  nou^t  here  hondes  whanne  Jjey 
scholde  eete,  as  here  custome  was ;  and  Crist  axede  hem,  why 
pey  breke  Godes  hestes  for  here  feynede  lawes.  Byholde  now 
wel  J)ese  condiciouns,  and  loke  where  men  do}>  after  hem  o]?er 
worse,  and  so  }?ou  schalt  yknowe  ])e  kynreden  of  jje  Phariseus. 
And  ]?es  fayners  of  holynesse  pursue  Crist  in  his  membres,  as 
fe  Phariseus  pur  suede  Crist  bodilyche.  And  yf  fey  seye  fat 
God  is  here  fader,  and  his  lawe  fey  kepe  and  here  reule  bof e, 
understonde  fat  Phariseus  breke  fe  lawe  fat  God  ^af  to  hem 
and  to  f e  peple,  for  here  feynede  reule  fat  hy  hemself  or- 
deynede.  And  f us,  yf  f es  ypocrites  seyef  fat  hy  ^  kepef  here 
reule  and  Godes  lawe  bof  e,  bot  ^  byholde  here  dedis.  For  f  e 
Jewes  seyde  to  Jesus  Crist,  fat  God  was  here  fader ;  bot  Crist 
answerede  hem  a3en,  fat  yf  God  hadde  be  here  fader,  fey 
scholde  have  yloved  him.  And  yf  fes  were  trewe  Cristene 
men,  fey  scholde  nou^t  pursue  Cristes  membres  for  prechynge 
of  f  e  gospel.  And  so  by  here  dedys  f  ou  schalt  knowe  hem,  and 
f  erfore  Crist  byddef  to  trowe  to  f  e  workes.  And  f  erfore  teche]> 
Seynt  Johan,  fat  whoso  bryngef  nou^t  f e  lore  of  Crist,  fou 
schalt  nou^t  to  him  seye,  Hayl,  in  confortyng  of  his  synne,  ne 
resceyve  him  into  f yn  hous,  for  yf  fou  do,  fou  art  partyner  of 
his  synne.  Praye  we  f erfore  herteliche  oiu*e  Fader,  fat  he 
delyvere  ous  from  yvel  of  Phariseis,  fat  is  synne  ajens  f e  Holy 
Gost,  and  ^yf  ous  grace  to  love  his  lore  in  herte,  and  to  werche 
f erafter  in  dede,  fat  we  may  come  to  him  in  blysse,  and  wonye 
wif  him  in  joye  wifoute  eny  ende.     Amen. 


tbei,  EE. 


2  om.  EE. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC. 


Ill 


V. 


AVE    MARIA. 


[This  tract  is  mentioned  by  Bale,  under  the  title  'Super  Salutatione 
Angelica/  It  also,  as  has  been  already  mentioned,  bears  the  name  of 
Wyclif  at  the  end,  in  the  Harleian  MS.,  2385.  If  written  by  the  reformer, 
which  seems  to  me  very  probable,  it  must  have  been  an  early  composition. 
The  language  used  respecting  indulgences  (p.  1 1 2)  is  less  trenchant  than  that 
wMch  he  was  accustomed  to  use  in  his  later  years,  and  the  general  tone  of 
the  composition  milder.  This  tract  is  found  along  with,  that  on  the  Pater 
Noster,  No.  Ill,  in  all  the  MSS.  which  contain  the  latter.] 

Mek  greten  comynli  oure  Ladi,  Goddis  Moder,  and  we  sup- 
posen  J)at  ])is  gretynge  save)?  many  men.  For  we  taken  as 
bileve  J)at  sche  is  blessid  in  hevene,  and  Crist  wol  do  at  hire 
praynge  among  alle  oj^ere  seyntis :  al  if  we  trowe  ])at  nei])er 
Crist  ne  sche  wole  do  for  men,  but  it  be  resonable,  and  men 
ben  worJ)i  to  ben  holpen.  And  so  many  men  folili  truste  to 
suche  praier  K 

In  Jjre  parties  comunli  )?is  preier  is  devyded.  pe  firste  part 
contejTie)?  wordis  of  Gabriel  whiche  he  seide  unto  oure  Ladi ; 

Hail,  ful  of  grace,  ]je  Lord  is  wi]?  jjee  : 

pe  secounde  part  been  wordis  ]?at  Elizabe]?  spak  to  hire, 
whanne  sche  seide ; 

Blessid  be  ))Ow  among  wymmen,  ^nd  blessid  be  \t  fruyt  of 
\\  wombe : 

pe  ]?ridde  part  ha])  two  wordis  encresid,  for  devocioun.  First 
men  seien,  Heil,  Marie,  Jjat  Gabriel  lefte  in  his  gretynge,  to 
teche  us  jjat  he  was  homli  and  knowen  wij?  J^is  ladi,  and  Jjerfore 
wolde  he  not  nemne  ])is  name  of  Marie,     pe  secounde  word 

a  Y  has  here  'And^so  mow  men  truste  to  be  holpyn  fully  in  suche 
prayer,'  which  completely  alters  the  sense. 


ti^  WFCLIF'S  WORKS, 

is  Jesus,  added  to  ElizabeJ?is  wordis;  and  \is>  word  lefte  ]?e 
gospeler,  to  teche  ]?at  Marie  hadde  but  a  ^  childe,  and  ]jis  child 
was  Jesus,  J)at  is  Savyour  of  mankynde ;  but  ]?is  ful  longe  after 
])at  oure  Ladi  was  greet  ])us.  pe  firste  word,  ]?at  is  Ave,  re- 
versi]?  J)e  name  of  Eva,  to  teche  us  J)at  oure  Ladi  contrariede 
Eve  in  lyvynge.  For  as  Adam  and  Eve  weren  cause  of  damp- 
nacioun  of  mankynde,  so  Jesus  and  Marie  ben  cause  of  mannis 
salvacioun.  pe  secounde  word  of  J)e  aungel  sei]?,  oure  Ladi 
was  ful  of  grace.  And  man  may  be  ful  of  grace  on  ))re  maneris 
bi  Godis  lawe.  First  of  himsilf,  as  Crist  was  \e  firste  quyke 
well  of  grace,  for  of  Crist  spronge  grace  unto  alle  men  after 
him.  And  oure  Ladi  was  ful  of  grace  as  a  stronde  ful  of  water, 
and  5af  grace  plentenousli  bo]?e  to  oj^ere  men  and  wymmen. 
Seynt  Stevene  was  ful  of  grace,  ]?at  suffride  to  his  lyves  eende 
for  to  bringe  himsilf  to  blisse ;  and  so  ben  manye  o)?ere  seintes. 
And  so  God  is  wi]?  alle  creaturis,  but  speciali  wi]?  men  )>at  schal 
be  saved,  but  moore  specialli  w\\  \q  chaumbre  of  his  manhod, 
]?at  was  oure  Ladi  Marie.  But  bojje  ]?e  aungel  and  ElizabeJ? 
seyn  ]?at  oure  Ladi  is  blessid  amonges  alle  wymmen  ]?at  ben, 
for  gendrure  of  such  a  child.  And  so  ])e  bigynnynge  and  j^e 
endynge  schulde  be  blessid  of  Jesus,  ])at  is  fruyt  of  ]?e  wombe 
of  oure  Ladi  Seinte  Marie. 

pe  ])ridde  part  of  ])is  gretynge  addij)  to  two  wordis  to  Jje 
gospel,  ]?at  ben  Marie  and  Jesus,  and  ben  two  devoute  wordis. 
But,  for  it  is  hard  men  to  grounde  hem,  si]?)>e  Goddis  lawe  sei]> 
Jjat  men  schulden  not  upon  greet  peyne  adde  unto  Goddis 
word;  it  is  seid  J^at  ))e  pope  ^ivej?  greet  pardoun  to  men  J>at 
adden  j^es  wordis.  And  bi  }>e  same  skyle  J?at  men  schulden 
trust  to  any  pardoun  *men  schuld  truste  to  ])is  pardoun*^, 
be  it  foure  score  dayes  or  moore.  And  as  ^  J^e  pope  may  ^ive 
pardoun  bi  addinge  of  ])es  two  wordis,  so  ^  maye  he  adde  ojjere 
mo,  and  wij>drawe,  as  him  likij?,  and  so  turne  Goddis  lawe  into 
lawe  of  Antecrist.  0]?ir  mooten  men  graunte  ]?is  weie,  or  seie 
j)at  ])is  was  yvel  doun,  or  seie  J?at  heer  was  first  a  defaute,  kep 
imto  popis  to  amende.  And  ]?erfor  ])enken  many  men  J?at  ]?o 
wordis  of  fe  gospel  weren  wiseli  sette  in  fe  gospel  wijjouten 

^  one,  Y.  ^  The  words  between  asterisks  are  from  Y ;  om.  V. 

3  From  Y ;  om.  V. 

WYCLIF. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC, 

any  variynge.  And  many  men  ]?enken  over, — if  suche  pardoun 
mi3te  be  grauntid  li^tli  wi]?  lasse  travail,  hit  schulde  be  grauntid 
generalli  mito  men  J^at  devoutli  seiden  ])es  names.  And  so 
my3te  pardoun  be  geten,  to  seie  eche  day  our  Ladi  sauter,  ^he, 
ten  J?ousand  ^eeris  in  o  ^ere  ^.  Truste  we  unto  wordis  of  )je 
gospel,  and  worschipe  we  Jesus  and  Marie  wij?  alle  oure  mi^t. 

1  Soin  Y;  V  has  Jcy. 


113 


— :<N«' 


WORKS.      VOL.   III. 


114 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


The  three 
creeds. 


The  Apostles' 
Creed  lias 
three  parts. 


VI,  VII,  VI 1 1. 

[The  three  short  pieces  which  follow,  and  which  are  included  by  Dr. 
Shirley  under  the  heading  of  Speculum  Vitae  Christianas,  are  of  little  im- 
portance. That  on  the  Apostles'  Creed  is  attributed  to  Wyclif  by  Bale, 
under  the  title  *  In  symbolum  fidei.'  It  certainly  gives  indication  of  Lollard 
sentiments.  The  two  other  short  pieces  follow  Tract  VI.  in  the  Lambeth 
MS.  (Y),  but  are  otherwise,  apparently,  unknown.  The  text  of  all  three  is 
founded  on  a  transcript  from  the  Lambeth  MS.] 

VI 

[ON   THE  APOSTLES'   CREED.] 

Htt  ys  soj)  ])at  beleve  is  ground  of  alle  vertues,  and  ferfore 
eche  Cristyn  man  schulde  be  sad  in  beleve.  per  be  )?re 
credys  in  J)e  Chirche, — crede  of  J?e  Apostelys,  and  crede  of 
])e  Chyrche,  and  crede  of  Attanasy,  Jjat  was  a  gret  doctour. 
But  of  J?efyrste  crede  schulde  Cristyn  men  speke,  flfor  yt  is  more 
comyn  and  more  schortyr  ])an  eny  ojjer.  Ne  bysy  we  us  nat 
what  J)e  ^  apostyl  made,  ne  what  party  of  ]?is  holy  crede,  and 
whan  )je  apostelys  gaderyd  yt ;  iFor  oure  beleve  techis  us  }?at 
God  ordeynyd  hyt  al,  and  bad  ))at  men  schuld  cun  hyt,  and 
teche  yt  to  o)>er.  And  ^if  prelatys  faylyn  in  ])is,  Christ  seyde 
|?at  stonys  schulde  cry;  and  secler  lordys  schuld,  in  defawte 
of  prelatys,  lerne  and  preche  ]?e  law  of  God  in  here  modyr 
tonge.  Ne  study  we  nat  how  many  partyes  ben  in  J?is  holy 
crede;  ifor  soJ)  it  is  J>at  alle  l?ese  partyes  ben  conteynyd  in  fre. 
And  herfore  men  seyn  ]>rys,  ]?at  ]?ey  trow  in  God.  Ffyrst  )?ey 
trow  in  ]je  Ffadyr,  for  he  ys  fyrst  persone;  aftyr  ))ey  trow  in 
Jesus  Crist,  be  dyvers  artyclys ;  and  sytj^e  ]?ey  trow  in  fe  Holy 
Gost.  And  eche  on  of  J?ese  Jjre  partyes  contenys  many  par- 
tyclys.    But  we  schul  wele  wyte,  Jjat  J^ese  thre  thyngys  ben  wel 

^  qu.  eche  ? 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC, 


115 


sotel  and  divers.  Trow  in  God,  and  to  God,  and  trow  God ; 
jjat  ys  ]je  leste.  pat  man  levys  in  God,  Jjat  clevys  to  hym  be 
charite ;  and  J)us  eche  man  ]jat  ys  in  hed  synne  is  owt  of 
his  beleve.  That  man  trowys  to  God,  ]?at  belevyj?  \2X  he  is 
trewe  and  ry^tful  in  al  })ynge  ]?at  he  sey]? ;  and  ]?us  do  unkende 
men,  Jjat  trow  not  in  hym.  pat  man  trowys  God,  ]?at  trowys 
})at  he  ys ;  and  so  do  develys  )?at  trow  not  in  hym. 

pe  fyrst  part  of  ]?is  crede  conteynys  ])re  articnlys.  Ffiirst  ]?at 
men  schulde  trow  in  fe  fyrst  Person,  J?at  ys  ]?e  Fadyr  of  hevyn 
and  power  of  God.  And  so  schulde  men  trowe  jjat  he  is 
almy^ty ;  so,  if  he  wyl  au^t  be  don,  he  dos  hit  whan  hym  lykys. 
And  so  ]?e  J)ridde  artycule  stondys  in  \\%  ]?at  he  made  of  no^t 
bojje  hev}ai  and  er]?e.  And  ^it  schul  men  trow  ]?at  Almy^ty  ys 
comen  to  ]?re  personys.  Almy^ty  ys  J>e  Fadyr,  almy^ty  ys  j^e 
Sone,  and  almy^ty  ys  ])e  Holy  Gost.  5it  schul  not  men  trowe 
jjat  ])ese  ben  ])re  almy5ty  goddys,  but  on  God  Almy^ty. 

The  secunde  part  of  ]?is  crede  begynnys  at  Jesus  Crist,  and 
towchis  xiiij  artyculis  fat  stondis  in  ordre.  Ffurst  men  schuld 
trow  in  Goddys  word,  or  his  Sone.  Aftyr  men  schuld  trow 
}>at  he  becom  man,  stondynge  his  godhed,  )?at  he  my^t  not  lese. 
The  J?ridde  tyme  we  schuld  trow,  ]?at  J)e  Fadyr  of  hevyn  has  but 
on  suche  sone,  evyn  wi)?  hym  in  kende,  and  }>is  ys  Jesus  oure 
Lord,  be  godhed  and  be  manhed,  sythen  he  made  us  of  no^t, 
and  bow^t  us  fro  synne.  The  iiij  articule  of  ]?is  parte  seys,  ])at 
Crist  was  conseyvyd  of  j^e  Holy  Gost,  nat  as  o})er  men  gete 
childryn  be  kynde ;  sethyn  J)is  person  ys  no  man,  but  ]?e  Holy 
Gost,  J)e  whyche  ys  lyf  be  sum  propyrte.  And  most  tokyn  of 
lyf  J)at  God  wold  schewe  to  man  was,  \2X  he  wold  take  oure 
kende,  and  become  oure  broj^er.  And  J^erfore  we  beleve  )jat  oure 
Lord  Jesus  was  conseyvyd  of  ]?e  Holy  Gost  wi|)Owte  mannys 
genderynge.  The  fyfte  tyme  we  schuld  beleve,  ))at  oure  Lord 
Jesus  was  born  of  ]?e  virgyn  Marie,  as  of  his  owne  modyr,  \2X 
was  ever  virgine  wijjowte  knowynge  of  man,  aljjow  Crist  tok 
of  hire  matere  of  hys  body.  And  sejjyn  sche  norischyd  hym 
withynne,  as  o})er  childyr  ar  norschid ;  but  he  went  owt  of  here 
body  be  myracle,  as  he  was  formyd.  The  vj  tyme  we  schul 
trowe,  J)at  aftyr  xxxij  ^er  he  suffrid  hard  passioun,  undtr  Pounce 
Pilate,  for  to  by  mankynd  and  mayntene  trew))e.     And  so  he 

I  2 


The  first  part. 


The  second 
part. 


ii6 


The  third  part. 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 

was  don  on  J?e  cros,  and  aftyr  ded  and  beryyd.  Sethen  his  sowle 
went  to  helle,  and  toke  owt  J>e  sowlys  ])at  he  ordeynyd  to  save 
before  }?is  world  was  made.  And  sethyn,  upon  J)e  thrydde  day, 
his  sowle  com  to  his  body,  and  quykyd  hyt  as  beforn,  and  ros 
owt  of  ]?e  sepulcre.  And  sethyn,  whan  he  hadde  efte  tyme 
schewyd  to  his  discipulis  his  resurreccioun,  he  stey^  up  to 
hevyn  as  J?ey  saw  opunly.  And  l?er  he  syttys  now,  in  best 
sete  |)at  may  acorde  to  man,  an[d]  J?at  ys  callyd  ]?e  ry^t  syde 
of  God  )?e  Fadyr.  And  at  })e  laste  he  schal  come  doun  here 
to  man,  and  jugge  sum  to  blysse  and  ojjer  to  helle,  for  ever- 
more to  be  ])ere  withoutyn  dwellynge  here. 

The  thrydde  part  of  ]>is  crede  begynnys  at  J?e  Holy  Gost,  in 
wham  we  schul  trow,  sethyn  J?at  he  ys  God.  And  vj  articulis 
ben  knyt  to  ])is  part  of  j)e  crede.  Ffurst  we  schul  trow  fat  j?er 
ys  general  chirche  of  angelys  and  seyntys  in  hevyn,  and  of  alle 
j?at  schul  be  savyd;  and  J>is,  aftyr  ]?e  day  of  dom,  schal  be 
withouten  synne  with  here  spowse  in  endles  joye,  and  iche  on 
have  joye  of  ojjer.  And  no  man  here  in  erjje  ys  parte  of  ])is 
chirche,  but  if  he  come  to  hevyn  be  his  holy  lyvynge.  And 
J?us  men  lakkys  knowynge  whej^er  ])ey  ben  partyes  of  holy 
Chirche,  ffor  >ey  schuld  nat  boste  of  heynes  in  here  prelacy. 
But  j?ey  mot  leve  aftyr  Crist  ^yf  ]?ey  schul  be  savyd ;  ffor  J?us 
techis  oure  beleve,  however  Antecrist  werke.  And  so  fis 
Chirche  has  Jjre  statys  be  processe  of  tyme.  Ffyrst  he  wandrys 
here  in  erj?e,  and  sethen  he  slepys  in  purgatory,  and  aftyr  he 
restys  in  blysse  of  Crist  ])at  ys  here  spowse.  And  so,  as  sum 
men  Jjynke^  ])ese  popys  ne  jjese  prelatys  ar  nat  part  of  holy 
Chirche,  but  of  synagoge;  sethen  ])ey  mot  leve  aftyr  Crist  ^if  }?ey 
schul  be  savyd.  pus  techis  oure  beleve,  howevyr  Antecrist 
grucchis.  And  schul  we  trowe  so\  J?at  eche  parte  ofjjis  Chyrche 
commovys  and  helpis  othir,  bo]?e  here  and  in  hevyn.  But  in 
hevyn  l^ey  schul  jn  reste  have  joye  of  here  blysse.  And  so 
schul  we  trow,  J>at  ech  part  of  ])ys  Chirche  schal  have  ful  remis- 
sioun  of  synne  j?at  yt  has  don  in  body  and  in  sowle,  with  glorye 
in  ham  bothe,  and  so  evyr  lyve  in  blysse.     Amen. 

^  read,  so  scbul  we  trowe. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC. 


117 


VII. 
[ON  THE  FIVE   OUTER  WITS.]. 

pE  be-hovys  to  know  \y  fyve  ^yttys,  })e  uttyr  and  J?e  ynnyr, 
and  to  spend  hem  in  good  use,  and  in  }?e  lovynge  of  God.  pe 
fyrst  ys  sy^t  of  eye ;  ]?e  to))er  heryng  of  ere ;  ])e  Jjyrd  tast  of 
mow)) ;  fe  fer]?e  smellynge  of  nese ;  ]?e  fyfte  handlynge  or 
towchyng  of  membris.  Kepe  so  \y  sy3t,  ])at  J)OU  se  no])yng 
\2X  ys  not  leful  to  se,  or  may  harme  \y  sowle.  And  kepe  J>y 
heryng  so  l?at  ]?ow  here  no  evyl  speche,  or  J^ynge  \2X  is  nat 
honeste  ne  profitable.  And  kepe  so  J?y  tast,  ]?at  ]?ou  swolow 
no  more  ])an  ys  nede,  or  myster^  to  ]?y  bodily  sustynaunce. 
And  kepe  so  \y  smellyng,  ])at  yt  make  J)e  nat  to  ete  over  moche, 
ne  delite  not  over  mekyl  in  smellyng;  ne  ugge  J)Ou  not  wij> 
seknesse  of  ])yn  evyn  CrisT;yn.  And  kepe  so  \j  towchyng, 
J?at  }?ou  wil^draw  J?e  fro  schameful  towchynge,  or  handlyng  bare 
of  man  or  of  womman.  Handyl  Jjou  not  unhonestly  Jjyself, 
ne  noon  oj^er,  ne  let  non  o\^x  towche  J)e  unhonestly.  Ffor  ^if 
\j  flesche  negh^e  ony  towchinge  unclene,  ])0u  may  not  J^e  dede 
eschewe. 


VIII. 

[ON  THE  FIVE  INNER  WITS.] 

pESE  ben  also  j>y  fyve  inwyttys ;  Wyl,  Resoun,  Mynd,  Yma- 
ginacioun,  and  Thogth.  Lok  j^at  j?y  wyl  be  good  and  holy, 
and  loke  ]>at  jjy  resoun  rewle  ]?e,  and  nat  }>y  fleschly  lust ;  and 
loke  ])at  J>y  mynde  be  good  and  honest  And  lok  Jjyn  ymagy- 
nacion  be  spedynge  in  lovynge  of  God,  and  not  be  set  to  harm 
or  schame ;  and  loke  \j  thow^t  be  groundyd  in  J?e  joy  of  hevyn. 
And  drede  ))e  peyne  of  helle,  and  ))ynk  not  over  mekyl  in  J?e 
vanite  of  })e  world,  but  }>ynk  devowtly  on  )?e  passion  of  Crist, 

^  read,  mynisteris. 


Sight,  hearing, 
taste,  smell, 
touch. 


Will,  reason, 
mind,  imagina- 
tion, thought. 


ii8 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


in  wo  and  in  wele,  and  he  schal  helpe  \q  in  al  \y  nede.  These 
be  J?e  wittys  )?e  whiche  God  has  gevyn  us  to  know  hym  wij?, 
and  to  rewle  us  thorw^  wysdam,  and  leve  ^  holy  lyf,  as  good 
servauntys  of  God  schuld  do,  and  eschewe  perelys  of  synne, 
and  for  to  come  to  Jjat  joye  ]?at  God  has  ordeynyd  us  to  be 
made  fore,  to  \q  wiche  joy  he  us  brynge,  J)at  deyde  for  us  up 
on  )?e  rode.    Amen. 

^  read,  lyve. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC. 


119 


IX. 


[ON  THE  SEVEN  DEADLY  SINS.] 


[The  evidence  connecting  the  following  tract  with  Wyclif  may  be 
deemed  tolerably  satisfactory.  Besides  being  mentioned  by  Bale,  imder 
the  title  oiBe  Peccatis  fugiendis,  it  is  the  first  tract  in  a  small  MS.  voliune 
(Bodl.  647),  nearly  ail  the  contents  of  which  are  known  or  reputed  to 
be  by  Wyclif.  The  Bodleian  Library  has  a  second  copy  of  it  (Douce 
273),  and  there  is  a  third  at  DubUn  (Trin.  CoU.  Dubl.  c.  v.  6).  The  text 
is  based  on  Bodl.  647,  a  MS.  written  in  the  West  Midland  dialect. 
The  internal  evidence  proves  the  tract  to  be  of  Lollard  origin,  but  no  more. 
Yet  the  passage  about  the  right  to  resume  church  endowments  if  misused, 
(p.  154),  sounds  like  the  voice  of  Wyclif ;  as  does  also  the  rough  humour 
in  the  comparison  (p.  139)  of  the  feats  of  a  knight  to  those  of  a  hangman. 
The  mention  of  the  romance  of  the  '  batel  of  Troye,'  were  it  necessary  to 
understand  it  of  the  version  made  by  Lydgate,  would  indeed  fix  the  date 
of  the  composition  to  a  period  subsequent  to  Wyclif  s  death.  But,  not  to 
speak  of  the  old  and  well-known  French  version  of  Guido  delle  Colonne, 
which  had  been  long  in  circulation,  an  English  metrical  version  is  known 
to  have  been  made  by  John  Barbour,  author  of  the  Brus,  See  Morley*s 
English  Writers,  vol.  ii,  part  i,  p.  432.] 


SYNNE   IS    FOR   TO   DREDE^ 
Cap.  I. 

SiJ)  byleve  teches  us  ]>at  everiche  yvel  is  ou]?er  synne  or 
comes  of  synne,  synne  schulde  be  fled,  as  al  maner  of  yvel. 
And  siJ?  no  ]?ing  is  fled  by  wisdome  of  mon,  bot  if  jjo  harme 
of  ]?at  j)ing  be  knowen,  everiche  trew  mon  schulde  wel  knowe 

^  These  words  appear  as  a  sort  of  heading  to  the  treatise  in  the 
Bodleian  MS. 


The  deadliness 
of  sin. 


I30 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


Five  forms  of 
punishment 
for  sin. 


I  John  ii.  i6. 


The  sin  against 
the  Holy 
Ghost. 


synne,  and  so  schulde  he  knowe  \o  frut  ])at  buriones  ])erof. 
Al  maner  of  yvel  is  ouJ?er  synne,  or  elles  peyne,  ])at  comes  bot 
of  synne.  And  so  in  fyve  maners  comes  peyne  for  synne. 
Peyne  come  to  Crist  for  to  bye  synne,  and  peyne  comes  to 
dampned  men  for  to  venge  synne.  Peyne  comes  to  Gods 
childer  to  purge  hom  of  synne,  and  peyne  comes  to  mony  men 
to  kepe  hom  fro  synne,  and  peyne  comes  to  o]?er  men  to 
schewe  Jjat  God  hatis  synne.  And  so,  as  God  is  J^e  beste  ])ing 
in  J)0  world,  so  is  synne  J)0  worste  j^ing  in  ])0  world.  And  so, 
where  alle  oj^er  ]?ingis  ben  Gods  creatures,  synne  is  made  wi]?- 
oute  God,  as  Seynt  Jon  seis.  So  ]?at  synne  is  clepid  noght  for 
]?is  enchesoun;  ffor  noJ?ing  is  creature  in  ]?at  he  synnes,  and 
so  nou]?er  fende  ne  mon  is  yvel  bot  for  synne ;  and  so  synne 
is  worse  ])en  ony  creature ;  and  God  hatis  more  synne  J?en  any 
oj^er  }?ing.  Synne  is  so  yvel,  ]>at  for  al  ])is  world  a  mon  schulde 
not  synne,  ^e,  li^tly  in  his  J^o^t ;  ne  God  may  not  bidde  a  mon 
for  his  godenesse  do  synne;  ne  synne  may  not  serve  God, 
al)?of  hit  profite.  Ne  synne  of  oure  first  fadir  my^t  not  be  bo^t 
bot  by  God  and  mon,  Jjat  is  above  aungel.  If  ]?ou  fieest  de]? 
and  oJ?er  maner  peynes,  fle  ])0U  more  synne,  for  hit  is  myche 
worse.  For  peyne  is  gode  medicyne  ])at  Crist  hymself  toke 
to  heele  mon  of  synne,  for  savyng  of  his  right.  Ffor  rightwisenes 
of  God  may  not  suffer  synne,  but  if  he  punysche  hit,  even  affter 
J)0  malice.  And  ])is  is  cause  ]?at  \o  peyne  }>at  Crist  suflferd  for 
mon  mot  be  principal  cause  to  make  ase]>  for  synne.  God 
may  suffer  peyne,  but  he  may  not  synne,  ne  he  may  not  suffer 
synne,  but  in  his  owne  creature  peyne  is  joyned  ]?erwi]>.  For 
elles  al  were  noght,  and  synne  were  more  J>an  God,  and  mayster 
owver  his  right.  And  so  \o  worste  servise  ]>at  a  mon  may  have 
is  servise  to  synne,  for  }>o  Lord  is  worste. 

If  a  mon  synne  ageyne  ])0  Holy  Gost,  hit  may  not  be  for- 
gyven,  more  Jjen  synne  of  \o  fende.  pat  mon  synnes  ageyne 
]?o  Holy  Gost,  )>at  to  his  lyves  ende  is  rebel  ageynes  God ;  and 
]?is  mon  mot  have  synne  wi]?outen  ende,  sij?  in  J^at  ojjer  world 
is  no  medeful  penaunce.  Synne  is  calde  dedly,  for  hit  bringes 
in  de]?  boJ?e  to  body  and  to  soule  wi]?outen  any  ende;  and 
synne  is  cald  venyal,  for  Gods  Son  forgyves  hit.  Men  schulden 
be  war  wij?  al  synne,  for  perel  j?erof,  sij)  Jjei  knowen  not  dedly 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC. 


\%i 


synne  fro  venyal,  as  fei  witten  nevere  whe]>er  ]>is  synne  schal 
evere  have  ende,  or  ])at  J?is  mon  schal  be  dampned  for  hardyng 
in  his  synne. 

Cap.  II. 

Al  maner  of  synne  ]?at  comes  to  mon  is  of  sum  enemye 
contrarye  to  his  soule.  po  fende,  and  \o  worlde,  and  monnis 
owne  flesche,  stiren  hym  to  coveyte  ageynes  Gods  wille.  And 
so  ich  one  of  ])es  haves  thre  synnes,  ffor  ich  one  takes  at  other, 
and  Jjese  maken  seven.  Pride,  envye,  and  wrath  ben  synnes 
of  \o  fende ;  wrathe,  slouthe,  and  avarice  ben  synnes  of  \o 
world ;  avarice,  and  gloter}^e,  and  \o  synne  of  lechorye,  ben 
synnes  of  \o  flesche.  And  ]?us  we  haven  seven,  and  ]?ese  seven 
cisters  ben  so  knytted  togedir,  J)at  one  bringes  in  alle  J?o  o]?er 
cisters.     Bot  of  \o  synne  of  pride  is  first  for  to  speke. 

Pride  is  wicked  liif  of  a  monnis  hyenesse.  As  God  askes 
ordir  in  al  J)is  worlde,  so  everich  part  of  J>is  worlde  ordeynes 
he  to  serve  hym  in  a  gode  mesure,  acordyng  wij)  ano};er.  And 
if  mon  or  aungel  passe  ]>is  mesure,  J?en  he  synnes  in  pride 
ageynes  his  God.  And  so  hit  is  seide  J?at  pride  bygan  wij?  first 
aungel  J?at  wolde  be  even  wi]?  God ;  not  {)at  ne  Lucifer  wiste 
})at  God  moste  be  above  hym,  bot  he  coveyted  an  ordir  in 
servise  of  God  whiche  j?at  God  wolde  not,  bot  oJ?er  meke 
servise.  And  so  hit  semes  J>at  iche  mon  synnes  in  pride  in 
)?at  ])at  he  synnes  ageynes  his  God.  And  so  for  sex  causes 
falles  a  mon  in  pride.  Ffirst  for  hyenesse  fat  he  hafs  of  giftis 
of  grace ;  as  men  J?at  ben  ypocritis  hyen  hom  in  holynes,  and 
somme  men  hyen  hom  in  witte  J>at  God  haves  gyven  hom,  and 
sum  men  hyen  hom  in  giftis  of  kynde,  as  sum  men  ben  proude 
of  bodily  strenght,  and  sum  men  ben  proude  of  bodily  bewte. 
Somme  men  ben  proude  of  godes  of  fortune,  as  of  happe  Jjat 
hom  fallen,  or  richesse  of  )?is  worlde.  And  on  ]?o  sevent  maner 
may  a  mon  be  proude  by  alle  Jjese  causes,  or  mony  of  >ese 
togedir.  And  whenever  a  mon  loves  to  myche  his  owne  hye- 
nesse for  any  of  J?ese  giftis,  he  synnes  in  pride.  And  so  a 
proude  mon  mysusis  Gods  giftis,  when  he  Jjonkes  not  his  God 
mekely  for  hom.  Bot  sith  Seynt  Poul  seis,  and  byleve  teches 
us,  jjat  a  mon  haves  noght  but  ]?at  he  haves  of  God,  iche  mon 


The  seven  sins ; 
Pride  and 
Envy,  of  the 
devil ;  Sloth, 
of  the  world  ; 
Gluttony  and 
Lust,  of  the 
flesh;  Anger, 
botli  of  the 
devil  and  of  the 
world;  Covet- 
ousness,  both 
of  the  world 
and  of  the 
flesh. 


Definition  of 
Pride. 


Six  principal 
forms  of  pride. 


I'ZZ 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


Pride  of 
knowledge. 


shulde  mekely  serve  his  God  aftir  jjo  giftis  })at  he  hafs  of  hym. 
As  he  were  a  fole  worthy  to  be  scorned,  J>at  had  godes  of  men 
onely  to  serve  horn,  and  were  proud  of  Jjes  godes  in  ]?at  ]jat  he 
mysused  horn,  and  made  hymself  unworthy  for  to  use  ]?ese 
godes,  and  be  punischid  for  horn,  and  for  to  leese  horn.  And 
so  iche  proude  mon  hyes  hymself  for  \2X  ))at  he  schulde  have 
sorowe,  as  an  ypocrite  schulde  bisy  hymself  to  large  his  holynes. 
But  now  he  dos  J?o  contrarie,  for  he  feynes  hym  holy  by  mony 
fals  sygnes  j  and  ]?is  is  one  condicioun  of  J?o  fadir  of  falshed. 
And  by  ])is  ypocrisye  ben  mony  men  desseyved,  and  specialy 
by  falshed  of  prelatis  and  prestis.  And  falshed  is  ground  of 
schewyng  of  ]?is  synne;  ffor  iche  holy  mon  hafs  holynes  of 
God  to  profit  to  his  neghtbore  by  ]?e  wey  of  treuthe,  and  not 
for  to  gab  to  hym  veynly  by  his  falshed.  And  by  ]?is  fendes 
synne  ben  mony  men  disseyved. 

Cap.  III. 

Also  mony  men  ben  proude  of  hor  conyng;  ffor,  as  Seynt 
Poule  seis,  Science  blowes  men ;  ]?at  is  to  sey,  mony  for  conyng 
hyen  homself  to  myche,  and  bosten  by  pride.  On  two  maners 
may  men  synne  for  hor  conyng ;  as  somme  men  gy ven  hom  to 
conyng  of  monnis  science,  J)at  is  unperfite  to  regarde  of  o]?er, 
for  science  of  God  and  science  of  kynde  is  myche  more  perfit 
])en  crafft  made  of  mon.  And  ^itte  clerkes  and  seculeres  studyen 
in  monnis  lawe,  and  done  mony  wronges  for  mysuse  ])erof. 
Bot  for  ]jo  service  is  foule  in  hymself,  one  cister  of  pride,  J>at  is 
covetise,  is  taken  wij)  ]?is  science^  and  marres  \o  Chirche.  As 
laweres  for  hor  covetise  distourblen  myche  folk,  and  so  ]>ei 
synnen  ageyns  homself,  and  eke  ageyns  l?o  puple.  And  ]?us 
synnen  men  of  craftis  of  honde ;  for  wi|)  what  craft  J)at  a  mon 
may  most  wynne  richesse,  ]>at  gladlyest  he  uses,  and  leves 
Gods  science.  Bot  science  of  God  is  most  nedeful,  sith  iche 
mon  mot  nede  serve  his  God ;  and  science  of  God  techis  Gods 
wille.  And  no  mon  may  serve  a  lord,  bot  if  he  witte  his  wille, 
and  herfore  dyvynite  is  evere  more  nedeful.  In  J)0  state  of 
innocense  mon  schulde  have  coned  divinite,  and  in  J?o  state 
of  synne  mon  mot  nede  serve  God.  And  he  serves  hym  not 
wil,  but  ^if  he  kepe  his  comaundementis ;  bot  how  schulde  he 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC, 


\%2> 


kepe  horn,  bot  if  he  knewe  horn  ?  And  so  iche  mon  here  mot 
nede  con  divinite,  sonime  more  and  somme  lesse,  if  he  wil  be 
saved.  Ffor  in  \o  state  of  blis  schal  iche  mon  be  a  divyne, 
better  Jjen  any  mon  is  here,  for  )7erin  stondes  his  blis.  And  so, 
if  men  traveilen  wel  here  in  })is  service,  }?ei  ben  more  disposid 
to  con  hit  in  heven.  And  ^itte  ]?ese  wrecchid  craftis,  for  )?ei 
ben  more  wynnyng,  maken  men  more  proude  in  hit  and  in 
araye.  But  men  Jjat  schulden  be  professoures  of  science  of 
God  synnen  many  weies  aboute  ))is  science.  As  somme  men 
hiden  J^is  tresoure,  and  delen  hit  not  aboute ;  and  ^ette  \o  more 
]>at  hit  is  delid,  \o  more  hit  encresis.  And  J?is  is  myche  more 
synne  j^en  to  hyde  gold.  Somme  men  ]>er  ben,  professoures 
of  divinyte,  Jjat  feynen  lesyngis  by  lawes  of  men,  and  whan  jjei 
schulden  preche  Gods  lawe  to  \o  puple,  Jjei  tellen  lesynges,  or 
o]?er  fablis,  ]jat  ben  unpertynent  to  J?o  lawe  of  God.  And 
summe  men  done  avoutrye  wi])  \o  lawe  of  God,  and  turnen  hit 
oute  of  his  kynde,  to  plese  wij>  po  puple.  And  so  wij>  beg- 
gyng,  and  pride  of  hor  speche,  J?ei  sellen  Gods  worde,  as  who 
schulde  seUe  an  oxe.  Nere])oles  Crist  teches,  sij?  ]jat  his  science 
is  frely  gyven  to  him,  hit  schulde  be  frely  delid.  And,  for 
tellyng  of  Gods  lawe  schulde  moste  profit  his  Chirche,  \o 
fende  is  ful  bisye  to  lett  ]?is  gostly  profite. 

Cap.  IV. 

Bot  as  men  ben  proude  for  ^iftis  of  grace,  so  \€\  ben  proude 
of  ^iftis  of  kynde.  As  somme  men  ben  proude  of  strenght  of  hor 
body,  and  bo})e  men  and  wymmen  ben  proude  of  hor  bewte, 
and  somme  ben  proude  of  hor  grett  kynn.  But  generaly,  if 
]30u  wilt  fle  pride  in  ]?is,  )?enke  hou  fou  haves  borowid  al  J)is  of 
God,  and  he  hafs  lent  to  J?e  al  J)is  to  ]?is  use,  to  serve  hym  in 
mekenesse  aftir  J)ese  ^iftis.  And  if  )jou  kepe  J^is  reule,  what 
gode  evere  God  hafs  lente  j)e,  J?ou  kepis  ]?e  fro  pride,  as  aungels 
in  heven.  If  God  hafs  lante  })e  bodily  strenght,  kepe  hit  to 
his  servise,  and  not  to  \o  noye  of  ])i  neghtbore ;  and  so  ]?enke 
mekely,  be  J>ou  nevere  so  strong,  how  feble  J?at  ))OU  schall  be 
b)^ore  })at  J?ou  dye.  And  if  \o\x  be  proude  of  schappe  )>at  God 
hafs  gyven  ]?e,  Jjou  schulde  wil  knowe,  by  witte  ]?at  he  hafs 
lante  J>e,  fat  m  iche  ston,  or  other  foule  body,  is  as  feyr  schap  as 


Pride  founded 
on  natural 
gifts- 


124 


WYCLIF'S  WORKS. 


Rom.  XU.  2. 


any  ])at  Jjou  haves.  And  so  soche  men  )?at  boosen  hor  brestis, 
or  pynchen  hor  belyes,  to  make  horn  smale  wastes,  or  streynen 
hor  hosis  ^  to  schewe  hor  strong  legges,  semen  to  chalange  God 
of  giftes  J)at  he  hafs  gyven  hem,  and  amende  hym  in  his  crafFt  as 
if  he  fayled  J?erinne.  And  in  })is  pride  synnen  wymmen  in 
makyng  of  hor  bosis  ^,  and  generaly  in  atyre  of  hor  body ;  }?at 
comynly,  fro  \o  hede  to  \o  fot,  men  deformen  hor  body  by  hor 
foule  atyre,  as  pikes  of  schoone,  and  garlondes  of  hedes,  and 
tatering  of  clothes,  beren  opmi  wittenesse.  Al  maner  of  atyre 
}>at  comes  to  monnes  body  schulde  be  mesured  by  jjis  reule. 
If  he  wolde  fie  pride  wi]?  sorowe  and  mekenesse,  reulid  by 
resoun,  schulde  he  loke  what  atyre  wolde  do  profite  to  his  body, 
and  aftir  ])is  ende  gete  hym  his  garnementis  ^.  Mon  schulde 
]?enke  how  God  made  hym  in  \o  state  of  innocence  wi]?outen 
any  clothing,  as  aungels  or  bestis ;  and  bycause  of  his  synne 
J}is  ape  made  hym  clothing ;  and  }>is  *is  no  matir  of  pride  bot 
of  sorowe.  And  so  in  al  J?is  atire  schulde  resoun  reule  men, 
J?at  \€\  synned  not  in  pride  of  quantite  or  qualite ;  as  a  clerke 
or  a  frere  may  synne  by  pride  in  valew  of  his  clothis  and  large- 
nes  of  hom,  and  have  als  myche  pride  in  leefing  ^  ^  of  horn  as  a 
knyght  hafs  in  his  strayte  garnement ;  and  more  harm  Jjei  done 
in  waasting  of  Gods  gode.  And  nerejjoles  we  schulden  witte, 
])at  costily  dispenses  barmen  unto  pore  men  ageyn  rightwisnes. 
And  so  al  maner  of  pride  harmes  to  Cristis  Chirche.  And  if 
])0u  aske  of  proude  men  resoun  of  ])is,  jjese  apes  seyn  })at  suche 
atire  makes  hom  schapply,  and  ]?ei  mote  conferme  hom  to  \o 
worlde,  }»at  asken  ^  J)is.  But  Lord !  where  is  resoun  of  men  ]?at 
speken  \v&  1  Ffor  right  as  a  laste  schulde  saumple  a  schoo,  so 
schappe  of  body,  ]?at  hafs  God  schapen  mon,  schulde  saumple 
his  cletyng^,  als  myche  as  hit  helpes  hym.  And  Seynt  Poul 
biddes  us  ffle  as  folye  to  confourme  us  to  )?o  worlde,  sij)  hit  is 
oure  enemye. 


-  hoose,  BB. 
5  askis,  BB. 


^  boos2is,  BB. 
^  cle);>inge,  BB. 


^  I  cannot  understand  'leefing.' 
The  reading  of  the  Douce  MS.  is 
leesyjige,  which  perhaps  means  '  loos- 
ing '  or  'loosening  ;  *  the  lax  drapery- 


garmentis,  BB.  *  leesy^ig,  BB. 


of  the  priest  or  fiiar  being  contrasted 
with  the  close-fitting  attire  of  the 
knight. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC. 


125 


Cap.  V. 

Bot  as  anentis  fairnes  ^  of  a  monnis  body,  hit  is  right  veyne 
}mg,  if  hit  be  wil  soght,  sith  fayrnesse  wil  fade  wij?  wynde  and 
Sonne,  and  nowther  mon  ne  wommon  schulde  pryse  hym  of  his 
bewte,  if  he  fenke  wil  how  he  schal  be  deed.  Ffor  mon  when 
he  is  deed  is  mony  weyes  more  foule  ]?en  any  ojjer  caryone  of 
o)?er  dede  bestis.  Lord,  what  schulde  move  ]>e  to  be  proude  of 
]?is  fairnesse,  sith  hit  profites  not  to  Jjo  soule,  and  is  of  litel  last- 
yng  ?  And,  as  Seynt  Bernarde  seies  ^,  a  mon  while  he  lyves  is 
a  seek  ^  ful  of  drytt,  and  ]>3X  is  litel  bewte ;  so  if  al  ]>o  filthe  ]?at 
a  mon  haves  wi))inne  were  turned  outwarde,  hit  were  a  grett 
peyne  to  be  nye  such  a  mon,  bothe  to  hym  and  to  o]?er.  Herye 
we  mekely  J)is  Lord,  J^at  hydis  ])is  filthe. 

And  as  anentis  pride  of  monnis  kynn,  Adam  was  most  gentil 
mon  aftir  Jesus  Crist,  and  he  come  of  erthe,  as  oure  byleve 
teches.  And  so  iche  mon,  ^e,  Crist,  was  made  of  erthe,  and  so 
ben  wormes  and  monny  foule  bestis.  And  so  hit  is  a  folye,  a 
mon  to  be  proude  for  nobley  of  his  kynn,  for  alle  we  comen  of 
erthe.  And  comynly  gentil  men  and  hye  in  ]?o  worlde  ben 
syriful  men  as  o]?er  men  ben,  and  no  men  ben  more  bonde,  sith 
]>ei  serven  to  synne.  And  sith  synne  is  J?o  worst  ]>mg  and 
foulest  in  j)0  worlde,  no  bondage  is  more  ]>en  to  have  synne. 
And  si]>  oure  kynraden  was  synful,  and  so  bonde  to  ])0  fende, 
how  schulde  men  bot  schame  to  be  proude  of  hor  kynn  ?  If  we 
take  hede  to  stories  of  men,  lordes  of  I>o  worlde  by  trechorie 
and  raveyne  ben  comen  to  hor  lordschipps ;  and  J?is  makes  no 
gentil  mon ;  and  bondage  to  men,  ^if  a  mon  be  virtuouse,  makes 
a  mon  to  be  fre  to  God.  Ffor  ]>o  first  bondage  come  bot  of 
synne,  and  bondage  to  men  come  of  tyrauntrye ;  and  so  as  two 
brether  ben  bothe  iliche  noble,  so  alle  men  schulden  be  even 
gentil  in  kynde.  Have  we  nobley  of  oure  fader  and  moder,  ]?at 
ben  Jesus  Crist  and  his  spouse,  holy  Chirche ;  fibr  by  Jjis  noble 
kyn  we  schal  be  gentil  in  heven.  Off  )?is  kyn  we  schulden  have 
joye,  and  not  of  erthly  kyn ;  ffor  ]>ei  were  somtyme  beggers  or 
servauntis  to  fooHs.     And  herfore  Jesus  Crist  come  bot  of  pore 


^  So  in  BB ;  W  hasfarnesse. 

»  The  reference  is  perhaps  to  a 
sermon  of  St.  Bernard's  '  De  triplici 


2  sack,  BB. 


Pride  of 
beauty. 


genere    cogitationum 
Opera,  Paris,  1586. 


nostrarum.' 


126 


WYCLIF'S  WORKS, 


Pride  of  riches 
and  prosperity. 


kyn,  and  wolde  not  make  horn  riche  to  \o  worlde  bot  in  virtues. 
Ne  he  schamed  not  of  povert  of  his  kyn,  bot  taght  us  more  to 
be  glad  of  kjniraden  in  virtues ;  for  joye  is  of  suche  kynraden 
in  \o  blisse  of  heven.  Bot  nedders  and  wormes  ben  felowes 
to  dampned  men,  as  ]?ei  weren  felowes  to  thefes  lyvyng  here  in 
erthe.  And  so,  if  we  take  hede,  he  ])at  is  proude  of  his  kynn, 
he  hafs  pride  for  to  be  fer  fro  J>o  state  of  innocense;  and 
certis  ]}is  is  no  mater  of  pride. 

Cap.  VI. 

po  thridde  J)ing  jjat  moves  men  for  to  be  proude,  is  godes  of 
fortune,  as  riches  of  }}is  worlde.  And  as  havyng  of  soche  godes 
is  \o  lest  of  thre,  so  by  \o  leest  evydense  is  a  mon  proude ;  for 
richesse  by  fortune  falles  fro  a  mon,  as  by  theft  or  robrye,  or 
perilis  of  ]>o  see,  or  by  wastyng  of  ]?ingis  for  defaute  of  hom ; 
and  God  forbede  J^at  godenesse  passe  ]>us  fro  a  mon ;  as,  if  he 
serve  treuly  to  God  in  charite,  he  is  als  gode  pore  as  when  he 
was  riche.  And  sith  God  acountes  a  mon  aftir  ])at  he  is  gode, 
not  aftir  )>at  a  mon  is  riche  is  he  gode  to  God ;  ffor  ]?en  Crist 
and  his  apostils  were  no])ing  worth.  And  ])at  richesse  of  ])is 
worlde  be  matir  to  be  proude,  wittenesses  experiense,  and 
wittenes  of  Gods  lawe.  Ffor  hit  is  seide  comynly,  \2X. 
evere  ]>o  more  gode  \2X  a  man  haves,  evere  \o  better  he  is, 
and  \o  more  to  telle  by;  and  in  wittenesse  herof,  riche  men 
ben  worschippid,  and  travelen  ful  sore  to  have  suche  richesse ; 
and  hit  were  a  folye  to  putt  men  in  suche  peril,  bot  if  \€\  were 
J30  better  for  wynnyng  of  suche  richesse.  And  one  mon  is  more 
worth  J)en  ben  two  o]?er,  when  he  is  taken  prisoner,  or  schulde 
be  solde.  Soche  mony  resouns,  with  comyne  experiense,  techen 
us  \2X  richesse  is  matir  of  pride.  Bot  resoun  of  kynde  teches 
\o  peril  J?at  a  riche  mon  is  inne  by  havyng  of  his  richesse. 
Ffor  if  he  spende  yvel  Jjese  godes,  ]>ei  don  hym  myche  harme  ; 
and  if  he  spende  hom  wil,  \o  occupacioun  of  hom  lettis  hym 
fro  better  servise  fat  he  schulde  serve  God.  And  herfore 
now]?er  in  state  of  innocense,  ne  in  state  of  blis,  schulde  mon  be 
])us  riche.  And  herfore  teches  Poul,  for  sikernes  of  prestis,  ]?at 
J3ei  schulden  have  fode  and  hillyng  nedeful  to  hom,  and  herewij? 
holde  hom  payed,  ffor  more  wolde  tarye  hom.    And  so  richesse 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC. 

of  )>is  worlde  ben  nedefiil  for  }?is  weye ;  bot  be  men  war  for 
pride  of  horn,  and  mony  ofer  perils.  Ffor,  as  Seynt  Poul  seis, 
riche  men  of  ]?is  woride  smaken  ^  herfore  hyenesse  and  hopen 
in  a  fals  grounde.  And  hit  is  al  one,  mon  to  be  proude  for 
richesse,  and  to  be  proude  for  a  weght  J?at  he  is  cloutid  wi]?. 
Bot  who  schulde  be  proude  of  a  nede  ^  cloth,  Jjat  be  beris  hevyly 
for  a  trespas  ]?at  he  did?  If  mon  had  stonden  in  state  of 
innocense,  he  schulde  not  have  ben  fus  occupied  wi}>  richesse, 
ifor  alle  ]?inge  schulde  have  ben  comyne,  as  hit  is  in  hevene ; 
and  iche  mon  schulde  have  had  fre  use  of  godes  ]?at  he  wolde. 
What  evydence  schulde  mon  have  to  be  proude  nowe  in  synne, 
for  losse  of  J)is  fredome  and  hevynesse  of  erthe  ?  And  so  ben 
we  certeyn  by  Crist  and  his  apostels,  ]3at  such  habundaunce  of 
godes  makes  us  not  better  to  God.  And  even  aftir  ]?at  we  ben 
gode  to  oure  God,  ben  we  onely  gode  to  J?o  worlde,  or  any  o]?er 
]>ing. 

Cap.  VII. 

Sith  \o  fende  temptis  first  men  to  pride,  he  castis  mony  weyes 
hou  he  schal  desseyve  horn.  And  so  he  castis  byfore  hom 
mony  maters  of  pride ;  if  he  fayle  in  one  he  takes  in  anojjer, 
and  if  he  take  in  mony  he  is  \o  better  payed.  Bot  we  schal 
undirstonde  ]?at  ]?is  fals  gylor  fayles  in  iche  resoun  J)at  he  makes 
to  mon;  ffor  as  God  is  grounde  of  treuthe,  so  he  groundes 
falshed.  And  herfore  were  hit  gode  to  witte  \o  cautelis  of  J?is 
giloure ;  for  iche  mon  loves  treuthe,  and  flees  to  be  disseyved ; 
5e,  ]5of  he  luf  falshed,  ^itte  he  lufs  treuthe.  Se  we  hou  jjis 
gyloure  fayles  in  his  resouns.  He  temptis  men  to  ypocrisye,  to 
hyen  hom  of  hor  holynesse ;  and  if  ]?ei  done  J?us,  hor  holynesse 
flees  fro  hom,  and  so  )?ei  hyen  hom  falsly  of  )?ing  ]?at  \€\  have 
not.  pis  is  \o  love  of  \o  fende,  fader  of  falshed.  If  j^o  fende 
move  men  to  pride  of  hor  connyng,  he  makes  hom  foolis  by  J)is 
fals  pride ;  ffor  iche  mon  here  in  erthe  hafs  more  of  unconnyng 
])en  he  hafs  of  connyng,  if  he  loke  wel.  And  so  mon  schulde 
lerne  to  knowe  mekely,  )?at  inalsmyche  as  he  is  proude  of 
connyng,  he  drawes  to  hym  unconnyng  j)at  he  wolde  fayne  fle. 
If  \o  fende  tempt  men  of  bodily  strenght,  and  \€\  falle  in  pride 
by  movyng  of  ]?is  giloure,  \€\  ben  made  so  myche  unstronge  in 
^  smacheUf  BB.  ^  nedy,  BB. 


127 


I  Tim.  vL  9. 


Remedial  con- 
siderations 
against  the 
various  kinds 
of  pride. 


ia8 


WYCLIF'S  WORKS. 


Definition  of 
ENVY. 


hor  soule ;  and  so  j?ei  losen  more  strenght  for  semyng  of  lesse 
strenght.  And  ])us  if  men  ben  proude  of  bewte  of  hor  body, 
fei  losen  als  myche  \o  feyrnesse  of  hor  soule ;  and  \o  soule 
with  his  purtenaunses  is  better  ]?en  \o  body.  If  J?o  fende  move 
men  to  be  proude  of  hor  kynn,  \€\  fallen  in  ]?at  fro  kynraden 
and  childerhed  of  God,  and  ))en  kynraden  of  kynde  is  litel  for 
to  preyse.  And  so,  if  a  mon  presume  ageyns  his  God  to 
amende  his  schappe,  he  foules  his  soule,  and  J^at  is  more  yvel 
]3en  foulenesse  of  body.  And  }?us  Jjis  fals  faytour  fayles  in 
richessis  when  he  moves  men  to  be  proude  of  hom,  as  he  lyed 
to  Crist  when  he  heght  hym  to  gif  hym  alle  rewmes  of  J?o  world 
for  to  worschip  him;  bot  he  had  not  ])at  he  hyght,  for  his  first 
forfeture.  And  so,  if  a  man  falle  in  brygge^  for  worldly 
richesses,  he  forfetis  ageyne  \o  cheef  lord,  and  noght  haves  by 
right.  And  j)us  of  alle  \o  argumentis  J>at  Jjo  fende  con  make, 
he  fayles  foule  in  his  proffer  to  a  trew  mon.  And  a  virtuouse 
mon  schulde  lerne  ])is  scole  to  conclude  \o  fende,  as  Crist  did 
when  he  temptid  hym ;  and  in  such  answeryng  and  arguyng 
of  mon  lise  more  mede  Jjen  in  stryves  of  scole.  And  so  Cristen 
men,  ]?at  is,  Gods  Chirche,  schulde  sey  to  soche  stryvers  ]>at 
chiden  wi]?  wordes,  ]?at  childre  of  God  have  none  suche  cus- 
toum,  but  answeren  by  stillenes  ageyne  soche  fendis.  And  fus, 
if  pride  be  chasid  fro  a  monnis  soule,  alle  hir  cisters  wil  fle,  for 
]?ei  ben  not  wi]?outen  hir. 

Cap.  VIIL 
po  next  cistir  of  pride  is  synne  of  ^xivyQ.  Envye  is  cald  an 
yvel  wille  of  a  mon,  by  whiche  he  wilnes  harme  falle  to  his 
neghtbore,  and  if  hit  he  fallen,  he  joyes  hym  ferof.  And  so, 
ri3t  as  pride,  J?o  first  of  J>ese  seven,  is  unordynel  wille  of  a 
monnis  owene  hyenesse,  so  envye,  \o  secunde  cister  of  synne, 
is  unordynel  wille  of  mon  to  his  neghtbore.  And  so  envye 
algatis  sownes  to  yvel,  and  is  most  even  contrarie  to  charite. 
And  here  clerkis  disputen  how  envye  may  be,  sith  no  mon  may 
wilne  a  }>ing  bot  if  hit  ]?enk  hym  gode,  or  elles  ]?at  gode  comes 
]?erof;  bot  now]?er  falles  to  envye.  Bot  here  schal  \o  fende 
witte  ]>at  envye  is  his  synne,  for  hym  Jjenkes  ]?at  Jjing  gode  Jjat 


1  hr:iU,  BB. 


WYCLIF. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC. 


izg 


is  harme  to  anojjer ;  and  so,  as  Gods  children  have  Hkyng  in 
gode  j?ing,  so  \>o  fende  and  his  childer  have  likyng  in  harme. 
Ffor  ]>o  fende  hafs  no  profile  of  his  felowschip;  flfor  more 
felowschip  shewis  more  consense  in  hor  yvel  wille ;  and  ]?at  dos 
horn  more  harme.  And  so,  as  godenes  profiles  to  a  gode  mon, 
so  wickednesse  plesis  to  an  yvel  mon.  And  so  iche  envyouse 
mon  is  an  opun  fole,  ffbr  hym  }?enkes  Jjat  ]>mg  gode  ]?at  is  yvel. 

As  men  tellen  in  fablis  of  tv^^o  men  in  a  cyte ;  Jjo  first  was 
envyous;  J?o  secounde  was  covetous,  po  justise  of  J)0  cyte 
ordeyned  to  make  a  crye,  Jjat  whej?er  of  jjese  two  men  asked 
oght  of  ]50  juge,  ])0  secounde  schuld  have  J>o  double  }>at  ))0  first 
asked,  pese  two  men  comen  at  tyme  and  J)0  stede^  as- 
signed, and  stryven  among  homself,  whe]?er  schuld  first  aske. 
pis  envyouse  mon  J?oght  Jjat  if  he  asked  first  he  schulde  do 
myche  gode  to  his  first  brother,  po  covetouse  mon  ]>oght  )?at 
if  he  asked  first  his  bro|3er  schulde  have  ]?o  double  to  hym; 
and  so  hit  was  ordened  ]?at  |)is  elder  broker  schulde  aske  first 
what  he  wolde.  And  so  )?is  envyous  mon  moste  nede  stonde 
to  J)is  decre ;  and  he  had  sorowe  to  do  profite  to  J?is  covetouse ; 
and  ])erfore  he  asked  Jjat  his  eye  schulde  be  put  out,  undir- 
stondyng  J)at  by  ))is  his  bro]?er  schulde  be  pure  blynde;  and 
Jjo  juge  of  ]>o  cyte  made  parforme  Jjis  sentense  ^. 

pis  justise  of  )>is  cyte  may  be  God  Almyghty,  ]?at  puttes  in 
monnis  fredame  to  chese  gode  or  yvel;   and  by  his  godely 

^  So  in  BB ;  W  has,  at  tyme  assigned. 


*  A  somewhat  different  version  of 
this  fable,  in  French  of  the  thirteenth 
century,  may  be  seen  in  the  Recueil 
of  Barbazan  (I.  91 ;  ed.  1808).  St. 
Martin  meets  the  two  men  on  a 
plain,  and  on  parting  company  with 
them,  says  that  if  one  of  them  will 
ask  him  for  something,  he  shall 
have  it,  whatever  it  may  be,  but 
the  man  who  has  not  asked  shall 
receive  double.  Urged  on  and  me- 
naced by  the  covetous  man,  the 
envious  man  asks  that  he  may  lose 
an  eye;  and  the  rest  of  the  story 
agrees  with  the  version  given  in  the 
text.  Barbazan  took  this  fable  from 
a  MS.  of  S.  Germain  des  Pres, 
No.  1830^ 

WORKS.      VOL.  III.  1 


A  third  version  is  given  in  the 
appendix  to  Robert's  edition  of  La- 
fontaine's  Fables  (II.  509;  Paris, 
1825).  In  this  version  (which  bears 
the  name  of  Ysopet-Avionnet,  who 
professes  to  have  translated  it,  and 
his  other  fables,  from  the  Latin), 
Phoebus  occupies  the  place  of  St. 
Martin,  and  the  language  and  whole 
air  of  the  fable  are  of  much  later 
date. 

From  what  source  our  author 
derived  his  version  of  the  fable  I 
cannot  determine.  The  Gesta  Ro- 
manonim  will  immediately  occur  to 
the  literary  reader,  but  this  fable  is 
not  found  there. 


The  fable  of 
the  envious 
man  and  the 
covetous  man. 


I30 


Three  classes 
in  the  Church : 
preachers, 
soldiers, 
labourers. 


Envy  among 
priests. 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 

choyse  his  brother  schulde  fare  \o  better,  pis  justise  is  Lord 
bothe  of  Gods  cyte  and  of  \q  cyte  of  jjo  fende,  for  bothe  men  ^ 
ben  his  creatures.  Bot  J)0  envyous  mon,  of  ))0  cyte  of  J)0 
fende,  chesis  to  harme  hymself  to  harme  his  neghtbore.  Bot 
J>is  ri^twise  juge  by  his  trewe  jugement  jugis  ]?is  envyous 
mon  to  be  pure  blynde ;  fFor  he  is  juge  of  alle,  and  jugis  men 
by  hor  wille.  And  so  \o  envyous  mon  is  blynde  by  boJ?e  his 
eyne,  bothe  by  eyne  of  his  body  and  eyne  of  his  soule;  ffor 
whatevere  he  sees  in  kynde,  bodily  or  gostly,  harmes  to  hym- 
self to  lyve  ]?at  evere  schal  laste.  And  ]3us  envyous  men  ben 
]?o  fendes  childer,  and  don  harme  to  homself,  and  profiten  to 
Gods  cite.  If  ]?ou  aske  resoun  why  J^ei  don  J?us,  ])ei  ben 
wijjout  resoun,  and  herfore  resoun  dampnes  hom. 

Cap.  IX. 

Bot,  for  to  speke  more  of  ]>is  fendes  synne,  \o  Chirche  is 
divyded  in  ]?ese  thre  partis ; — in  prechoures,  and  deffendoures, 
and  ]>o  Jjridde  part  ben  laboreres.  Prechoures  schulden  be 
prestis ;  for  Crist,  hed  of  \e  Chirche,  bad  his  disciplis  to  preche 
])0  gospel  to  alle  maner  men,  and  j?us  he  wan  ))is  worlde.  And 
gode  marke  how  Crist,  J>at  was  God  and  mon,  bad  his  gostly 
knyghtis  go  in  to  al  Jjo  world,  not  for  to  feght  wi]?  colde  armes 
of  body,  bot  wi]?  armes  of  charite,  J)at  is  Cristes  gospel.  And 
so  he  bad  not  leesynges  ne  fablis  be  prechid,  but  treuthe  of  jjo 
gospel,  for  \2X  is  virtu;  ne  he  bad  not  onely  preche  to  men  fat  gaf 
hom,  bot  to  alle  maner  of  men  wi]50uten  acceptyng  of  persones. 
And  so,  on  a  stille  maner,  Crist  forfended  symonye  and  beggyng 
and  covetise  unto  alle  his  prechoures.  For  as  ]?ei  token  frely 
hor  connyng  of  God,  so  schulden  ]?ei  frely  dele  hit  to  \o  peple. 

po  first  part  of  ])0  Chirche  schulde  be  next  Crist,  for  hit 
schulde  be  next  heven,  and  most  ful  of  charite ;  bot  \o  ^  part 
by  ]?o  fende  traveles  by  envye.  pis  part  schulde  be  al  of  one 
religione,  as  prestis,  and  dekens  lyvyng  clerkes  lif ;  bot  \o  fende 
hafs  chaungid  J>is  part  in  mony  coloures,  as  seculers  and  reli- 
giouse ;  and  bothe  have  mony  partis,— as  popes  and  cardinalis 
and  bischops  and  archdekens,  munkes  and  chanouns,  hos- 
piteleres  and  freris.  And  sith  of  |?ese  ordires  one  lufs  more  his 
1  om.  BB.  2  ^is^  BB^ 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC, 


131 


bro})er  \tn  he  lufs  a  mon  of  a  straimge  ordire,  and  wil  defFende 
his  ordir  by  personel  afFeccioun,  hit  is  no  wondir  \2X  charite 
be  putt  awey,  iFor  hote  humoure  jjat  is  partid  wil  souner  waxe 
colde.  And  so  Cristen  men  byleven,  by  ordynaunce  of  Crist, 
]>at  hit  were  better  to  clerkes  to  be  alle  of  one  sute  ^,  and  Jjen 
myghten  two  ofer  partis  Uf  with  horn  in  more  charite.  Ffor 
now  may  men  se  J)at  foure  ordires  of  freris  Jjat  ben  late  founden 
by  ordynaunce  of  men,  kepen  hem  not  in  charite  amonges 
homself ;  sith  not  onely  one  ordir  hafs  envye  to  ofer,  but  one 
persone  in  one  ordir,  for  worschip  or  office,  haves  envye  to  his 
bro]?er  for  hor  dyversite.  And  for  })is  cause  one  ordir  wolde 
have  ano]>er  aweye,  bothe  for  hit  harmes  hym  in  name  and  in 
beggyng ;  and  one  begger  is  woo  j?at  anojjer  iettis  hym.  And 
}>us  hit  is  of  ojjer  ordires  of  religioun.  By  ordynaunce  of  Crist 
prestis  and  bischops  was  ^  al  one,  bot  effter  fe  emperoure 
departid  hom,  and  made  bischops  lordis  and  prestis  hor  ser- 
vauntis;  and  }?is  was  cause  of  envye,  and  quenchid  myche 
charite.  Ffor  ordynaunce  of  Crist  stondis  in  mekenesse,  in 
unyte,  and  charite;  and  variaunce  of  richesse,  and  hyenesse 
in  statis,  gendren  envye,  as  comynly  variaunce  of  worschip 
and  richesse  gendres  envye  amonge  mony  men.  And  so  if 
possessioneris  weren  broght  to  \2X  state  \2X  Crist  ordeyned  to 
his  clerkes,  ])en  schulden  men  have  charite,  bothe  wi]?  seculere 
clerkes,  and  also  wij?  religiouse. 

Cap,  X, 

po  secounde  part  of  jjo  Chh-che  is  calde  deffenderes,  as  lordes 

and  knyghtis,  and  o))er  men  of  armes.     Envye  regnes  in  hom 

for  mony  enchesouns.     Ffor  }>ei  coveyten  by  pride  worschipp 

and  richesses,  and  lordschip  of  clerkes  makes  lordes  to  pore. 

Ffor  we  schai  undirstone  })at  holy  Chirche,  as  ho  ^  is   oure 

moder,  so  ho  is  a  body ;  and  hele  of  J)is  body  stondes  in  J?is, 

J?at  one  part  of  hir  answere  to  anojjer,  aftir  \o  same  mesure  Jjat 

Jesus  Crist  haves   ordeyned  hit.     As  in  a  monnis   body,  if 

humoures  ben  uneven,  on  oj^er  hole  members  comes  sekenes 

anoon,  or  feveres  of  body,  or  ojier  straunge  sekenesse.   And  ]>us 

hit  mot  be  in  body  of  Jjo  Chirche,  ffor  oure  Lord  Jesus  Crist 

1  secte,  BB.  2  j^^^^  gg  3  ^cho.^  gg^ 

K  2 


Envy  among- 
lords  and 
knights. 


iSZ 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


Envy  among 
labourers. 


is  auctor  of  kynde,  and  ordeynes  better  lawes  to  membres  of 
his  Chirche  ]jen  he  ordeynes  to  partis  of  a  monnis  body.  And 
so  men  seyn,  Surely  ]?o  Chirche  schal  nevere  be  hool,  byfore 
proporciouns  ^  of  hir  partis  be  broght  ageyne  by  ]?is  hevenly 
leche,  and  medicyne  of  men.  O,  if  hit  were  a  charite  to  hele 
a  seke  mon,  how  myche  more  charite  were  hit  to  hele  ]?o 
Chirche  our  moder !  Mercye  faylis  to  men  )>at  helpen  not  J)is 
seke  wommon,  ffor  more  charite  men  schulden  have  to  hir  and  to 
hir  membres.  And  J?is  defaute  of  charite  brynges  in  envye,  and 
makes  men  of  armes  feght  and  to  stryve;  ifor  batels  ben  un- 
kyndely^  officis  to  J)ese  defendoures,  bot  to  mayntene  by 
strenght  j?o  ordynaunce  of  God.  And  here  hom  fayles  charite, 
when  ])ei  leven  ])is  better  and  esyer  algatis,  and  taken  \o  fendes 
office;  ffor  hitt  falles  to  fendes  by  pride  and  envye  one  to 
feyht  wi})  ano))er,  as  Gods  lawe  telles ;  and  clerkes  office 
schulde  be  to  drawe  men  to  pees.  Bot  no  we  ]?ei  moven  un- 
kyndely,  bothe  in  worde  and  in  dede,  men  for  to  werre  ageyns 
Gods  lawe.  And  so  many  principlis  J>at  \o  fende  haves  founden 
unto  ])ese  grete  werroures,  ben  even  ageyne  charite.  Ffor  ]?ei 
taken  for  a  lawe,  ])at  hit  is  leveful  for  hom  to  anoye  hor  enmye 
on  what  wey  J?at  ]?ei  may.  Bot  charite  of  Crist  biddes  \o  con- 
trarie,  J?at  men  schulden  love  hor  enemyes,  and  do  hom  gode 
for  yvel.  And  so  ]?is  part  of  J)e  Chirche  faylis  in  multitude 
and  humours  of  charite,  and  travels  in  envye.  And  so,  as 
virtu  in  prestis  quickens  j?o  Chirche,  so  synnes  or  vices  jjat 
regnen  in  hom  maken  }?o  Chirche  venymous  in  two  ojjer  partis  ; 
and  specialy  synne  of  consense  of  clerkes,  ]>at  J)ei  hiden  Gods 
lawe  fro  ojjer  partis  bynethen  hom.  For  \o  virtu  of  charite 
schulde  be  most  in  clerkes ;  envye  is  moste  in  hom  when  J^ei 
ben  turned  to  yvel.  Bot  nowe,  to  plese  ]>es  lordis,  clerkes 
hyden  Gods  lawe,  and  pursuen  prestis  for  prechyng  of  treuthe. 

Cap.  XL 

po  ]?ridde  part  of  ]?e  Chirche  travels  by  envye  for  mony 
enchesouns,  bot  thre  ben  most  comyne.  One  is  defaute  of 
prechyng  in  whoche  ]>ei  schulden  be  tau^t  more  to  telle  by 

^  So  in  BB ;  W  has  proposiciouns,  ^  So  in  BB ;  W  destroys  the  sense 
of  the  passage  by  reading  ben  nowe  kyndely  offices,  unless  nowe  is  used  for  no. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC, 


^ii 


charite  }>en  any  worldly  gode.  For  ])is  lore  fayles  horn  bothe  in 
worde  and  dede,  ffor  more  covetouse  ben  none  ])en  ben  j>es 
prestis.  po  secounde  cause  of  envye  among  ))0  laboreres  is  J?at 
j^ei  ben  to  chargid  and  spoylid  in  hor  godes  by  two  partis  above 
]?at  schulden  deflfende  hom,  iFor  freris,  persouns,  and  o)?er  men 
J>at  robben  \o  Chirche,  maken  hom  to  swete  hor  owne  blode  by 
hor  ypocrisye.  And  si])  seculer  lordes  schulen  mayntene  hom 
ageyns  ])is,  bot^e  ])ese  two  partis  spoylen  \o  puple.  And  right 
as  light  and  virtu  of  heven  comes  fro  above,  so  helpe  of  fo 
puple  schulde  cum  fro  Jjese  two  partis ;  sith  ensaumple  of  gode 
lif,  and  gode  techyng,  and  gode  dedes^  schulde  cum  fro  ])ese 
clerkes  and  seculer  lordes.  And  \o  stomak  of  a  mon  schulde 
deffye  his  mete,  and  norische  o]?er  members.  }>at  hongen  on  his 
body ;  so,  as  seyntis  seyn,  schulden  prestis  be  a  stomak  to  deifye 
\o  gostly  mete,  and  so  norische  \o  body  of  oure  modir  holy 
Chirche.  Bot  J>is  offis  faylis.  And  as  eyne  in  \o  hed  reulen  al 
\o  body  for  to  go  right  weyes  and  profitable  to  mon,  so  prelatis 
of  ]?o  Chirche  schulden  lede  hit  in  Gods  wey.  Bot  Crist  seis 
in  his  Gospel,  ])at  if  a  blynde  lede  a  blynde  mon  in  \o  wey,  \€\ 
fallen  bothe  in  \o  dike.  And  ])us  \o  wey  of  charite,  ))at  schulde 
be  brood  to  alle  men,  is  streyned  by  envye,  and  lettis  men  to 
sue  Crist.  And  so  J)0  fend  haves  cast  a  boon,,  and  made  J?ese 
honndes  to  feght;  and  by  a  bal  of  talow  lettis  hom  to  berke. 

And  so  uneven  delyng  of  godes  of  ))is  worlde  genderes  myche 
envye  among  jjese  worldly  men.  And  so  partis  of  J)is  comyne, 
and  specialy  marchauntis,  moven  to  ])is  envye  by  desseyt  of  hor 
crafft.  And  as  lordes  schulden  be  mendid  by  prechyng  of  hor 
bischopis,  so  lordes  schulden  amende  marchauntis  and  o|)er 
folk,  ]?at  in  \o  J?ridde  part  of  ]?o  Chirche  sowen  by  hor  envye 
seed  of  dissencioun,  and  synnes  ])at  distourblen  rewmes..  For 
al  J)of  pore  men  of  \o  comyne,  for  hor  bisye  travel,  synnen  lesse 
in  envye  and  in  ojjer  synnes  ])en  done  men  above  hom  Jjat 
traveilen  not  J)US,  nere]?oles  for  mony  causis  fallen  \€\  in  envye, 
ffor  everiche  synne  brynges  in  ano]?er;  and  alle  oure  ]?re 
enmyes,  and  speciaty  \o  fende,  worchen  to  iche  synne,  and  one 
helpis  onoJ>er.  And  specialy  if  a  mon  be  partid  fro  God,  }>at 
schulde  be  his  foundement  to  ageynstonde  synne,  he  is  a  house 
upon  gravel,  J)at  is  light  for  to,  move!     And  so,  by  lore  of  Seynt 


134 


WrCLIF'S  WORKS. 


Definition  of 
sinful  ANGER. 


Poule,  iche  membre  of  holy  Chirche  schulde  be  as  membre  of  a 
mon,  and  iche  schulde  helpe  oJ?er;  for  kyndely  monnis  hond 
helpis  his  heved,  and  his  eye  helpis  his  foote,  and  his  foote  his 
body ;  so  J)at  membres  of  a  mon  fat  ben  more  foul,  ben  more 
helpyng  to  a  monnis  body,  ne  one  membre  lettis  not  ano)?er  for 
to  worche,  bot  ra])er  helpes  hit  wijjouten  envye,  and  eche  one 
dos  his  propir  werke,  and  so  stondis  monnis  body.  And  )?us 
schulde  hit  be  in  partis  of  \o  Chirche;  bot  dSpartyng  fro  \o 
stok  lettis  siche  helpe,  and  somme  men,  as  deede  lymmes 
departid  by  synne,  helpen  not  \o  Chirche,  bot  rather  don  hit 
harme.  And  ]?us  done  men  Jjat  ben  departid  fro  \o  rote  of 
charite.  And  herfore  membres  of  \o  Chirche  drawen  alle  in 
one  50k,  and  ben  alle  of  one  wille,  as  J?o  Chirche  telles.  And 
herby  may  we  suppose  who  ben  of  holy  Chirche,  and  who 
membres  of  \o  fende,  and  maken  jjo  wicked  Chirche;  ffor 
charite  is  a  cloth  ])at  partis  ]?at  one  Chirche  fro  partis  of  ))at 
oJ)er,  as  holy  men  seyn.  And  }>ese  two  glues,  of  predestina- 
cioun  and  of  prescience  of  God,  joynen  ]?ese  two  bodies.  And 
\o  token,  ]?at  \o  puple  is  ]?us  partid  in  willes,  teches  ]?at  J?ei  ben 
not  of  one  Chirche.  For  Gods  lawe  schulde  be  reule  to  schape 
men  of  one  wille,  bot  parting  fro  ]?is  lawe  departes  men  fro 
charite,  and  so  hit  departis  men  fro  membres  of  Gods  body,  and 
so  fro  membres  of  holy  Chirche,  and  ]?en  ben  ]?ei  fendis. 

Cap.  XII. 

Ire  is  \o  thridde  cister  approprid  to  Jjo  fende.  Bot  J)ere  ben 
two  ires,  gode  ire  and  yvek  Gode  ire  is,  when  a  mon  is  wroth 
in  Gods  cause,,  and  not  to  venge  his  owne  cause,  but  to  venge 
Gods  wrong.  And  ]?us  is  God  seide  in  his  lawe  bothe  wroth 
and  wode ;  and  J>us  weren  holy  prophetis  medefuly  Avroth,  as 
Moyses  was  a  meke  man,  and  wroth  on  ])is  maner.  Wrathe 
))at  is  synne  is  by  pride  of  mon^  and  principaly  for  monnis 
cause,  unskitM  wille  of  vengeaunce.  And  al{)of  mony  ypocritis 
excusen  horn  fro'  J)is  ire  bi  coloure  of  \o  firste  ire,  nerejjoles  ]jo 
juge  above  sehal  juge  at  \o  day  of  ire  hou  j^at  treuthe  stondes. 
Envie  and  ire  ben  dyverse  in  maner ;  ffor  envye  stondes  in  y vel 
})Oght,  and  schewes  hym  not  forthward ;  and  envye,  modir  of 
ire,  haves  maner  of  ]?o  fende ;  bot  ire  distourblis  monnis  witte. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC. 

and  moves  his  body,  and  neghes  neer  to  vengeaunce  of  a 
monnis  neghtbore ;  as  Cajm  was  fadir  of  ire,  sleeyng  his  bro]?er. 
Bot  ire  ]?at  is  in  God  is  al  in  oj^er  maner.  Ffor  by  \q  reule  of 
Austyn,  take  awey  movyng  and  distourblyng  of  witte,  and  al 
})inge  ]>at  is  unperfit,  and  kepe  wille  of  vengeaunce,  as  right- 
wisenes  askes,  and  such  ire  is  acordyng  to  God.  When  God 
takes  gret  vengeaunce,  and  hastly  ^  wijjal,  J)en  is  maner  of 
wodenesse  acordyng  to  hym ;  as  here  God  by  his  ire  snybbes 
his  servauntis,  bot  at  J?o  day  of  dome  he  dampnes  horn  scharply. 
Ffor  iche  fende  serves  to  God,  suffryng  jjat  he  is  worthy ;  and 
so  ire  }?at  God  snybbes  wi}?  mon  sownes  to  reprove^  }?at  he 
blames  ^  \o  fendes  childer.  Ffor  no  man  askes  wysely  J?at  God 
chastise  hym  not,  bot  takes  rather  mekely  \q  peyne  J^at  God 
sendes  hym,  ffor  elles  he  were  unbuxum  scoler  to  his  mayster. 

And  J)us  ))re  harmes  fallen  of  ire.  Ffirst,  a  monnis  witte  is 
lettid  in  his  worchyng,  and  mon  is  made  by  his  foly  like  unto 
beestis.  And  ]>us  movyng  of  spiritis  lettis  oft  men  to  herberow 
\o  Holy  Gost,  J)at  lufs  reste  in  soule.  And  soche  men  taken 
not  hete  of  charite,  as  \o  sonne  makes  not  hoot  watir  ]jat  rennes 
hastily;  and  in  figure  of  j?is,  Caymes  heved  tremblid,  and  des- 
peyred  for  to  have  remyssioun  of  his  synne.  Ffor  he  was 
distourblid  in  resoun,  \zX  is  heved  of  \q  soule.  And  so  mov- 
ynges  of  mon  withinne  maken  a  den  to  \o  fende  to  reste  hym 
inne,  derkyng  and  aspying  when  he  may  anoye  mon ;  and  Jjis 
is  \o  secounde  harm  j^at  comes  of  ire.  po  )?ridde  harme  of  ire 
stondes  in  )?is,  |)at  hit  spoyles  a  mon  of  godes  wijjouteforth.  He 
J)at  slees  his  brojjer  leesis  hym  a  frende,  sith  Crist  seide  J?at 
Scariot  was  a  frende  to  hym.  And  not  al  onely  lesis  mon  by 
ire  frenschip  of  })at  mon  J^at  he  slees  unjustly,,  bot  frenschip  of 
his  frendes,  and  luf  of  God  and  aungels.  And  as  a  mon  by 
suche  ire  lesis  his  strenght,.so  he  lesis  his  catel  for  harme  ]?at 
he  dos.  Ffor  al  \oi  ]?o  fende  make  hym  strong  for  tyme  of  his 
ire,  nere]?oles  he  mote  nede  be  feble  Jjeraftir.  And  ]?us,  among 
synnes,  ire  is  ful'  contrarious  to  felouschip  and  charite  J?at 
schulde  be  in  \o  puple.  And  herfore  biddes  Jk)  prophete  to 
bewar  wi])  ]?at  man  ]?at  hafs  his  spirit  in  his  nose  and  hastly 
takes  vengeaunce. 

^  bastilicbe,  BB.  2  reprofe,  BB.  ^  hla77ied,  BB. 


135 


Three  evils 
flow  from 
Anger. 


136 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


Vengeance, 
under  what 
limitations 
lawful. 


Is.  ii.  4. 


Cap.  XIII. 
Iche  mon  J^at  is  vengeable  by  unskilful  ire,  is  like  to  a  fende 
)?at  blasphemes  ageyns  God,  to  whom  is  propre  to  take  ven- 
geaunce  of  his  sogett.  Ffor  no  mon  scholde  take  vengeaunce 
bot  if  God  move  hym,  and  teche  hym  as  his  instrument  how 
God  wil  have  vengeaunce.  And  ]?us  iche  irrouse  mon  blas- 
phemes ageyns  God.  And  herfore  by  comyne  lawe  schuide  no 
mon  make  batel,  bot  if  he  have  leve  of  prince  of  ]?o  puple. 
And  certis  an  erthely  prince  is  comynly  proude,  and  wantis 
witte  to  teche  when  men  schulden  feght;  and  herfore  it  is  lickly 
])at  prince  of  \o  worlde  is  auctor  of  batels  l>at  men  now  usen. 
Ffor  wil  I  wot  ))at  Crist  is  kynge  of  pees  and  charite,  and  moves 
men  to  pacience,  as  to  his  monhed  falles.  And  here  may  we 
se  how  ]?o  fendes  argument  disseyves  J?o  puple,  and  moves  horn 
to  feght  po  fende  takes  a  soth^  jiat  in  ]?o  olde  lawe  was 
leveful  men  to  feght  by  auctorite  of  God;  and  sith  \o  same 
God  is  now,  why  schulden  men  not  now  feght  ?  Bot  here  we 
graunten  \o  fende  ])at  in  }?o  Olde  Testament  hit  was  leveful  to 
feght,  *as  Gods  lawe  techis  us;  and  now  in  ]>o  newe  lawe  were 
leeiful  to  fey^te*  %  if  suche  circumstansis  weren  as  were  in  ]?o 
olde  lawe ;  and  elles  schulden  men  be  in  pees  for  luf  of  oure 
God.  Sothly  in  J)0  olde  lawe  men  foghten  wi)>  Gods  enmyes, 
to  venge  Gods  injurie,  and  by  noone  ojjer  cause;  and  nowJ?er 
schulden  men  now,  if  hor  feghtyng:  be  kveful.  po  seconde 
circumstaunce  of  leveful  feghtyng  askes  j>at  by  autorite  of  God 
\o  feghtyng  be  made ;  and  ]>at  God  telle  hom,  and  bidde  hom 
feght  ]3us,  and  ])en  schuide  God  mesure  men,  and  teche  hom  to 
feght.  And  if  men  kepten  wil  ))is,  j^ei  schulden  not  feght  now 
ffor  no  men.  Bot  fals  men  stiren  now  to  batel ;  ffor  tyme  is 
comen  J?at  Ysaie  spekes  of  Grist, — \^t  men  schal  weUe  hor 
swerde  into  plowgh-schares,-  and  ]?o  irne  of  hor  speres  into 
sythes  or  sikles.  po  thridde  cause  ))at  men  schulden  holde  in 
feghtyng  and  werryng,  is^  J?at  )>ei  schulden  by  charite  do  dedes 
of  hor  feghtyng,  loovyng  God  and  hor  neghtbore,  ^e,  men  ]?at 

^  tdke]>for  a  sothe,  BB. 

3-  The  words  between  asterisks  are  omitted  in  W,  evidently  by  a  mistake 
of  the  copyist. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC. 

\€\  feght  \vi]).  Ffor  Seynt  Poule  biddes  J)at  alle  oure  dedes  be 
done  in  charite;  and  by  Gods  lawe  we  schulden  luf  oure 
enimyes,  and  so  make  horn  frendes  by  \o  stxenght  of  charite. 
And  sith  no  mon  schulde  feght  bot  wi]?  Jjese  thre  maners,  hit  is 
knowen  j>ing  )?at  men  schulden  not  now  feght.  And  herfore 
Jesus  Crist,  duke  of  oure  batel,  taght  us  lawe  of  pacience,  and 
not  to  feght  bodily.  If  God  rowne  in  })in  eere,  and  bid  )>e 
feght  in  his  cause,  as  God  taght  by  prophetis  in  \t  Oide  Testa- 
ment, feght  fast  in  Gods  cause,  as  he  hymself  biddes  Jre,  and 
elles  holde  ])i  pees,  as  Crist  did  wi)>  his  clerkes.  And  se  J)is  apis 
argument,  ]?at  if  men  foght  sumtyme,  wij>  fes  ]>re  causis,  )?en 
men  schulden  feght  now.  For  now  is  tyme  of  pees,  and  J?o 
Chirche  is  olde,  and  none  of  ]?ese  casis  fallen  ]>at  men  schulden 
feght  wi]>,  bot  even  ]?o  contrarie  sue^^,  as  iche  mon  schulde 
knowe.  And  so  \o  fende,  fadir  of  ire,  autorises  j?is  feghtyng ; 
and  his  lymmes  suen  hit,  moved  of  hor  mayster. 

Cap.  XIV. 

Bot  5itte  argues  Anticrist,  to  mayntene  mennis  feghtyng,  pat 
kynde  techis  J^at  men  schulden  by  strenght  ageynstonde  hor 
enmyes.  Sith  a  nedder  by  hir  kynde  stynges  a  mon  J^at  tredes 
on  her,  why  schulde  we  not  feght  ageynes  oure  enmyes  ?  for 
elles  ])ei  wolden  destrye  us,  and  dampne  hor  owne  soules.  And 
]?us  for  luf  we  chastisen  hom,  as  Gods  lawe  techis  us.  And  so, 
sith  oure  enmyes  wolden  assayle  us,  bot  if  we  sayliden  hom 
byfore,  sith  we  loven  better  oureself,  we  schulden  first  assayle 
hom,  and  J?us  we  schal  haf  pees. 

Here  me  J?enkes  J)at  \o  fende  disseyves  mony  men  by  falsenes 
of  his  resouns,  and  by  his  fals  principlis.  Ffor  what  mon  }>at 
hafs  witte  connot  se  ]?is  fallas  ?  if  hit  be  leveful  by  strenght  to 
ageynstonde  violence,  Jjeii  hit  is  leveful  to  feght  vA\  men  jjat 
ageynstonden  us.  Wil  I  wot  \2X  aungels  ageynstode  fendes, 
and  mony  men  by  strenght  of  lawe  ageynstonden  ^  hor  enmyes ; 
and  jitte  \€\  killen  hom  not,  ne  feghten  not  wij)  hom.  And 
wise  men  of  \o  worlde  holden  hor  strenghtes,  and  Jjus  ven- 
cuschen  hor  enmyes  wijjouten  any  strok ;  and  men  of  \o  gospel 
vencuschen  by  pacience,  and  comen  to  reste  and  to  pees  by 

1  sewes,  BB.  ^  g^^  -^^  gg  .  ageynstodetiy  W. 


137 


A  justification 
of  war,  both 
defensive  and 
offensive. 


The  author's 
reply. 


138 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


Rejoinder 
from  those  ^ 
who  maintain 
the  lawfulness 
of  war. 


sufFryng  of  deth.     Right  so  may  we  do,  if  we  kepen  charite ; 

l)of  men  ravischen  oure  lordschipp,  or  elles  oure  meblis,  we 

schulden  sufFre  in  pacience,  ^e,  ]?of  j)ei  diden  us  more,  pese  ben 

J)0  counseils  of  Crist.     But  here  J^o  world  grucches,  and  seis  J?at 

by  j>is  wise  weren  rewmes  destryed.     Bot  here  byleve  techis  us, 

si]>  Crist  is  oure  God,  J>at  )?us  schulden  rewmes  be  stablid,  and 

oure  enmyes  vencusched.    Bot  peraventure  mony  men  schulden 

lese  hor  worldly  richessis.     Bot  what  harm  were  Jjereof  ?  sith 

in  \o  state  of  innocense  alle  men  schulden  comynly  wante  suche 

lordschipp.    Bot  ]?o  fende  takes  ensaunple  at  wormes  of  venyme, 

and  by  a  naked  propurte  teches  men  to  feght ;  bot  mony  o]?er 

ensaunples  of  pacience  of  bestis  schulden  teche  us  to  suffre,  for 

myche  more  gode.     And  a  fendis  conscience  reulis  hym  J^at 

bringes  of  ]?is,  Jjat  if  he  were  ])us  pacient  his  enmyes  wolde  kille 

hym.     As  if  a  mon  wolde  sey,  ]?at  if  he  keppid  Cristis  counseil 

]?o  fende  wolde  fordo  hym,  for  he  is  more  ]>en  Crist.     And  if 

we  feghten  Jjus  for  luf,  hit  is  not  luf  of  charite ;  flfor  charite  sekes 

not  propur  gode  in  )?is  lif,  bot  comyne  gode  in  heven  by  vir- 

tuouse  pacience.     And  wil  I  wot  ])at  worldly  men  wil  scorne 

J?is  sentense ;  bot  men  ])at  wolden  be  martirs  for  J)0  love  of  God 

wil  holde  wij?  ]?is  sentense ;  and  )>ei  ben  more  to  trow,  for  J>ei 

have  more  charite  and  better  ben  wi]?  God.     And  disseyt  of 

love  is  wij>  men  }?at  feghten,  as  wi]>  fendes  of  helle  is  feyned 

fals  luf.     Bot  at  Domesday  schal  men  witte  who  feghtis  ])us 

for  charite ;  ffor  hit  semes  no  charite  to  ride  ageyne  ]?in  enemye 

wil  armed  wi]>  a  scharpe  spere,  upon  a  strong  courser;   ffor 

^itte  ))0  cosse  ^  of  Scariot  was  more  token  of  charite.     And  so 

Gods  lawe  techis  men  to  cum  bifore  in  dedes  of  charite  and 

werkes  of  worschip ;  bot  I  rede  not  in  Gods  lawe  ]?at  Cristen 

men  schulden  cum  byfore  in  feghting  or  batel,.  bot  in  meke 

pacience.    And  ]>is  were  ^o  mene  whereby  we  schulden  have 

Gods  pees. 

Cap.  XV. 

5itte  \o  fende  argues  pat  men  feghten  wil;  for  by  virtu  of 
feghtyng  men  have  grete  name  and  honoures  and  worschippis, 
])at  ben  mede  of  vu'tues.  And  titil  of  conquest  is  \o  beste  of 
alle ;  bot  conquest  may  not  be  wi]?out  gret  feghtyng,  and  so. 

'-  kys,  BB* 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC. 

oure  batil  is  leveful ;  or  elles  wil  hit  sue  |)at  in  alle  J)is  world, 
men  occupyen  hor  lordschips  by  unjust  titil,  and  so  schulde 
iche  mon  feght  wi}?  his  broj^er  for  defaut  of  titil.  Lord,  si}? 
Crist  approved  J)ese  knyghttis,  and  bad  his  apostils  selle  hor 
cootis  and  bye  horn  swerdis, — wharto  bot  to  feght?  and  of 
dedes  and  wordes  of  Crist  is  feghtyng  approved,  why  is  hit  not 
leveful  ?  Bot  here  we  answeren  aftir  \o  first  sentence,  ]?at  werres 
and  feghtynges  ben  now  unleveful.  And  to  fo  first  resoun  we 
answeren  on  jjis  wyse ;  \2X  name  of  J?o  worlde  Jjat  ]?o  fende  hafs 
hyed  is  a  grete  evydense  Jjat  batil  is  cursed.  Ffor  mony  men 
ben  preysid  now  for  fendes  werkes,  and  honour  and  worschip 
J)at  \o  world  gyves  horn  is  comynly  for  vicis  and  not  for  vir- 
tues; ffor  worldly  men  tellen  more  by  vicis  fen  by  virtues. 
Lord,  what  honour  falles  to  a  knyght,  for  he  killes  mony  men  ? 
Wil  I  wot  J>at  honge-men  killen  mony  moo,  and  by  more  just 
titel,  and  so  by  vertue,  and  so  schulden  ]?ei  be  preysid  more 
];en  soche  kny3tis.  And  bochere  of  bestis  dos  oft  tyme  his 
ofiis  by  right  and  by  charite,  and  so  he  dos  hit  wil;  bot 
bocher  of  his  brejjer  by  not  so  gret  evydense  slees  men  in 
charite,  and  so  not  so  justly.  Why  schulde  not  |)is  bocher,  for 
his  better  dede,  be  preysid  more  ]?en  ]?is  kny^t  fat  jjo  world 
hyees  ?  sith  more  virtuous  dede  is  more  for  to  pryse.  And  so 
hit  were  better  to  mon  to  be  bocher  of  bestis  fen  to  be  bocher 
of  his  brefer,  for  fat  is  more  unkyndely.  po  passioun  of  Crist  is 
myche  for  to  preyse,  bot  sleeyng  of  his  tormentoures  is  odiouse 
to  -God.  Lord,  sif  kynge  of  al  fis  world  preyses  so  myche 
passioun,  and  hatis  such  accioim  ^,  why  schulde  not  men  do  so  ? 
As  to  titil  of  conquest,  we  schulde  undirstonde  fat  if  God 
bid  conquest,  hit  may  fen  be  leveful, — as  childer  of  Israel  had 
justly  hor  rewme.  Ffor  sith  God  is  Lord  of  alle  fes  worldly 
godes,  he  may  gif  mon  right  to  what  f ing  fat  he  wiL  And  so, 
if  rewme  have  forfeetid  ageyns  fis  cheff^  lord,  in  peyne  of  fis 
trespas  he  gyves  hit  ofer  folk.  Bot  mon  schulde  not  dreme 
fat  puple  haves  so  synned  fat  God  wil  punysche  hom  fus,  bot 
if  God  telle  hit  hym.  Ffor  foure  hundrid  wynter  synneden 
f  ese  Amorees,  and  God  justly  suffrid  hom  in  londe  of  byheest. 
And  to  suche  a  conquest  mot  conqueroures  be  worthy  for  to 

*  occupacioufi,  BB.  2  cbefe,  BB. 


139 


Title  by  con- 
quest ex- 
amined. 


140 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS, 


Crusades  not 
necessarily 
lawful  because 
sanctioned  by 
the  pope. 


have  ])is  londe  whoche  ]?ei  schulden  conquere.  And  Jjo  thridde ; 
if  God  gif  hit  horn,  and  move  horn  to  conquest,  J)0  titel  is  gode 
inoghe  if  J>ei  contynuen  in  gode  life.  Bot  hit  is  likly  J?at  mony 
conquerours  faylen  in  tyme  of  grace  in  mony  of  })ese.  Bot 
one  ]?ing  I  wot  wil  by  lore  of  God's  lawe,  ]?at  if  a  mon  occupye 
a  lordschip  unjustly,  and  his  eyr  aftir  hym  be  a  just  mon,  God 
J?at  is  cheefF  Lord  approves  his  lordschip ;  ffor  gift  of  God  is 
best  titel,  ^e,  better  ])en  heritage.  And  so  just  lif  of  eyres 
schulde  clere  hor  conscience.  And  j)us  schulde  no  mon  feght 
wi])  o])er  by  titel  of  conquest,  bot  if  God  bad  hym.  And  so, 
as  Baptist  telles,  God  approved  knyghtis  to  deifende  his  lawe 
by  strenght,  al  ]?of  ]?ei  slee  no  men.  And  Crist  bad  sille 
mennes  kootis  and  bye  hom  swerdes,  not  to  feght  bodily,  bot 
to  speke  mekely,  bothe  in  cause  of  God  and  worldly  causis ; 
and  j)es  ben  two  swerdes  ]?at  Crist  seis  ben  inoghe. 

Cap.  XVI. 

Bot  ^itte  men  replyen  of  |?is  new  dede,  J?at  Jjo  pope  approves 
croyserye,  and  to  hym  schulden  men  trowe.  Herinne  ^  is  seid 
pleynly  in  oj^er  placis  Jjat  ])0  pope  may  synne,  and  clerkes  ]?at 
ben  to  him  ward.  Ffor  he  is  not  more  confermed  J?en  Seynt 
Petre  was. ;  and  he,  aftir  he  had  taken  ]?o  Holy  Gost,  synned, 
as  Poul  seies.  Why  myght  not  Anticrist  synne  ?  He  is  Anti- 
crist,  l?at  by  ypocrisie  reversis  Jesus  Crist  in  his  fals  lyvyng. 
Crist  forsoke  to  Jjo  fende  temporal  lordschip ;  Anticrist  gedris 
hit  wij>  mony  a  fals  titil.  Crist  was  most  servisable  of  any  prest 
of  er])e ;  Anticrist  is  most  daungerouse,  and  closid  in  a  castel, 
and  com^^nes  not  wi])  men  by  forme  of  J)0  gospel  more  ]jen 
a  spirit  in  cloos;  how  schulde  he  be  Cristis  vikere?  Meke- 
nesse  and  servise  and  povert  to  \o  worlde  schewis  ])0  fals 
feynyng  of  such  an  ypocrite.  And  in  ]?is  fals  gabbyng  is 
groundid  mony  oJ?er, — as  assoyling  of  synne,  and  mony  o]jer 
privylegies,  bi  whoche  he  bigyles  \o  folk.  For  Jjei  may  not  se 
hom ;  and  ]>ei  schulden  trowe  J?at  he  seies,  as  he  falsely  feynes, 
as  blaspheme  falsehed,  ]?at  he  makes  medeful  to  slee  Cristen 
men,  and  mayntene  his  lordschip,.  je,  more  medeful,  as  he  seis, 

^   hit,  BB; 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC. 


141 


])en  to  deffende  Cristis  lif.  And  )?us  byleve  of  Cristen  is  turned 
up  so  doune. 

And  in  consence  of]?is  synne  sjnanen  clerkes  comynly;  for 
si|>  consence  to  a  synne  foules  mon  in  \o  same  synne,  and  on 
sex  maners  may  a  mon  consente,  hit  is  knowen  by  prestis 
dedes  how  \€\  consenten  in  J)is.  He  consentis  jjat  helpis  to 
do  a  wickid  dede,  or  deffendis  ])is  synne  on  o  maner  or  onoJ?er ; 
he  ]?at  counseils  jjerto,  and  he  jjat  approves  hit;  and  he  J?at 
is  stille  to  helpe  men  ageynes  hit,  and  he  \2X  stirtis  ^  o  bac  for 
to  reprehende  hit. 

po  pope  is  stirtour^  of  ])is  feght,  and  synnes  more  ])en 
feghters, — as  \o  bischopis  of  \o  temple  synned  more  )?en 
Pilate,  or  kny^tis  Jjat  slowen  Crist,  for  prestis  autorisiden  J)is 
synne.  But  who  schulde  have  autorite  to  deffende  ]?o  popis 
lordschip,  his  state,  or  elles  his  lif,  by  such  maner  of  feghting  ? 
Ffor  wil  I  rede  ]?at  Crist  blamed  Seynt  Petre,  for  he  wolde 
deffende  Cristis  lif  by  smytyng  of  swerde.  Also  I  rede  J?at 
Crist  wolde  not  take  vengeaunce  of  Samaritanes,  when  )?ei 
helden  his  owne  godes  fro  hym  and  his  apostils,  and  denyed 
horn  J)us  bothe  mete  and  herberow.  Bot  Crist  seide  he  was 
not  comen  to  lese  ]?us  mennis  lyves.  Also  Crist  is  a  gode 
hyrde  for  J)is  condicioun,  Jjat  he  puttis  his  owne  lif  for  savyng 
of  his  schepe ;  bot  Anticrist  is  a  wolff  of  raveyn,  for  he  dos  ever 
J30  reverse ;  he  puttis  mony  thousande  lyves  for  his  owne 
wrecchid  lif.  And  by  forsakyng  of  ])ing  ])at  Crist  biddes  prestis 
forsake,  he  myght  cees  al  ]?is  stryve.  Why  is  not  he  a  fende  ? 
po  prestis  l?at  feghten  in  ])is  cause  synnen  foule  in  homycide ; 
ffor  if  men-sleeyng  in  seculeres  be  odiouse  to  God,  myche  more 
in  prestis  ])at  schulden  be  Cristis  vikers.  And  clerkes  con- 
senten in  prechyng  and  mayntenyng  of  ]>is  cause,  and  in 
cowarde  dombenesse  for  a  foule  luf,  and  seculeres  in  mony 
wises  consenten  to  J?is  synne.  And  )?us  prestis  ben  irreguler, 
and  seculeres  helpen  hom.  And  J)us  al  J?is  worlde  is  fouly  in 
discencioun  \  and  I  am  certeyn  ]?at  \o  pope  and  alle  men  of 
his  counseil  con  not  make  a  spark  of  resoun  to  prove  fat  he 
schulde  do  ]?us.    And  j?us  bolnyng  by  ire,   and   specialy  in 


1  sturtis,  BB. 


2  autour,  BB, 


Different 
modes  of  con- 
senting to  sin- 


Great  sin  of 
the  pope,  in 
encouraging 
•war  and  blood- 
shed among 
Christizms. 


14^ 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


clerkes,  distourbles  |?o  Chirche  mony  weyes,  and  lettis  men 
to  Wynne  heven.  Bot  byleve  schulde  teche  us  to  be  meke  as 
Crist  was,  and  J)en  schulden  we  fare  \o  better,  bothe  to  body 
and  soule.  If  we  have  ire  in  Gods  cause,  kepe  we  })at  wi]? 
mekenesse  and  wi]?  prudense  of  God,  and  so  schal  we  plese  hym. 

Cap.  XVII. 

po  fifte  synne  of  )?ese  seven  is  calde  slouthe  in  Gods  servise ; 
and  ]?o  world  helpes  \o  fende  bojje  in  ))is  and  ire.  We  schal 
witte  J>at  ydelnesse  in  servise  of  God  norischis  oj^er  mony 
synnes,  and  ]?us  plesis  \o  fende.  And  herfore  seis  J>o  Gospel, 
}>at  ]?o  fende  aspyes  whe}>er  servauntes  of  a  monnis  house  ben 
ydel  and  proude,  and  if  he  fynde  J?at  hit  be  so,  he  dwellis  wi]? 
]?at  mon.  Lord,  if  a  gode  housebonde  wil  not  his  hyne  be  ydel, 
myche  more  of  God,  ]>at  lufs  clene  travel.  And  l?us  we  reden 
of  aungels,  |?at  nowfer  ny^t  ne  day  ]?ei  ben  ydel  in  God's  ser- 
vise, but  blisfuly  serven  hym.  Mon  in  state  of  innocense 
schulde  be  kept  fro  ydelnesse,  if  or,  as  Gods  lawe  seis,  he 
schulde  have  kept  Paradis ;  and  myche  more  in  state  of  synne 
schulde  mon  wake  in  Gods  servise.  Ffor  \o  fende  is  a  thefF 
to  wake  on  mon  bothe  day  and  ny^t ;  and  if  he  se  hym  nappe 
or  ydel,  he  temptis  hym  to  monnis  harme.  If  he  slepe  in  Gods 
servise  ]?o  theff  spoylis  fro  a  mon  godes  ]>at  God  hafs  gyven 
hym,  to  helpe  hym  fro  Jjo  fende./  If  mon  wake  in  ydelnesse, 
])0  fende  aspyes  J)at  J)en  is  tyme  to  tempt  mon  to  serve  hym, 
for  J?en  he  Jjenkes  to  spede  his  cause.  As,  if  a  mon  have  to 
a  lord  any  cause  for  to  spede,  he  chesis  a  tyme  when  ])0  lord 
is  ydel  for  to  here  hym.  And  so  J?o  fend  aspyes  tyme  when 
mon  leves  to  serve  God,  and  )?en  he  moves  to  serve  hym,  in 
lustful  servise  of  })0  flesche,  or  in  servise  of  Jjo  w^orld,  and  putt 
byhynde  Gods  servise.  And  in  j?at  mon  is  fals  ageyne  )?o  firste 
comaun dement,  and  J?en  J50  fende  sees  his  tyme  to  move  mon 
to  serve  hym.  Ffor  iche  mon  mot  sumwhat  do,  as  a  spere  in 
pleyne  place,  moved  In  a  grete  wynde,  mot  nedes  be  moved 
sumwhyder ;  aftir  j)0  movyng  of  J)is  wynde  mot  J^o  spere  take 
his  weye.  *So  iche  monnis  soule  is  a  spere  ])at  nedely  mot 
sumwhat  do;  and  if  ]?o  Holy  Gost  lede  hym  not  to  Gods 
servise,  J)0  fende  ledes  him  to  his ;  for  sumwhat  mot  a  mon  do.  ■• 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC. 


U3 


Lord,  if  monkynde  in  ])0  stat  of  innocense,  when  he  had  in 
hym  strenght,  and  was  not  bysett  wi]?  enmyes,  schulde  not  be 
ydel  bot  serve  his  God  bisily,  fifor  elles  he  schulde  by  ydelnesse 
have  fallen  fro  ]?o  state  of  innocense, — ^how  schulde  he  be  ydel 
now  when  peril  is  myche  more  ?• 

And  here  schulde  a  mbn  vdtte  to  what  state  a  mon  is  calde 
of  God,  and  aftir  J?o  office  of  ))is  state  serve  his  God  treuly,  as 
dy^erse  membres  of  mon  serven  ]jo  body  in  hor  kynde.  And 
as  dyverse  partis  of  mon  served  unkyndely  to  mon  if  one  toke 
]>o  servise  of  anojjer  and  loft  his  owne  propur  werk,  so  dyverse 
partes  of  po  Chirche  have  propir  werkes  to  serve  God ;  and  if 
one  part  leve  his  werk  j>at  God  haves  lymyttid  hym,  and  take 
werke  of  anojjer  part,  synful  wondir  is  in  ]>o  Chirche.  And 
herfore  is  iche  mon  nedid  to  witte  what  state  he  stondis  inne, 
and  kepe  ]>o  servise  of  ])at  state,  for  elles  he  synnes  in  ydel- 
nesse. And  so,  if  a  mon  synne,  he  falles  in  ydelnesse  of  his 
werke.  And  if  J)is  synne  be  in  a  mon,  hit  haves  sum  cistir 
couplid  wij)  hit.  For  nedes  mot  men  here  in  erthe  serve  God 
or  elles  ]>o  fende ;  and  so  as  virtues  ben  knyttid  togedir,  so  ben 
vicis  in  hor  maner.  And  also  hit  sues  ]?at  iche  mon  is  nedid  to 
con  his  byleve,  ffor  a  servaunt  of  a  lord  mot  nede  witte  what  he 
schulde  do.  And  ]?us  byleve  of  holy  writte  schulde  teche  men 
of  hor  state,  hou  J?ei  schulden  serve  hor  God,  lest  )?ei  synned  in 
ydelnesse ;  and  J>us  byleve  is  nedeful  to  iche  mon  of  l?is  worlde. 

Cap.  XVIII. 

And  J>us  schulden  Cristen  men  witte  Jjat  sum  servise  is 
comyne  to  alle  statis  of  men,  when  )?ei  have  discrecioun ;  and 
iche  mon  is  holden  to  kepe  Gods  comandementis,  and  to  serve 
hym  bisily  in  al  Jjat  God  haves  gyven  hym.  Bot,  as  we  seiden 
byfore,  thre  partis  of  Jjo  Chirche  schulden  in  J?re  dyverse  maners 
serve  treuly  hor  God, — as  prestis,  and  gentil  men,  and  laboreres 
of  ]>o  worlde.  As  prestis  have  a  state  hyest  of  alle  oJ)er,  so  God 
askes  of  hom  more  parj&t  servise;  and  ydelnesse  in  prestis  is 
more  dampnable.  po  moste  hye  servise  ))at  men  have  in  erthe 
is  to  preche  Gods  worde,  ]>at  falles  unto  prestis.  And  herfore 
more  streytly  God  askes  of  hom  ]?is  servise,  ffor  herby  schulden 
prestis  make  childer  in  God,  and  |jat  is  a  werke  of  God,  ]?at  hafs 


Each  human 
condition  or 
callhxg  has  its 
own  appro- 
priate work. 


The  work  of  a 
priest  Ls  the 
highest  of  all. 


144 


WYCLIF'S  WORKS. 


and  preaching 
is  the  most 
important 
branch  of  it. 


weddid  \o  Chirche.  Ffeyre  hit  is  to  have  a  son  ]?at  were  lord  of 
J)is  worlde,  hot  myche  feyrer  hit  were  to  have  a  son  in  God,  )>at 
schuld  cum  to  heven  as  lyme  of  holy  Chirche. 

And  herfore  Jesus  Crist  occupyed  hym  mooste  in  )?o  werke 
of  prechyng,  and  laft  oj^er  werkes ;  and  ]>us  diden  his  apostils, 
and  herfore  God  loved  horn.  Also  he  dos  better  ]?at  bettir  kepis 
Gods  heestis.  po  first  heest  of  ]jo  secounde  table  biddes  us 
worschip  oure  elders,  as  fadir  and  modir,  bot  J?is  schulde  moost 
stonde  in  worschip  of  holy  Chirche.  Ffor  ho  is  oure  modir  Jjat 
we  schulden  most  luf,  and  for  hir  dyed  Crist,  as  oure  byleve 
techis  us.  Bot  ho  is  most  worschippid  by  prechyng  of  Gods 
worde,  and  so  J?is  is  ]?o  most  servise  })at  prestis  schulden  do  to 
God.  And  ]?us  a  wommon  seide  to  Crist  ]jat  J)0  wombe  j?at  bare 
hym  and  j)0  teetis  J?at  he  sook  schulden  be  blessid  of  God ;  bot 
Crist  answerid  ]?at  rather  schulden  J?oo  men  be  blessid,  J^at 
heren  Gods  worde  and  kepen  hit  in  lyvyng.  And  J?is  schulden 
prechoures  do  more  J»en  ojjer  men,  ffor  ]jei  schulden  here  ]?o 
worde  of  God  |)at  schulde  speke  in  hom,  and  ]?is  worde  schulden 
]?ei  kepe  more  fen  ojjer  tresoure.  And  ydelnesse  in  ])is  office 
hyndris  most  Jjo  Chirche,  and  gendres  moste  \o  fendes  childer, 
and  sendes  hom  to  his  court.  Also  Jjo  servise  is  better  jjat  haves 
a  worse  contrarie ;  bot  contrarie  of  prechyng  is  worste  of  alle 
ojjer ;  and  herfore  prechyng  is  ])0  best,  if  hit  be  wil  done.  And 
herfore  Jesus  Crist,  when  he  steyghe  to  heven,  enjoyned 
specialy  to  alle  his  apostils  to  preche  \o  gospel  frely  to  iche 
mon.  And  also  when  Crist  spake  last  wif  Petir,  he  bad  hym 
thryes  upon  his  love  for  to  fede  his  schepe ;  and  J)is  wolde  not 
a  wise  hirde  do  bot  if  he  loved  hit  wel,  ffor  Jjo  office  of  gostly 
herde  stondes  in  J?is.  And,  for  J?o  bischops  of  J)0  temple  tellid 
Crist  to  do  J?is  dede,  J?erfore  Crist  tolde  hom  Jjat  at  Jjo  day  of 
dome  Sodom  and  Gomor  schulden  better  fare  J?en  Jjei;  for 
lettyng  of  gostly  seed,  si|j  Jjat  hit  is  better,  is  worse  Jjen  Jjo 
spillyng  of  bodily  seed.  And  Jjus  if  oure  bischopis  prechen  not 
in  hor  persone,  bot  letten  trew  prestis  to  preche  to  hor  schepe,  Jjei 
ben  in  Jjo  synne  of  bischopis  Jjat  kilden  Jesus.  Praying  is  gode, 
but  not  so  gode  as  prechyng ;  ffor  no  prest  wot,  Jjat  dwelles  wijj 
us,  whejjer  his  preyer  be  better  Jjen  preyer  of  Jjo  puple.  And 
Jjis  is  done  herfore,  for  no  prest  schulde  chaffere  wiJj  his  owne 

WYCLIP. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC. 


145 


preyer  and  money  of  men.  Ffor  a  prest  wot  not  \o  valew  of 
his  preyer ;  bot  \2X  mon  chafFeres  ageyns  God  and  resoun,  J?at 
knew  not  \o  valew  of  his  owne  chafFere.  And  so  in  prechyng 
and  preying  wij>  hert,  and  gyvyng  of  sacramentis,  and  lernyng 
of  Gods  lawe,  and  gyvyng  gode  ensaumple  by  clennesse  of  lif, 
schulde  stonde  \o  lif  of  a  prest  if  he  lif  wil.  Etyng  and  slepyng 
and  honeste  of  pleying  schulde  a  prest  take  unto  {)is  ende,  ]>at 
hit  profile  to  hym  to  do  J^ese  fyve  first. 

Cap.  XIX. 

•  Gentil  men  of  J?o  worlde  schulden  serve  hor  God  in  gifftes  J)at 
he  haves  gyven  hom,  and  specialy  in  ]?is ;  jjat  \€\  defFende  Gods 
lawe  by  powere  of  \o  worlde.  And  )?us  \o  prestis  schulden 
Wynne  godes  to  \o  Chirche,  and  gentil  men  defFende  hom  by 
powere  ageyns  yvel  men.  Bot  no  mon  haves  any  offis  to  serve 
his  God,  jjat  ne  he  schulde  serve  hym  more  if  God  gif  hym 
wherwith.  And  Jjus  fendes  childer  schulden  be  chastised  wif 
strenght,  J^at  J?o  Chirche  my^t  profite  aftir  Gods  lawe.  Ffegting 
and  werryng  is  non  ofiis  to  ]?is  part  of  J?o  Chirche,  bot  if  God 
bidde  hom  for  deffence  J^erof ;  and  J?en  schulden  \€\  holde  hom 
in  mekenesse  and  mesure,  as  hor  God  techis  hom.  Justyng 
and  huntyng  and  hawkyng,  wi]?  oJ)er  pley  )>at^  may  be  done 
wij)0uten  synne,.  J?ei  schulden  take  in  mesure,  in  als  myche  as 
J;ei  helpen  for  to  serve  God.  Bot  if  prestis  leven  hor  of&s 
lymyttid  unto  hom,  and  usen  chesse  and  tablis  and  hasarde  or 
taverne,  \€\  passen  unkyndely  fro  J)e  offis  of  prest.  Ffor  \€\ 
schulden  hunte  \o  fende,  and  destrye  synnes,  andbisye  hom  in 
Gods  lawe,  and  taste  of  his  swettnesse,  ne  take  not  jjis  state  bot 
if  pei  wil  holde  J?ese  boundes.  Ffor  covetise  of  wynnyng  and 
ydelnesse  of  reste  bryngen  mony  prestis  to  serve  J?o  fende. 
.  And  as  garmentis  of  pride  schulden  be  fer  fro  knyghtis,  so 
spoyling  of  pore  men,  al  if  \€\  ben  hor  tenauntis.  Rightwise- 
nesse  of  Gods  lawe  schulden  ]?ese  knyghtis  knowe,  and  mayn- 
tene  hit  in  hom  and  in  ojjer  bothe ;  for  myghty  deffendyng  of 
\o  lawe  of  rightwisenesse  falles  to  knyghtis,  by  a  holy  purpose 
for  to  serve  God  and  mayntene  his  lawe.  If  ))ere  ben  feble 
men,  as  clerkes  or  comynnes,  J)at  stonden  wi})  Gods  lawe  and 

^  So  in  BB ;  om.  in  W, 
WORKS.       VOL.    ITT.  L 


The  work  of 
a  gentleman  is 
to  defend 
God's  law. 


He  should 
avoid  injustice 
towards  his 
dependents, 
and  should 
defend  the 
weak,  as 
women,  and 
oppressed 
clergymen. 


146 


WrCLIF'S  WORKS. 


A  scholastic 
speculation  on 
this  topic. 


have  mony  enmyes,  hit  longis  to  knyghtis  to  deffende  horn  fro 
jjese  enmyes.  And  herfore  seis  Baptist  to  knyghtis  of  Rome, 
]>at  if  }jei  wolden  wynne  heven,  ]?ei  schulden  holde  hom  in  })ese 
boundes.  '  Oppresse  ^e  not  30ure  bre]>ren,  ne  do  hom  non 
injurie;  bot  fie  covetise  of  godis,  and  be  payed  wij)  50ure 
sowdes  ^.'  And  for  ]>ei  schulden  passe  comynes  in  knowyng  of 
Gods  lawe,  ]>ei  schulden  teche  comynes  to  holde  rightwisenes. 
And  ])is  is  ]>o  cause  why  God  approves  J)is  state,  and  5ifs  hom 
worldly  worschip  wi]>  powere  and  rentis;  and  if  ]>ei  leven  fis 
office,  Jjei  forfeten  ageyns  God,  and  serven  Gods  enmye,  and 
ben  Gods  traytoures.  And  so  to  hor  servauntis  schulden  ]?ei 
have  charite,  ne  punische  hom  in  no  wey,  ne  take  of  hoiii  no 
servise  bot  by  ]>o  waye  of  charite  and  profite  to  hor  soule. 
And  as  God  Ms  more  mon  J^en  mon  schulde  luf  God,  so  lordes 
of  hor  godenesse  schulden  luf  more  hor  servantis  Ipen  hor 
tenauntis  loven  hom,  for  ]>is  is  Gods  lawe.  And,  for  luf  dos 
mony  )>inges,  for  hit  is  not  ydel,  ]?en  lordes  schulden  helpe  hor 
tenauntis,  and  defende  hom  in  right.  And  so  if  ]?ei  weren 
oppressid  by  unkynde  braunchis,  as  prestis  or  freris,  lordes 
schulden  helpe  hom,  as  kepere  of  a  vyne5erd  schulde  helpe  |?o 
vynes,  and  kutt  awey  supeflu  ]?at  growes  in  hom ;  as  unkynde 
braunches,  )>at  growen  in  ]?o  roote,  schidden  be  kutte  awey  for 
profite  of  Jjo  tree.  And  al]?of  lordes  schulden  comynly  do  J)us, 
nere]?oles  gretter  lordes,  and  specialy  kynges,  ben  more  to 
blame  if  }>ei  faylen  in  J)is.  Ffor  as  hor  mede  is  more  if  ])ei  don 
wel  hor  offis,  so  blame  is  more  and  peyne  for  defaute.  pis 
schulden  prestis  telle  lordes,  or  elles  ]>ei  ben  to  blame. 

Bot  somme  trewthis  ben  hid  in  ])is  mater  ]?at  men  wil  not 
assent  wij),  for  Jjei  con  not  ];o  termes ;  as,  God  is  oblischid  to 
mon  by  his  owne  fredome,  and  God  by  his  just  lawe  may  take 
no  servise  of  mon,  bot  if  he  gif  mon  J)0  better  fen  he  takis 
of  hym.  And  so  God  is  more  holden  to  mon  J^en  mon  may 
be  to  God,  ffor  even  als  myche  as  he  is  holden  gifs  he  to  mon. 
Lef,  sith  ^  lordes  ben  vikers  of  godhed  of  Crist,  lete  hom  sue 
godhed  in  maner  of  hor  governayle. 

^  leeve^  sithen,  BB, 

*  The  rendering  of  this  passage  does  not  agree  with  either  Wydiffite 
version. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC. 


147 


Cap.  XX. 

Moreowver  hit  were  to  witte  how  comynes  schulden  fie  ))is 
synne,  and  serve  God  and  mon^.  By  \o  lawe  of  God  Jjei 
schulden  serve  mekely  to  God  and  to  hor  iordes,  and  do  trew 
servise  to  God  and  to  hor  maysteres,  not  servynge  at  hor  eye, 
and  ydel  in  hor  absence ;  ifor,  as  Seynt  Poule  seis,  Jjei  serven 
first  to  God,  and  God  may  not  be  aweye,  ne  nojjing  hid  fro 
hym.  5^,  by  \o  lawe  of  Crist,  if  \q  lord  be  untrew  mon  and 
tyraunt  to  his  sogettis,  ^it  schulden  ]?ei  serve  hym,  jGfor  ]?ei 
schulden  serve  to  God  in  mekenesse  and  charite.  I  have  not 
redde  in  Gods  lawe  \2X  sogettis  schulden  feght  wi}?  hor  worldly 
soveraynes,  and  so  gete  horn  pees;  bot  Crist  taght  us  by 
paciense  to  vencusche  oure  enmyes,  and  wynne  j)0  blisse  of 
heven,  bot  not  wi})  o]?er  stryvyng.  O,  if  killyng  of  men  be 
foule  Jjing  in  knyghtis,  more  in  hor  sogettis,  ]?at^  schulden  be 
meke  and  pacyent.  And  so  ]?enken  ti-ew  men  \2X  no  mon 
schulde  take  vengeaunce  bot  if  God  bid  hym,  for  to  venge 
Gods  wrong,  pis  lawe  schulden  men  teche  \o  folk,  and  putte 
on  bak  \o  fendes  lawe ;  and  J>en  schulden  men  have  pees,  and 
stryves  schulden  slepe. 

Alle  we  seyn  we  loven  Crist  and  holdyng  of  his  lawe ;  bot 
when  he  bad  his  apostils  preche,  he  wente  hymself  to  heven, 
ffor  j)ei  schulden  at  ])at  tyme  have  more  mynde  on  his  wordes 
fro  he  had  reproved  hom.  He  bad  hom  do  ]?is  ofiis,  go  into 
al  \o  worlde,  and  preche  to  eche  mon  J?o  gospel.  He  bad  not 
wende  to  Jude  ^  and  preche  only  jjcre,  ne  to  \o  folk  of  Israel 
for  J?ei  weren  of  his  kyn,  bot  preche  generaly  bothe  to  state 
and  mon.  Bot  \€\  schulden  not  preche  cronyclis  of  \o  world, 
as  \o  batel  of  Troye  ^,  ne  oJ)er  nyse  fabUs,  ne  monnis  lawes, 
founden  to  wynne  hom  \o  money,  ifor  Crist  biddes  his  clerkes 
preche  l>o  gospel,  and  by  \2X  \€\  wan  \o  world  and  scounfitiden 
Jjo  fende.     For  he  }?at  trowes  |?is  worde,  and  aftirward  is  cris- 

1  yudee,  BB. 


*  The  studiously  un-democratic 
tone  of  this  chapter  is  veiy  notice- 
able, when  one  remembers  the 
charge  continually  brought  against 
Wyclif  and  his  followers   by  their 


contemporaries,  of  exciting  the  com- 
mons to  contempt  and  hatred  of 
their  lords. 

^  See  the  prefatoiy  notice. 


The  duties  of 
the  com- 
monalty; 


•were  they 
taught  as  they 
ought  to  be, 
there  would  be 
peace  instead 
of  strife. 


148 


WFCLIF'S   WORKS. 


J^ 


On  COVET- 

OUSNESS. 


tened,  and  lastis  in  J)is  lore,  schal  be  saaf  in  heven,  and  he  ])at 
trowes  hit  not  schal  be  dampned  in  helle.  Bot  helj?e  ^  is  fer 
fro  fo  trewthe  of  foo  ojjer  thre  japes  a.  And  fus  defaute  of 
prechyng  of  \o  lawe  of  Crist  distourblis  al  ]?is  worlde,  and 
makes  stryff  among  men.  Gods  lawe  techis  subjeccioun  and 
pees,  and  techis  \o  menes  herto,  and  forbedes  )?o  contrarye. 
pus  schulde  J30  folk  be  taght  to  kepe  hom  fro  synne,  and  to 
use  hom  in  virtues.  Bot  Jjis  is  not  by  werre,  sith  )?e  puple  Jjat 
travels  in  werris  schal  evere  be  worse  in  virtues,  and  J)is  is 
worse  ])en  myche  losse  of  worldly  godis.  And  we  schal  witte 
by  Gods  lawe,  ]?at  a  gode  comynate  makes  hom  have  gode 
hedis,  for  ])us  ]?ei  disserven  of  God;  and  synne  J?at  is  in 
comynate  God  ordeyns.  to  be  punischid  .by  wickednesse  of 
hor  soverayne ;  and  }»erfore  ))ei  schulden  fle  synne,  ffor  }>es  two 
partis  of  J)0  Chirche  suen  iche  to  ojjer.  Bot  iche  mon  schulde 
witte  ])at  al  \is  worlde  is  led  by  lawe ;  and  so  holdyng  of  Cristis 
lawe  floures  in  pees  and  charite,  bot  holdyng  of  Anticristis 
lawe  brynges  in  stryfF  and  envye.  And  j)us  may  men  knowe 
J)0  fruyt  of  jjese  two  lawis.  Anticrist  bisyes  hym  to  sommen 
men,  and  curse  hom,  and  pryve  hom  of  her  godes,  and  putte 
hom  efte  in  prisoun.  And  ]?is  lawe  is  more  taght  and  dred  and 
executid,  for  ))0  fende  and  covetise  hafs  more  maystrye  of  men 
J>en  Crist  and  his  lawe,  for  ]?at  is  thynne  sowen.  Ffor  marke 
contreys  and  comynatees,  and  herby  may  j?ou  knowen  hom. 

Cap.  XXI. 

pe  fiffte  synne  of  pese  seven  is  cald  covetise,  or  avarice  of 
worldly  godis,  and  marris  mony  men ;  and  hit  fallis  to  men 
when  Jjei  coveiten  to  myche  godes  of  J?o  worlde,  and  to  Htil 
gostly  godes.  And  desire,  wij?  bisynes,  may  juge  men  in  ])is, 
ffor  what  a  mon  desires  he  travels  more  aboute  hit,  and  sorowis 
more  of  losse  of  hit,  j?en  of  a  )?ing  lesse  loved.  And  by  ))is, 
as  Greggor^  seis,  may  men  knowe  hor  owne  luf.     And  J:us 

^  So  in  BB,  and  W  may  have  had  the  same  reading  originally,  but  the 
word  has  been  partly  .erased,  so  that  it  now  stands  be. 


a  thre  japes.  That  is,  romances, 
fables,  and  human  laws.  See  pre- 
ceding page. 


^  S.  Greg.  Moralia,  lib.  xxxi.  cap. 
13.  'Dum  [hypocrita]  animarum 
damna  aequanimiter  tolerat,  jactu^ 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC. 


149 


when  laboreres  of  \o  worlde  traveler!  in  hor  offis,  J^ei  schulden 
have  hor  eye  to  God,  and  first  and  moste  do  for  hym.  Ffor 
he  is  untrew  to  God  )?at  liflftis  not  up  his  eye  to  hym,  and 
knowes  not  hym  lord  of  alle,  to  whom  eche  mon  mot  nede 
serve,  and  to  worschip  of  his  God  dos  al  Jjat  he  dos.  And  so 
to  knowe  Gods  lawe,  and  specialy  to  serve  God,  is  holy  day 
ordeyned,  and  to  fille  J?ing  leffte  on  werk  day.  And  so  clerkes, 
])at  schulden  lif  contemplatif  lyve,  ben  worse  ]?en  mony  men 
of  J)0  world  J?at  lyven  actif  lif.  Ffor  he  ])at  serves  treuly  to  God 
and  his  mayster,  and  kepes  hym  fro  grete  synnes,  as  mony 
servauntis  done,  Hfej?^  better  lyve  to  God  ]?en  ))es  hye  prelatis 
]?at  ben  negligent  to  serve  God  by  his  lawe.  Ffor  God  curses 
soche  prelatis  as  traytoures  to  hym,  and  soche  comyn  lyvers 
loven  God  ful  wil. 

And  so,  if  we  loken  avarice,  hit  faylls  in  mony  wyses.  Ffor 
whoevere  is  avarous,  he  is  ydolatroure,  and  makes  worldly  godes 
his  God,  and  \2X  is  a  falsehed  ageyne  \o  first  maundement  of 
God,  and  worse  Jjen  lif  of  Paynym.  And  J^erfore  Seynt  Poule 
calles  ydolatrye  of  soche  men  service  of  mawmetis,  as  done 
heethen  men.  And  hit  is  light  for  to  prove,  supposyng  ])is 
reule,  \2X  what  kynd  ]}ing  a  mon  loves  most  he  makes  his  God. 
And  if  men  out  of  byleve  schulden  be  fled  as  paynyms,  mony 
of  us  schulden  be  fled,  for  ]?ei  ben  more  perilouse.  And  so 
covetouse  men  ben  aboute,  as  foolis,  to  turne  \o  ordynaunse 
of  kynde  ]?at  God  hymself  hafs  made;  ffor  God  haves  putte 
hymself  hyeste  of  alle  }?ingis,  and  aftir  hym  monnis  soule,  for 
J)us  ]?inges  schulden  be  loved;  and  erthly  ]?inges  lowest,  fibr 
]?ei  schulden  be  leeste  loved.  And  herfore  erthe  is  defoulid 
under  feet  of  men,  to  teche  J)at  mennis  affeccioun  schulde  be 
litel  to  \o  erthe.  And  herfore  Cristis  apostils  were  taght  of 
hor  mayster  to  shake  J?o  powder  of  hor  feet  to  men  \2X  denyed 
hym.    Bot  Jjo  covetouse  mon  dos  al  contrarye  herto ;  and  when 

1  So  BB  ;  lyven,  W. 


ram  vero  rerum  temporalium  repel- 
lere  .  .  .  festinat,  cunctis  veraciter 
indicat,  teste  mentis  perturbatione, 
quid  amat.  Ibi  quippe  est  grande 
studium  defensionis.  ubi  et  gravior 
vis   amoris.      Nam   quanto    magis 


The  covetous 
man  is  an 
idolater. 


terrena  diligit,  tanto  privari  eis  ve- 
hementius   pertimescit.     Qua   enim 
mente  aliquid  in  hoc  mundo  possi-  j 
demus,  non  docemur  nisi  cum  amit-  j 
timus.'  I 


150 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


Covetousness 
infects  all 
three  parts  of 
the  Church ; 
and  first,  the 
clergy, 


he  coveitis  to  be  lord  J)us  agejns  Gods  wille,  "he  forfeetis 
ageyiie  J?o  Lord  of  alle,  and  )?us  is  made  most  pore  mon. 
Ne  vauntage  herby  haves  he  none  o]>er,  bot  by  luf  is  drawen 
to  helle,  and  J)at  is  ferrist  |?ing  fro  heven.  Ffor  loved  })ing 
drawes  men  to  hit,  as  Jjo  stoon  of  adamaunt  drawes  irne  unto 
hym.  And  herfore  God  biddis  men  most  love  heven  and 
hevenly  J)inges.  And  se  we  hou  ^0  avarous  mon  coveytis  un- 
kyndely  to  fille  his  soule  wi}?  )?ing  ]>at  on  no  wyse  may  fiUe  hit. 
Ffor  monnis  soule  is  ordeyned  J?us  to  be  filde  wij?  hir  God,  and 
vanyte  of  J^is  worlde  makes  hir  to  long  aftir  hym,  ffor  ho  haves 
not  kyndely  ende  to  whiche  monnis  soule  is  made.  And 
herfore  Jjo  avarouse  ^  mon,  evere  )}0  more  he  haves  of  worldly 
gode,  evere  \o  more  he  longes,  ffor  he  is  ferther  fro  his  ende. 

Cap.  XXII. 

Bot  se  we  hou  J)is  avarice  marres  \re  partis  of  J)0  Chirche. 
Ffor  ])ese  prestis  and  ])ese  clerkes,  ])at  schulden  be  ferrest  fro 
covetise,  ben  most  engleymed  ])erwij?,  for  J?ei  forsaken  Gods 
lawe.  pei  schulden  be  payed  by  Gods  part,  as  wi|?  dymes  and 
offerandes,  and  gif  hom  al  to  hevenly  lif,  as  aungels  }>at  were 
sende  fro  God,  and  drawe  men  fro  \o  world  by  virtu  of  hor 
mayster.  Bot  now  no  more  covetouse  men  schal  men  fynde 
in  erthe,  ne  ferrer  fro  hevenly  lif,  ne  more  wrappid  wi]?  worldly 
causes.  And  hit  semes  to  mony  men  jjat  |)ei  gon  hedlyngis 
to  helle,  and  drawen  men  aftir  hom  J)at  ]?ei  schulden  here  to 
heven.  Ne  we  ben  not  sufficient  to  speke  ful  of  ]?is  covetise, 
for  }>o  synne  of  symonye  entris  us  into  avarice,  and  by  stiryng 
of  J)is  synne  we  wedden  hit  al  oure  lif.  Ffor  soche  lawes  and 
occupacioun  ])at  wynnes  us  J)is  worldly  mucke,  we  suen  hom 
for  al  oure  lif,  and  leven  lif  ])at  falles  to  prestis.  Ffor  sith 
prestis  haf  ful  certeyne  worldly  godes  to  hom  in  mesure,  for  Jjei 
schulden  travel  night  and  day  to  coke  for  mennis  gostly  fode, 
and  teche  hem  by  Gods  lawe  hou  men  schulden  leve  perels  of 
])is  worlde, — if  ]>ei  faylen  in  ]?is,  ]?ei  ben  tray  tours  to  God  and 
mon.  Ffor  prest  is  a  spyere  in  his  castel,  to  loke  ofer  perels 
of  schepe ;    and  if  he  be  blynde  in  his  soule  for  pouder  of 

^  At  this  point  there  is  a  gap  in  Douce  273  (BB),  extending  to  p.  154. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC, 


151 


temporal  goodis,  or  slepe  for  lust,  as  sw)'ne  done,  and  j)us  perel 
come  to  schepe,  \o  Lord  fat  owis  \o  schepe  bj  skil  schulde 
dampne  hym  for  negligense.  And  so,  J>of  we  se  not  nowe  J>o 
hardnesse  of  oxire  jugement,  Gods  lawe  techis  ns  how  God  wil 
harde  deme  us. 

And  sith,  as  we  seyden  byfore,  who  ))at  coveytis  worldly  godes 
more  })en  profite  to  his  soule,  or  is  nedeful  to  his  lif,  he  synnes 
in  avarice  ageyne  his  God  and  his  soule,  hit  semes  J?at  persones 
comynly  taken  beneficis  for  avarice.  Ffor  if  \€\  token  for  heele 
of  soule,  ]?ei  wolden  bisily  do  hor  cure,  ffor  negligence  of  ])is 
offis  dampnes  horn  ful  grevously.  And  sith  J>ei  resten  in  worldly 
godes,  and  leven  j>is  offis  in  whiche  is  mede,  hit  semes  ]>at  fese 
godes  ]?ei  sought,  and  not  soule  heele,  in  )?is  offis;  and  }?is  is 
symonye  to  God,  and  cursis  hom  in  hor  entre.  And  als  long 
as  \€\  dwellen  in  J)is  symonye,  \€\  don  harme  to  hor  fioc  in 
^jYYng  of  sacramentis,  in  syngynge  or  preyinge,  or  what  evere 
\€\  do.  And  J)us  blynde  hirdes  and  necgligent  done  harme 
to  J>o  Chirche.  Lord,  whej^er  J>o  first  juge,  J>at  is  welle  of  resoun, 
schal  dampne  }>us  for  necgligence  hyred  hynes  of  his  floe,  and 
schal  spare  more  thefis,  fat  bothe  letten  to  do  Gods  service,  and 
spoylen  hor  schepe  bisily,  and  recken  nevere  of  hor  soules, 
and  hou  fei  faren  !  And  fus  don  somme  bischopis,  erchdekens, 
and  officials  and  servauntis  to  hom,  fat  clippen  f o  puple  and 
spoylen  hom.  And  fus  somme  hyrdes  in  hor  entyre  synnen 
sore  in  symonye,  and  in  contynuaunce  f erof  grevousely  agreg- 
gen  hor  synne,  and  maken  fo  fendes  knott  in  hor  dying  in  |)is 
synne.  Lord,  sith  no  puple  schulde  gif  hor  prestis  by  fo  titil 
of  almes  norischyng  and  hillyng  to  do  hor  prestis  servise,  if  f  ei 
frauden  of  fis  servise,  and  harmen  men  as  fendes,  whef er  men 
ben  holden  by  Cristis  lawe  to  laste  in  fis  almes  1  Wei  I  wot  fat 
Gods  lawe  byndes  not  men  to  fis,  for  fen  God  nedid  men 
to  synne  and  do  hor  owne  dampnacioun.  And  alfof  harme 
may  cum  herof,  in  foole  jugement  of  sogetis,  so  more  harme 
may  lightly  cum  in  foole  askyng  of  almes.  Covetise  of  clerkes 
falles  bothe  in  bying  and  sell}Tig,  and  also  in  procuryng  of  soche 
benfices.  Covetise  is  in  freris,  in  selljmg  of  hor  prechyng,  in 
schryvyng,  in  birying,  and  in  hor  fals  counseyling;  so  fis  semes 
fo  worste  synne  fat  is  amonge  men. 


who  commonly 
seek  benefices 
from  desire  of 
worldly  gain, 
and  so  are 
simoniacaL 


T^2 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS, 


Covetousness 
in  the  nobility 
and  g-entry, 
from  kings 
down  to 
squires, 


who  I.  consent 
to  the  covet- 
ousness of  the 
clergy ; 


Cap.  XXIII. 
po  secunde  part  of  }?o  Chirche  fayles  not  of  avarice,  sij)  alle 
men  of  nobley,  fro  kyngis  unto  squyeers,  synne  in  ]?is  covetise 
oujjer  more  or  lesse.  Ne  hor  owne  covetise  is  not  ynoghe  to 
hom,  bot  if  ])ei  comynen  wi}?  clerkes  in  hor  cursid  covetise. 
Oure  byleve  techis  us  j^at  not  onely  ])ese  men  synnen  ])at  don 
jjo  wicked  dede  of  synne,  bot  ]?ese  []?at]  consenten.  Loke  sixe 
maner  of  consence,  and  aseye  mennis  dedes,  and  )?ou  schalt  se 
Jjat  lordes  conseriten  to  synne  of  clerkes.  Ffor  ]?ei  norischen 
and  defenden  symonye  of  hom,  and  ferfore  hit  is  resonable  by 
rightwisenes  of  God  })at  })ei  ben  parcyneres  of  ]?is  grete  synne. 
Lordes  senden  lettris  for  soche  avaunsementis,  )?ei  speken  by 
mouthe  for  doying  of  Jjis  synne,  and  mayntenen  in  hor  servise 
clerkes  ful  of  symonye  ;  hou  may  J^ei  be  excused  of  synne  to 
God?  pei  done  first  perpetuel  harme  in  apperynge  of  ]>o 
chirches,  and  avaunsen  hor  foolis  to  grete  benfices,  and  at  ]?o 
last  schal  ]?ei  witte  J?at  ]?is  dos  hom  harme.  For  most  avauntage 
l^at  ])ei  have  of  suche  symoneres  is  ]?at  Jjei  lasten  in  hor  servise, 
and  wasten  pore  mennis  godes ;  and  ]?us  a,  if  hit  be  wil  soght, 
dos  hom  algatis  harme.  Hit  is  a  trayturye  to  God,  to  be  his 
special  vikere,  and  hyre  wi])  Gods  godes  men  to  serve  God, 
and  sithen  put  hom  in  hor  offis,  and  drawe  hom  fro  Gods  ser- 
vise ;  sith  servise  ])at  J>ei  schulden  do  is  fedyng  of  \o  ChirchCj 
and  feghtyng  wi]?  J?o  fende  in  deffense  of  Gods  part.  Suche 
fals  traytorye  dos  no  gode  to  rewmes.  Hit  were  better  ]?at 
lewid  men  diden  to  lordes  ))is  offis,  and  al  ]?o  lordschip  of  prestis 
were  purgid  fro  hom ;  ff'or  better  and  lighter  and  treulier  schulde 
hit  be  done,  and  moo  gentil  mennis  childer,  aftir  hor  eyris, 
schulden  be  helpid  by  J?is  offis,  \2X  now  ben  in  myschef.  '  Lord, 
whej^er  hit  were  worschip  to  lordis  of  )>is  world  to  se  in  hor 
presence  soche  synnes  done,  and  pore  mennis  godes  on  J>is 
wyse  wastid !  If  ]?ei  were  lightid  wij?  light  of  byleve,  to  se  al 
aboute  resoun  of  ]?ese  dedis,  Jjei  schulden  have  schame  herof 
and  drede  of  \q  perel.  pei  have  perel  ynogh  of  her  owne 
synne,  fof  }>ei  clouten  not  on  hom  synne  of  hor  servauntis. 
And  in  J?is  same  consence  ben  lerid  and  lewid,  J?at  reproven 
not  j^is  synne,  bot  helpen  j^erto,  —  bischops  and  prechouris, 
'"^  Read  h/s. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC. 


m 


confessoures  and  counseyloures,  })at  schulden  crye  ageyne  j)is, 
and  deffende  Gods  cause.  Bot  blyndenesse  of  Gods  cause  makes 
traytors  unknowen.  Welle  of  Jjis  traytorye  is  }?o  popis  court, 
and  a  streem  herof  ben  courtis  of  bischops,  and  anojjer  streem 
ben  courtis  of  lordis.  And  }>is  synne  flowes  to  possessioneres 
and  freris ;  and  so  hit  owverflowes  al  ]?is  wyde  worlde. 

pere  is  anoJ?er  avarice  approprid  to  lordes,  j?at  comes  of  hor 
pride  and  hor  grete  costis,  ]>at  nedes  horn  to  spoyle  hor 
tenauntis  and  hor  neghtboris,  and  to  feght  wiji  rewmes,  wij? 
whoche  J?ei  schulden  have  pees.  Richees  of  J>is  world  j?at  God 
hafs  graunted  lordes  schulde  be  sufficient  to  horn,  wi]?  a  litil 
prudence,  pei  schulden  ];enke  hou  ]?ei  ben  dedly,  as  o]jer  men 
ben;  \€\  broghten  noght  into  ])is  worlde,  and  naked  ]?ei  schal 
wende  awey.  And  schort  tyme  ]?at  J?ei  dwellen  here,  J?ei  have 
bot  hor  sustynaunce,  bot  if  fei  oght  profiten  to  hor  soule,  and 
ordeynen  wisely  hor  godes,  for  day  of  dome  schal  cum  when 
\t\  schal  nedely  acounte. 

Cap.  XXIV. 

po  J?ridde  part  of  \o  Chirche  is  j)0  comynate  of  men,  l?at 
hafs  mony  partis  smytted  wi]?  avarice,  and  specialy  marchaundis, 
and  men  J)at  wolden  be  riche,  so  ])at  few  men  or  none  ben 
cleene  of  ])is  synne.  Bot  men  of  lawe  and  marchauntis,  and 
chapmen,  and  viteleres,  synnen  more  in  avarice  J?en  done  pore 
laboreres.  And  j^is  token  hereof;  for  now  ben  ]?ei  pore,  and 
now  ben  \€\  ful  riche,  for  wrpnges  Jjat  J?ei  done.  Men  of  lawe  ben 
somme  of  ])0  lawe  of  londe,  and  somme  of  J>o  lawe  of  \o  pope^, 
\2X  holden  Cristen  court.  Bot  ]?is  name  is  ofte  fals,  and  named 
by  j?o  contrarye,  when  J?is  is  byfore  o]?er  Anticristis  court, 
pese  laweres  comynly  ben  men  wifouten  mercy  and  wijjouten 
charite,  as  hor  dedes  schewen.  pei  ben  knytte  by  covenaunt 
to  mayntene  hor  wynnyng,  ]?at  \€\  schulden  take  no  losse,  bot 
J?us  selle  hor  wordes.  And,  as  Austyn  seis^,  f  ei  sellen  hor  right- 
wisenes,  and  now  fei  sellen  falsehed,  and  so  \€\  sellen  j?o  devel. 


a  Either  of  the  common,  or  of  the 
canon  law. 

^  In  the  only  passage  bearing  on 
the  professional  honesty  of  lawyers 


that  I  can  find  in  his  works,  (Epist. 
CLIII)  St.  Augustine  says  pretty 
nigh  the  contrary. 


2.  are  driven 
into  this  sin  by 
pride  and  vain- 
glory. 


Covetousness 
in  the  com- 
mons: 
I.  in  la\vyers ; 


o- 


154 


The  sin  of 
usury. 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 

and  Jjus  \d  parten  hom  fro  God  and  wedden  horn  wij)  J?o 
fende. 

And  })is  same  marchaundise  is  wi]?  thre  oj^er.  Bot  usure  is 
a  comyne  synne  j?at  mony  men  usen ;  and  J>is  is  forfendid  in 
Jjo  olde  lawe,  and  more  in  ]?o  new  lawe,  when  luf  schulde  be 
more.  Lord,  what  charite  is  wit  hym  ]?at  leeves  his  neghtbore 
worldly  godes  for  a  tyme,  and  after  askes  J?o  same,  or  })ing  als^- 
myche  worth,  and  owver  ))is  encrees  ?  So  ))at,  when  al  J?ing 
is  sought,  he  selles  pure  tyme ;  bot  by  propurte  of  God  he  is 
lord  of  tyme,  and  so  charite  is  awey  bothe  to  God  and  mon. 
He  may  not  by  covenaunt  have  so  mykel  encrees,  bot  if  bytwene 
hym  and  o])er  be  bying  and  selling.  He  wil  be  certeyn  of  j>at 
at  he  byes,  and  sumwhat  he  selles,  or  elHs  hym  fayles  right. 
He  selles  not  ]?at  J?ing  ])at  he  leeves  in  a  maner,  for  he  askes 
))at  hool  in  ende  of  a  tyme  ;  ne  he  selles  not  wynnyng  j?at  comes 
of  ]>is  catel,  ffor  mon  selles  not  a  )?ing  J)at  nevere  was  his,  ne 
])ing  }>at  stondes  in  fortune ;  and  oft  J?ere  comes  no  wynnyng. 
And  so,  if  al  ]?inge  be  ^oght,  he  selles  not  ]?ing,  bot  lenght  of 
tyme  by  whiche  he  leeves  ])is  money.  And  so,  sith  lenght  of 
tyme  and  tyme  is  al  one,  he  selles  tyme  to  his  ne^tbore,  and 
])at  he  may  not :  for  God  onely  is  Lord  of  tyme,  and  wil  J)at 
tyme  be  comyne  to  alle  maner  of  creature  J^at  dwellis  in  ]?o 
tyme,  Ne  chaffaryng  of  tyme  profitis  not  to  mon,  ffor  as  God 
ordeynes  tyme  to  mon,  so  mot  hit  be.  And  blessid  be  ]?is  Lord, 
f)at  okeris  on  })is  wyse.  He  leeves  mon  frely  giftis  of  grace  and 
giftis  of  kynde  to  have  for  a  tyme ;  and  efft,  in  ende  of  tyme, 
he  askes  acounte,  what  ]?is  mon  haves  profited  wit  godes  of 
God.  If  he  have  myche  profitid,  \o  Lord  is  ]?o  better  payed,, 
and  al  })0  •  encrees  \o  Lord  gifs  hym,  for  J?o  Lord  is  riche 
inoghe,  and  dampnes  ydelnesse.  And  everiche  servaunt  in 
erthe  J>at  profitis  not  to  hymself,  })is  is  usure  of  luf,  and  not 
usure  of  avarice.  Wil  I  wot  J)at  mony  a  caas  fallis  in  ]jis  mater, 
and  answeres  and  resouns  to  excuse  oker,  bot  God  ))at  wot 
al  )>inge  schal  juge  men  by  hor  purpose,  ffor  bothe  he  puttis 
mede  and  synne  in  mennis  purpose.  Bot  )?o  usurere  wolde  not 
leeve  to  men  J^ese  godes,  bot  if  he  hopid  wynnyng,  })at  he  lufs 

«  Here  ends  the  lacuna  in  tlie  Douce  MS. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC. 


155 


more  })en  charite.     Mony  ojjer  synnes  ben  more  ])en  ]>is  usure, 
bot  for  J)is  men  cursen  and  haten  hit  more  Jsen  oj^er  synne. 

Bot  oft  tjTue  oj?er  avarice  is  more  synne  pen  ))is.  Hit  is  a 
myche  synne  to  holde  conyng  of  God,  and  profite  not  J^erwiJ) 
to  }?in  even  Cristen.  Ojjer  comyne  laboreres  ben  not  wifouten 
avarice,  when  \€\  done  injuries  to  hor  even  Cristen,  not  onely 
for  wynnyng  of  ))is  worldly  gode,  bot  pure  for  envye  and 
veniaunse  of  hor  bro}jer.  And  somme  men  pleten  by  costes 
and  dispensis,  and  wynnyng  geten  j?ei  none,  bot  likyng  of  hor 
veniaunse.  Bot  we  schal  undirstonde  \2X  )?ere  ben  ]?re  lawes, 
lawe  of  God,  and  lawe  of  mon,  and  lawe  of  J?o  fende.  Lawe  of 
God  dos  gode  for  yvel,  and  monnis  lawe  gode  for  gode ;  bot 
\o  lawe  of  \o  fende  dos  evere  more  yvel  for  gode.  And  J)is 
lawe  is  myche  usid  of  \o  fendes  childer. 

Cap.  XXV. 

po  sixte  synne  ofjjese  seven  is  called  glotorye;  and  hit  falles 
to  \o  flesche.  Bot  bothe  \o  fend  and  \o'  world  tempten  mon 
to  ))is  synne,  when  ]?ei  supposen  victorye ;  ffor  bi  fallyng  in  )>is 
synne  J?ei  haf  mon  lightly  to  hor  propur  synne,  by  cautels  of 
hor  temptyng.  Glotorye  falles  ]?en  to  mon,  when  he  takes 
mete  or  drink  more  })en  profitis  to  his  soule.  Ffor  few  men 
synnen  in  abstinence,  ]?at  have  habundaunce  of  })is  fode,  and 
5itt  Jjei  wil  not  take  of  hit.  Bot  certis  hit  may  falle  to  a  mon 
J)at  he  synnes  in  abstinence,  when  he  fedes  not  his  horse  \2X 
schulde  here  hym  to  serve  his  soule.  Ffor  iche  mon  schulde 
be  a  kny^t,  and  ryde  here  in  worldly  travel ;  ffor  by  J?is  travel 
schulde  a  mon  make  blis  to  his  soule  and  gete  to  hit  fo  joye  of 
heven,  for  mede  of  his  travel.  Ffor,  as  \o  gospel  techis,  mon 
is  here  as  wommon  J?at  travels  of  childe  in  anguische  and  noye. 
And  if  \o  childe  be  wil  borne,  }?at  is,  a  cleene  soule,  in  house  of 
his  deth  hit  partis  fro  his  body ;  ))en  he  joyes  for  his  peyne  Jjat 
he  suffrid  here,  ffor  his  peyne  is  turned  to  blis  J^at  he  schal  evere 
have.  And  so  ]?is  Lord  J>at  we  serven  wil  J>at  we  eete  and  drink 
als  myche  as  profitis  us,  or  we  schulde  aske  by  resoun.  If  a 
mon,  to  chastise  his  body,  take  ))ese  J)inges  in  abstinence,  if  he 
have  prudense  J>erwi]?,  J)0  abstinence  is  medeful.  And  so,  if 
God  sende  hym  wantyng  of  Jjese  godes,  and  he  J>enke  al  is 


Other  forms  of 
co\  etousness  in 
the  commons. 


Gluttony: 
definition  of 
the  sin. 


The  possible 
abuse,  but 
general  bene- 
fits, of  ab- 
stinence. 


75^ 


WrCLIF'S  WORKS. 


Other  kinds  of 
gluttony. 


Gluttony  in  the 
clergy  and 
monks ; 


gods,  and  J^at  he  has  myche  more  synned,  jjen  j)is  abstinence  is 
worthe,  and  Jjonkes  God  in  charite ;  ])is  abstinence  is  gode  and 
medeful  to  })is  mon.  Lord,  men  abstenen  in  werre,  with  myche 
fastyng  and  peyne,  to  wynne  worschip  of  \o  worlde  and  to 
anoye  hor  enmyes ;  bot  for  to  wynne  \o  blis  of  heven  and  dis- 
counfite  \o  flesche,  \ti  wil  not  gladly  fast  ])us,  for  )?at  flesche  is 
hor  god.  And  herfore  seis  Seynt  Poule  ))at  glotouns  ben'oute  of 
]70  feith,  sith  jjei  maken  hor  wombe  hor  God,  |>at  jjei  loven  more 
]?en  homself,  and  so  more  ]?en  trewe  God,  alfof  be  he  above 
mon,  whiche  he  schulde  luf  more  ]?en  mon,  for  God  is  bettir  J>en 
mon  in  kynde.  And  certis  ]?is  is  a  foule  sac  ^  and  stynkyng  ]>at 
mon  makes  his  god.  And  mon  is  more  foule  by  synne  when 
he  hafs  chosen  hym  suche  a  god,  and  forsaken  oure  gode  God 
Jjat  so  myche  hafs  done  for  mon. 

And  here  may  we  se  J30  maner  of  glotorye.  Ffor  glotorye  is 
not  onely  in  meete  and  drink,  bot  in  al  oj^er  ]?ing  jjat  schulde 
norische  a  mon ;  and  so,  as  temperure  of  iche  bodily  |?ing  schulde 
norische  a  mon,  distemperure  }?erinne  may  be  calde  glotorye. 
So  foole  fastyng  is  glotorye,  and  so,  sith  excessis  in  mesure  is 
calde  glotorye,  iche  synne  is  glotorye  or  suyng  Jjerof ;  ffor  he  is 
a  glotoun  ))at  travels  oute  of  mesure  to  con  mony  J?inges,  ]?at 
don  his  soule  harme.  And  ))us  may  we  se  }>at  iche  glotoun  is 
a  foole,  as  mon  when  he  synnes  travels  in  foly ;  as  iche  synful 
mon  synnes  for  sum  gode,  and  ]jo  contrarie  falles  J>at  J)0  foole 
coveytis.  As,  \o  glotorous  mon  coveytis  to  haf  lust,  or  ellis  to 
have  strenght  or  beute  of  body,  bot  ]?o  contrarie  falles  of  alle 
]?es  l?inges,  sith  a  glotoun  by  his  synne  schortis  his  lif,  and 
makes  hymself  feble  in  strenght  of  his  body,  and  a  stinkyng 
caryoun  by  resoun  of  his  glotorye. 

Cap.  XXVL 

And  J)us  )>re  partis  of  ])0  Chirche  synne  in  glotorye,  bot 
clerkes  more  schamely,  for  J?ei  schulden  kepe  more  tem- 
peraunce.  Upon  fyve  maners  synnen  men  in  excesse  of 
eetyng  and  drinkyng,  and  comynly  clerkes.  Ffirst  when  a  mon 
eetis  or  drinkes  byfore  ]>o  tyme  J?at  resoun  schulde  aske;  as 
glotouns  of  drinke  wil  drinke  in  ])e  morowe,  and  jjat,  as  J^ei 

^  So  in  BB  ;  W  has  sek. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC. 


^57 


seyn,  askes  dronkenes  owver  even.  Sum  mon  to  hastily  eetis 
or  drinkes,  and  |?at  ageyne  physik  dos  harme  to  his  body.  And 
somme  men  deynteuously  ^  norischen  her  body,  as  spendyng 
Gods  gode  to  costily  in  glotorye.  And  sum  mon  to  lustfuly 
eetis  or  drinkes,  and  \2X  distemperes  a  mon  in  body  and  in 
soule.  And  somme  men  taken  hom  tyme  to  eete  saverly,  and 
evere  \o  more  )?at  j^ei  wasten  \o  better  ben  J?ei  payed ;  3e,  \€\ 
holden  hit  a  booste  to  eete  myche  or  drinke.  And  God  wot 
whejjer  proude  clerkes  synnen  in  fese  maners;  3e,  religiouse 
men,  as  mounkes  or  freris,  wasten  more  meete  or  drinke  {jen 
profitis  to  hom.  *Ffor,  as  mony  men  seyn,  monkes  haf  grete 
kuppes,  and  purchascen  pardoun  to  men  J?at  drinken  depe  of 
hom*^,  and  in  hor  bred  and  hor  drinke  asken  ]?ei  a  mesure, 
and  stryven  for  defaute  ))erof  more  J;en  defaute  of  virtues.  As 
J?ei  asken  noumbre  and  grettenesse  of  eyren,  so  ]?ei  asken  large- 
nesse  of  flesche  and  of  fische ;  and  J?us  J^ei  harmen  homself  in 
mortheryng  of  meete.  And  so  Jjei  synnen  in  excesse  of  wak- 
yng  and  fastyng ;  and  biddyng  of  hor  psalmes,  and  forme  of 
hor  clothyng,  and  syngnes  of  hor  silence,  done  homself  harme, 
and  occupyen  hor  wittes  in  lernyng  of  ]?ese  j?inges.  And  al 
suche  excesse  smakes  glotorye. 

Bot  blessid  be  })0  Lord  J>at  askes  of  mon  mesure  and 
noumbre  and  weght  of  a  clene  luf !  for  virtues  of  God  may  no 
mon  disuse ;  and  herfore  schulde  iche  mon  coveyte  myche  of 
hom.  Bot  bischops  or  abbotis  or  o]?er  grcte  prelatis  holden  a 
grete  avaunt^  to  be  gode  meete-gyveres,  and  coste  myche  of 
Gods  godes  in  quantite  of  meete  and  in  qualite  Jjerof,  by  whiche 
)?ei  passen  hor  neghtbores;  and  by  resoun  herof  maken  fals 
suggestiouns,  and  seyn  fat  J^ei  have  nede  of  so  myche  rent. 
And  ))is  schewes  opunly  whoos  childer  ]?ei  ben.  Ffor  \o  fadir 
of  leesynges,  god  of  alle  glotouns,  is  god  of  hom,  to  whom  \€\ 
alle  serven.  Ffor  he  J?at  worschips  fals  goddes  mote  nede  have 
mony.  And  ]?us,  if  we  taken  hede  to  noumbre  of  j?ese  prestis, 
and  quantite  of  hor  fode  ]?at  \€\  consumen,  no  folc  in  })is 
worlde  maken  more  waste.     And  if  J?ei  schulden  feste  men  wi]? 


^  to  tenderly,  BB. 
omitted  in  BB. 


2  The  passage  between  the  asterisks  is 
^  vau7it,  BB. 


waste  of  good 
food. 


158 


WrCLIF'S  WORKS. 


Gluttony  in  the 
nobility  and 
gentry;; 


hor  meete,  |)ei  maken  more  waste  ])en  any  oj^er  men.  And  sith 
seyntis  seyn,  and  resoun  approves  hit,  |?at  richesses  fat  clerkes 
have  schulden  be  pore  mennis  godis,  )7ei  done  wronge  to  pore 
men  in  alle  suche  excesse.  Hor  chekis  and  hor  body  beren 
wittenesse  of  hor  lif,  hou  Jjei  lyven  in  glotorye  of  pore  mennis 
part.  Lord,  si)>  Crist  schal  dampne  men  at  J?o  day  of  dome 
for  j)ei  fede  not  pore  men,  as  J)0  gospel  seis,  hou  schal  fei  be 
dampned  ])at  professen  povert,  and  maken  hor  suggestioun 
in  getyng  of  hor.godes  ]?at  Jjei  schulden  fede  pore  men,  and 
aftir  al  J)is  mortheren  pore  mennis  godes,  as  traytours  to  God. 
per  ben  mony  mon-sleeres,  bot  fese  ben  j^o  foulest,  ffor  j?ei 
sleen  pore  men,  hor  owne^  body  and  soule.  Of  ])is  serves 
dowyng,  ageyne  Gods  maundement,  to  norische  soche  fendes 
and  traytoures  to  pore  men.  pus  speken  seyntis  of  almes 
gyven  to  clerkes,  hou  hit  is  turned  to  thefte,  to  raveyne,  and 
sacrilege. 

Cap.  XXVII. 

po  secounde  part  of  Jjo  Chirche  synnes  in  glotorye,  and 
specialy  in  costily  meetis  and  drinkes.  And  al])of  gentil  men 
schulden  costilyere  fare  ]?en  prestis,  })ei  ben  not  excusid  fro  ])0 
synne  of  glotorye.  Ffor  he  Jjat  wil  kepe  hym  fro  drenchyng  of 
water,  kepe  hym  fro  ])e  brynke  for  to  be  siker.  Soth  hit  is  ))at 
lordes  schulden  reule  by  drede  and  powere,  and  so  J)ei  schulden 
be  costily  in  fode  and  in  clothyng.  Bot  ]?ei  may  passe  resoun 
by  pride  of  hor  state ;  and  herof  comen  mony  perels  by  wey  of 
suche  glotorie ;  and  ])us  ]?ei  rennen  in  dette,  and  wasten  hor 
godes;  and  aftir  Jjei  pillen  hor  tenauntis,  and  distourblen 
rewmes,  and  so  ]?ei  ben  worse  \tn  theves  by  cause  of  j/is 
glotorye.  For  soth  hit  is  Jjat  grete  cause  of  stryffe  in  J?o 
puple  is  unjust  partyng  of  worldly  richesse.  po  puple  is 
childische,  and  takes  more  hede  to  suche  J)ing  jjen  )?ei  done  to 
virtues  or  richessis  of  \o  soule,  ffor  gostily  ])ingis  )jei  seen  not, 
and  knowen  hom  to  litil.  Lordes  by  suche  glotorye  fallen  offt 
in  sikenesse,  and  so  ben  deede  or  hor  tyme,  by  hor  owne 
hondes.     Ffor,  as  clerkes  seyn  comynly,  glotorie  slees  mo  men 

^  BB  reads  and  ]per  owne. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC. 


159 


jjen  dos  swerde.  And  on  J)is  wyse  glotouns  ben  mon-sleers  ; 
and  when  J?ei  loven  homself  so  litil,  no  wonder  \oi  \€\  sleen  hor 
brether.  Glotorye  distoui'blis  lordis  to  have  hor  hoole  wittes. 
Ffor  when  \o  body  is  undisposid,  hit  serves  not  wil  \o  soule  ; 
and  ]?en  )?ei  reulen  amysse  homself  and  ]?o  peeple  undir  horn. 
And  of  pis  springes  lecchorye,  and  mony  synnes  aftir  hit ;  and 
J)us  \o  fende  by  one  synne  bringes  a  mon  to  mony.  And  pus 
fro  po  brinke  ben  mony  led  into  po  grete  see,  and  pere  ben  pei 
drenchid. 

And  lustis  and  defaute  of  reule  is  cause  of  pis  synne.  For 
mon  schulde  wil  witte,  pat  ofte  comyne  meetis  ben  more  holsum 
to  men  pen  ben  pese  riche  meetis  wip  hoot  spices,  and  oft  tymes 
comyne  drinkes  dos  more  gode  pen  pese  hye  drinkes,  made 
costily  by  crafftis.  And  pus  mony  men  supposen  pat  God  hafs 
gyven  to  reumes  bothe  meete  and  drink  pat  is  most  acordyng 
to  hom.  So  if  po  reume  of  Englond  were  reulid  wil  by  resoun, 
ping  pat  comes  forth  in  po  lond  wolde  suffis  hit  to  meete  and 
drinke.  Bot  wil  I  wot  pat  God  hafs  ordeyned  one  lond  to  be 
plentyuous  in  one  maner  of  ping,  and  one  in  anoper,  ifor  cause 
pat  pei  schulden  comyne  in  charite.  Bot  pis  is  to  myche  lefft 
by  werris  and  covetise ;  for  mony  men  byen  wyne  for  lustis  and 
for  wynnyng.  For  alpof  wyne  be  nedeful  for  lordes  and  sacra- 
mentis,  nerepoles  God  Almyghty  askes  ping  in  mesure.  And 
so  mony  drinken  wyne  pat  were  better  lif  wip  ale.  We  schulden 
trist  and  knowe  of  cure  gode  God,  pat  he  wil  pat  his  servauntis 
have  gode  mete  and  drinke,  to  remounte  hom  in  hor  body,  and 
herby  serve  hym  better ;  bot  in  al  pinge  he  askes  mesure,  as 
God  is  in  al  pinge.  And  pus,  by  ensaumple  of  glotorye  of 
lordes,  apis  pat  ben  lesse  pen  pei  synnen  mony  weys,  when  pei 
ben  to  costily  and  to  lustily  in  fode.  Ffor  prelatis  and  abbotis 
be^  ensaumple  herof,  passen  lif  of  lordes,  and  wasten  pore 
mennis  meete.  And  pis  makes  po  lordschip  pat  pei  ben  dowid 
wip ;  flfor  herfore  pei  leeven  prestis  state,  and  taken  lif  of  lordis. 

Cap.  XXVIII. 

po  pridde  part  of  po  Chirche  synnes  to  myche  in  glotorye,  as 
men  pat  haf  myche  worldly  gode,  and  perwip  ben  to  lustily ;  as 

^  hy,  BB. 


interchange  of 
products  be- 
tween different 
countries  is 
good. 


Gluttony  in  the 
commons. 


i6o 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


Evils  of  drunk- 
enness. 


burgeis  and  marchaundes  and  o})er  riche  comynes.    Horn  J^enke 

hit  is  a  grete  avaunt  to  spende  myche  in  household,  and  make 

grete  festis  to  lordes;  and  herof  comes  myche  yvel;  fFor  by  J?is 

ben  parties   made,   and   mony  wrongis  mayntened.     Ffor  ]?o 

synne  of  covetise  bringis  in  \o  synne  of  glotorye.     And  not 

onely  riche  comyns  synnen  Jjus  in  glotorye,  bot  mony  pore 

laboreres  ben  blemyschid  by  l?is  synne,  and  specialy  in  dronk- 

enesse,   for  uneven  norisching.     Ffor  now  \q\  hungren  and 

thristen,  and  J)erwif)  travelen  fast,  and  now  Jjei  comen  to  meete 

and  drinke,  and  taken  to  myche  J>erof ;   and  soche  mot  nede 

passe  mesure,  as  swyne  eten  hor  meete.    pis  we  seyn,  for  soche 

men  schulden  warly  ete  and  drinke,  and  take  sum  drinke  on 

werk  day,  and  not  spende  al  on  holy  day ;  ffor  ]?is  J^ing  unables 

hom  to  serve  God  on  holy  day,  and  makes  hom  to  feght  as 

wode  men,  56,  more  ])en  beestis  done,  ffor  beestis  kepen  more 

mesure  in  etyng  and  drinkyng. 

Hit  were  to  long  to  telle  ]?o  harmes  J>at  comen  of  dronkenesse, 

ffor  soche  men,  as  beestis,  serven  l?en  not  Crist, — ffor  Crist  is 

wisedome  of  \o  Fader, — and  ])ei  faylen  ]?en  in  resoun,  and  ben 

)?en  as  hors  and  mule  J^at  wanten  undirstondyng.    Lord,  sith  hit 

is  schameful  to  be  in  state  of  a  beeste,  myche  more  schulde  hit 

be  to  passe  beeste  in  foly ;   and  so  done  |>es  dronken  men  for 

tyme  ]?at  l?ei  ben  dronken.    A  mon  schulde  not  by  resoun,  to 

Wynne  al  fis  worlde,  ne  to  wynne  Jjo  blis  of  heven,  chese  to  lese 

his  witte;  for  J^en  hit  did  hym  no  gode,  lordschip  ne  blis  of 

heven ;  as  men  seen  ])at  beestis  coveyten  not  monnis  lordschip. 

Bot  si])  men  fallen  by  dronkenesse  fro  resoun  worse  ])en  beestis, 

who  schulde  not  by  pure  skile  fie  to  be  droiiken  ?     And  by  J>is 

skile  al  synne  schulde  algatis  be  fled,  for  synne  makes  a  mon 

noght  in  ))at  ])at  he  is  synful.     Ffor  ^itt  a  mon  is  sum  j^ing  in 

|)at  }>at  he  is  myche  or  litil,  and  so  in  jjat  J)at  he  is  whit  ^,  slep- 

ynge,  or  restynge;  bot  no  mon  is  oght  worthe  in  Jjat  ])at  he 

synnes.      And  herfore,    as   Austyn   seis,    synne   makes    mon 

noght  a. 

^  witty yBB. 

a  S.  Aug.  Enarratio  in  Ps.   143.  similis  factus  est ;  sed  quia  peccavit, 

'  Homo  vanitati  similisfacl7is  est.  Pec-  quia  recepit  digna^  vanitati  similis 

cando  vanitati  similis  facins  est.    Nam  factus  est.* 
quando  est  primum  conditus,  veritati 

WYCLIF. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC. 


i6i 


And  if  }?ou  sey  ]>at  hit  spedes  a  mon  to  be  dronken  ones  in 
a  moneth,  for  myche  gode  comes  ]?erof, — suppose  we  to  phisi- 
sians  )>at  \€\  taken  soth,  bot  wil  I  wot  J>at  more  gode  comes  of 
mennis  synne ;  bot  schulden  men  synne  herfore  ?  sith  ]?at  Poule 
seis  nay.  If  gode  cum  of  synne  hit  is  a  grace  of  God,  and 
men  schulden  not  putt  hom  in  ])is  caas  to  wynne  al  J?is  worlde, 
ffor  in  ]?is  ]?ei  tempten  God,  and  witten  not  whejjer  his  right- 
wisenes  wil  profyte  mercyfuly  to  mon  when  he  synnes  ])us. 
And  if  Jjou  sey,  mon  fallyng  in  dronkenesse  ryses  sone  ])erof, 
and  better  is  disposid  for  to  do  his  werk,  or  what  ])at  he 
schulde  do,  here  ])0u  spekes  as  a  foole,  as  alle  proctoures  of 
synne.  For  Jjou  woste  nevere  whe)>er  Jjou  schalt  dye  in  tyme 
of  \\  dronkenesse,  and  nere  make  asethe  to  God  for  synne  \2X 
Jjou  fallis  inne.  Bot  Gods  lawe  techis  us  to  lyve  evere  in  ]?at 
state  }>at  we  be  redy  to  hym,  what  tyme  ))at  he  calles  us.  And 
amonge  ojjer  causes,  herfore  haves  God  ordeyned  ]>at  tyme  of 
deth  be  uncerteyne  to  men  Jjat  dwellen  here  in  erthe,  ffor  we 
schulden  evere  be  redy  whenevere  God  calles  us  to  ende  in  his 
servise,  and  take  of  him  J>o  blis  of  heven.  Mony  soche  blynde- 
nessis  colouren  mennis  synne  and  maken  hom  Gods  foolis, 
for  iche  synne  comes  of  folye.  If  J?o  worlde  holde  men  foolis 
for  \o  luf  of  Crist,  hit  is  a  gode  token  in  men  ])at  lyve  wel,  for 
we  schulden  take  as  bileve  ]?at  mon  when  he  synnes  dos  hym 
harmc,  to  body  and  to  soule,  to  l?is  Hf  and  to  j^at  o}?er. 

Cap.  XXIX. 

po  sevent  synne  is  lecchorye,  and  stondis  in  J?is  J?ing,  ]?at 
mon  mysusis  lymes  or  powere  of  his  body,  J>at  God  haves 
ordeyned  unto  men  for  his  kyndely  gendrure.  And  undir- 
stonde  we  by  mon,  bothe  mon  and  wommon.  And  on  fyve 
maners  is  J?is  synne  done.  Ffirst,  when  a  sengle  mon  delis  wij? 
a  sengle  wommon,  and  J?is  \o  chapitre  calles  a  symple  forni- 
cacioun.  As  God  hafs  ordeyned  instrumentis  and  powere  to 
do  J?is  dede,  so  he  ordeynes  mariage  and  feyth  of  wedded  folk. 
And  Jjus  in  iche  lechorye  is  sum  Jjing  by  kynde,  and  sum  J^ing 
ageyns  kynde ;  and  J?erinne  stondes  synne.  Ffor  synne  is  so 
feble  and  no5t  worth  ^  of  hym,  J^at  hit  myght  not  be  bot  if  gode 
^  worthy,  BB. 

WORKS.      VOIi.  III.  M 


Pleas  for  in- 
temperance 
refuted. 


Definition 
of  LUST. 


It  has  five 

kinds: 

I.  fornication ; 


l62, 


2.  adultery; 


3.  seduction ; 


4.  seduction  in 
the  case  of 
kindred ; 


5.  unnatural 
offences. 


Every  sin  is  a 
kind  of  spi- 
ritual adultery. 


The  nature  of 
this  sin  in 
priests. 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 

of  kynde  groundid  hit.  And  he  )?at  excusis  synne,  or  preysis 
hit  herfore,  excusis  J>o  fende  and  dispreyses  God.  po  secounde 
maner  of  ]?is  synne  is  calde  avoutrye,  and  falles  on  thre  maners ; 
when  weddid  synnes  wi}>  weddid,  or  weddid  wi]?  unweddid; 
and  ]?at  is  on  two  maners.  And  J?is  is  a  gratter  synne,  for  feyth 
in  ])is  is  broken,  and  mony  harmes  comen  herof,  as  feghtyng 
and  disherityng,  leesyng  of  godes  and  virtues,  and  fat  is  moste 
of  al.  po  thridde  maner  of  ]>is  synne  is  lecchorye  wij?  virgyns. 
Ffor  he  ])at  moves  horn  herto,  ou])er  mon  or  wommon,  is  by- 
gynner  of  ]?is  synne  and  mony  oj^er  ]?at  folowen.  po  fourt 
maner  of  lecchorye  is  bytwene  kyn,  or  ellis  bytwene  affinitCy 
and  |?is  is  grett  synne.  Ffor  everiche  suche  couplyng  schulde 
be  for  luf  and  charite,  and  herfore  hafs  monnis  lawe  ordeyned 
]?at  kyn  and  affinite  schulde  not  be  weddid  ])us  togider,  for  hit 
is  no  myster.  And  dispensacioun  wi]?  Jjis  lawe  Wynnes  myche 
money.  Weddyng  of  fadir  or  modir  wi]?  hor  owne  childe  is 
agens  Gods  lawe  for  resonable  causes,  po  fifft  maner  of 
lecchorye  is  ]>o  synne  of  Sodome,  and  is  more  unkyndeiy  ])en 
any  oj^er  lecchorye.  ^  And  J)is  synne  may  mony  weys  falle  unto 
men,  or  elles  to  wymmen,  for  mony  kyns  causes.  And  among 
ojjer  synnes  ])is  hatis  God  myche ;  and  hit  cryes  unto  God  to 
have  veniaunse  J>erfore. 

Bot  bisyde  ]>is  bodily  lecchorye  of  men  fere  is  gostly  lec- 
chorye, fat  God  chargis  more.  Iche  synne  may  be  calde  a 
maner  of  voutrie,  sith  God  schulde  be  spouse  to  iche  monnis 
soule,  and  fis  weddyng  is  broken  by  iche  hedly^  synne;  and 
more  synne  is  none  fen  to  breke  f is  spousehed,  for  hit  is  most 
hye  and  most  for  to  kepe.  And  here  asken  prestis  hou  hor 
synne  is  calde  ^ ;  for  hit  semes  fat  hit  is  bot  simple  fornica- 
cioun,  and  so  f  o  lightist  of  of  er  maner  lecchorye.  But  me  f  enkes 
fat  f is  synne  of  prestis  is  more  grevouse ;  for  as  f ei  schulden 
be  more  hye  in  virtues  fen  ofer  men,  so  fei  synnen  .most  gre- 
vousely  in  brekyng  of  Gods  spousehed,  as  lecchorie  of  a  noune 
is  comynly  more  grevouse  fen  simple  fornicacioun  of  anof er 
wommon.  Trist  we  not  to  lightenesse  of  fis  lecchorye,  ffor  hit 
is  grevous  for  to  dampne  a  mon,  sith  Seint  Poule  seis  fat  no 


bedely,  BB. 


clepyd,  BB. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC. 


163 


maner  lecchoure  hafs  part  of  heritage  in  ]?o  reume  of  God.  Ne 
triste  we  not  to  leve  ]?is  synne  by  oure  o^\^le  powere  in  tyme 
of  oure  elde,  al])of  we  synnen  in  ^oukthe  ^,  flfor  certis  we  witte 
not  what  tyme  God  wil  calle  us.  And  ))is  synne  is  ful  lustful 
in  men  of  nowne  powere,  and  jjei  may  synne  as  myche  as  ^onge 
men  in  dede. 

Cap.  XXX. 

Bot  se  we  owver  how  ])is  synne  is  partid  in  ]>o  Chirche.  And 
hit  semes  |)at  prestis  synnen  myche  in  avoutrie,  bothe  religious 
and  o)?er.  And  by  J)is  skile  wil  we  witte,  ]?at  ^oukthe  of  horn, 
and  state  of  complexioun,  and  hor  fode  and  ydelnesse,  wil  dryve 
hom  to  ]?is  synne.  And  herfore  men  ])at  knowen  hor  dedis 
seyn  J)at  ]>ei  synnen  here  mony  gatis,  sith  more  grevos  avoutrie 
pei  chargen  to  litel,  and  he  jjat  is  untrew  in  more  reckes  litel 
to  be  fals  in  lesse.  Ffor  prestis  ben  weddid  wij?  God  by  holdyng 
of  his  lawe,  and  ))is  bond  is  dissolvyd  bothe  in  lif  and  offis. 
For  ]>ei  schulden  lif  on  Gods  part,  and  preche  trewly  ]>o  gospel, 
bot  bothe  ]?ese  have  prestis  schamefuly  forsaken,  and  ben  weddid 
wij>  ])0  contrarie  to  hor  lyves  ende.  And  so  ]?ei  have  taken 
Anticrist  and  forsaken  Crist,  and  more  foule  devorse  was  nevere 
none  made.  Hor  bodily  lecchorye  cryes  in  ]?o  Chirche  bothe 
prively  and  apertly,  by  holdyng  of  hor  lemmons  and  by  getyng 
of  hor  childer,  as  ]>ei  were  weddid  men.  Lord,  sith  Seynt 
Poule  wolde  nevere  ete  flesche  bifore  he  sclaundrid  his  brother, 
hou  may  prestis  for  schame  synne  comynly  wi])  wymmen,  ^e, 
])at  schulden  be  hor  childer !  OuJ>er  Gods  lawe  is  fals  and  }70 
popes  lawe  bothe,  or  )?ese  men  schulden  be  prived  of  almes  of 
])0  puple.  Ffor  om'e  bileve  techis  us  |?at  ]?ei  harmen  homself, 
and  J)0  puple  J?at  ]>ei  schulden  gostly  serve  in  clennes.  Bot 
cursid  be  Jjat  lawe  ]?at  ]?us  nedis  a  mon  to  harme  hymself  and 
his  broJ?er,  ageyns  ]>o  lawe  of  God. 

And  by  myche  more  skile  fro  freris  and  possessioneres 
schulden  men  wij)drawe  hor  almes,  when  ]>ei  synnen  more, 
bothe  by  wastyng  pore  mennis  godes  by  more  falsehed  and 
lecchorie,  and  lesse  servyng  unto  men,  bothe  bifore  God  and 

M  2 


The  secular 
clergy  are 
grievously 
gtiilty  of  this 
sm,  both  in  the 
material  and  in 
the  spiritual 
sense. 


164 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


Prevalence  of 
this  sin  among 
the  nobility 
and  gentry ; 


mon.  Bot,  for  strenght  of  Anticrist,  men  })at  wolden  bygynne 
]3is  moten  gedire  horn  togedir,  and  onely  holde  wi])  Gods  lawe. 
Lord,  who  wolde  not  despise  ]?is,  jjat  mouthe  and  hondes  of  J?is 
prest  ])at  makes  and  tretis  Gods  body  schulden  be  polute  wi]) 
a  hoore  !  And  if  he  abstyne  hym  fro  masse,  and  resseyve  J)0 
sacrament,  sith  he  resseyves  hit  gostly  wi])  an  unclene  bileve, 
he  dos  more  despit  to  Gods  body  }?en  if  he  caste  hit  in  ])0  lake ; 
for  synne  is  more  unclene  to  God  })en  any  bodily  fil]).  And  ]?us 
})0  prest  brekes  his  vow,  ou}?er  prive  or  apert,  sith  he  vowed  to 
serve  God  at  tyme  f^at  he  toke  ])is  state,  to  lif  \o  lyve  J?at  fel 
to  a  prest,  and  clenly  do  his  offis.  And  sith  ])at  gostly  sacrilegie 
is  fals  takyng  of  holy  gode,  hym  semes  to  synne  in  sacrilegie 
when  he  withdrawes  his  holy  service,  and  so  he  serves  in  myche 
more  to  be  hangid  ]pen  a  thejBf.  And  as  hangyng  in  helle  is 
more  grevous  ])en  hangyng  here,  so  punysching  of  God  is 
more  grevous  ])en  monnis  punyschyng.  And  so,  sith  place 
agreggis  synne,  as  comynate  of  men  schulde  wil  knowe,  so 
holy  state  agreggis  synne  in  prestis  Jjat  synnen  })us.  As  hit 
is  more  grevous  synne  to  do  lecchorie  in  holy  Chirche  ]?en  in 
oJ)er  unholy  placis,  so  hit  is  of  synne  of  prestis.  And  ]?us  ]?ese 
traytoures  don  despit  to  God  ])at  ]?ei  schulden  most  serve ;  and 
])ei  desseyven  }>us  J)0  puple,  ]?at  J)ei  schulden  serve  in  helpe  of 
soule.  And  more  traytoures  ben  jjer  none,  bothe  to  God  and 
to  his  Chirche. 

Cap.  XXXI. 

po  secounde  part  of  J)0  Chirche  is  smyttid  wi])  lecchorie,  as 
ben  gentilmen  and  hor  wifes  bothe,  as  if  Jjei  holde  hit  bot  a 
gamen,  one  to  lye  by  o])ers  wif.  And  if  freris  enterlasen,  ])0 
synne  is  more  perilouse.  We  sufidcen  not  to  telle  harmes  ])at 
comen  of  l)is  synne ;  ffor  by  ])is  ben  fals  traytoures  bothe  to 
God  and  to  mon.  And  he  mot  nede  be  fals  to  iche  mon  fat  he 
delis  wij),  ])at  on  })is  wyse  is  tray  tour  to  his  God.  And  ])us  ben 
fals  eyres  geten  in  rewmes,  and  mariage  of  cosyns,  and  dis- 
honoure  of  faderes.  Hou  schulde  rewme  by  soche  beestis 
stonde  in  gode  govemayle  ?  Ffor  certis  beestis  wi])Outen  witte 
gone  not  ])us  togeder.  And  of  ])is  comes  feghtyng,  bothe  wi])- 
inne  and  wi])OUte;   ffor,  as  philosoforis  seyn,  bothe  mon  and 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC. 


165 


beestis  ben  pure  batelouse  in  t}Tiie  of  ]?is  dede ;  and  men  bi  J^is 
fals  iuf  ben  made  pure  hardy  to  assayle  hor  enmyes,  by  foly  jjat 
ledes  horn ;  ne  hit  it  is  no  nede  to  aske  whejjer  ]?is  synne  be 
costily,  and  bringes  injurye  bothe  to  God  and  mon.  And  herby 
is  hit  lesse  excusid,  ]>at  comynly  ]?ese  lecchoures  have  ^\dfes  of 
hor  owne,  fayrere  ])en  \€\  synnen  wi]>.  Hou  schulde  God  teche 
]?ese  foolis  to  holde  his  lawe  and  Iuf  hit,  sith  soche  foolis  ben 
wode  and  unable  to  holde  Gods  lore  ? 

And  most  synne  ])at  sues  aftir  }>is  avoutrie  is,  ])at  \€\  ben 
unstable  to  stonde  for  Gods  lawe  and  his  right.  Ffor  ]?ese  men 
])at  ben  ])us  divided  by  Iuf  of  lecchorye,  ben  unstable  as  wedir- 
cokkes,  and  wil  turne  wi]?  one  foul  wynde.  Lord,  hou  schulden 
soche  men  be  vikers  of  godhed,  and  execute  )?o  wille  of  God, 
]?at  no  weye  may  be  turned !  And  sith  \€\  ben  by  ]?is  of5s  in 
))is  hye  state  of  \o  Chirche,  no  drede  by  levyng  of  J)is  dede  ])ei 
ben  vikeres  of  \o  fende.  And  sith  wommon  is  chaumburleyn 
of  hert  of  mon  J?at  lufs  hir,  falsehed  of  soche  wymmen  turnes 
mennis  hertis  wi]?  \o  wynde.  Ffor  if  hor  purpose  and  hor  Iuf 
stode  in  God  and  in  his  lawe,  j^ei  schulden  be  more  sad  in  hit 
]?en  in  any  o]?er  ])ing ;  but  \€i  schewen  opunly  contrarie  by  hor 
dedes.  Lord,  sith  lawe  of  oure  God  is  algatis  wi})Outen  wem, 
and  ]>is  synne  is  so  foule,  hou  schulden  ]?ese  two  dwelle  togedir  ? 
Gods  lawe  is  wi]?outen  wem,  as  ]?o  holy  psalme  seis,  bot  monnis 
lawe  is  comynly  unstable,  and  eke  fals.  For  who  con  excuse 
]?is  lawe  by  whiche  lordes  ben  oblischid  to  prisoun  men  to  hor 
deth,  J)at  ben  cursid  by  Anticrist,  al  if  j^o  cause  be  deffence  of 
Gods  lawe  }?at  may  not  fayle  ?  Certis,  J)ese  lordes  bynden  hom 
by  ]?is  lawe  to  serve  )?o  fende.  And  J?us  gostly  lecchorie  comes 
to  men  by  false  lawe. 

Bot  se  \o  filthe  of  lecchorie,  hou  mon  schulde  kyndely  hate 
hit.  Iche  mon  by  lore  of  kynde  schames  to  do  hit  opunly ;  and 
sith  ]?o  soul  of  iche  mon  is  principal  part  of  hym,  3e,  al  \o 
persone  of  \o  mon,  as  byleve  techis  us,  sith  lecchorie  puttis 
doune  J?o  soule,  and  makes  \o  body  mayster  of  mon,  hit  semes 
J>at  hit  turnes  mon  fro  monnis  kynde  to  kynde  of  beeste.  And 
])us  is  ^  synne  in  monnis  body,  when  hit  hafs  lordschip  })us  on 

1  \h  is  a,  BB. 


■whom  it  in- 
capacitates 
from  standing 
up  in  defence 
of  God's  law, 


while  they 
persecute 
preachers  in 
obedience  to 
man's  law. 


Man  ought 
naturally  to 
hate  this  sin, 
because  it 
makes  the 
body  master  of 
the  soul. 


1 66 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


Incontinence 
in  the  poorer 
class 


his  soule,  and  so  ageyns  al  aungel  kynde,  for  soule  hafs  kynde 
of  aungels.  And  ]?us  ]?is'synne  specialy  puttis  blame  in  monnis 
body,  not  onely  for  hit  wastis  J?o  body,  bot  for  hit  puttis  \o 
body  above  J?o  soule.  And  ]>us  is  ]?is  a  stynkyng  synne  bothe 
bifore  God  and  mon,  and  wastis  and  fordos  \o  gode  bothe 
of  body  and  of  soule.  And  of  Jjis  schulden  lordis  gedir  witte, 
and  forsake  fis  lecchorye,  for  hit  harmes  gretly  to  persone  and 
to  comynate. 

Cap.  XXXII. 

po  Jjridde  part  of  \o  Chirche  is  not  clene  of  lecchorie,  for 
]?ei  gone  togedir  as  bestis.  And  ])is  is  knowen  to  bischop^ 
clerkis,  for  ]?ei  spoylen  bom  in  chapiters,  as  who  wolde  spoyle 
a  thef ;  and  by  hor  feyned  sommenyng  ^  ])ei  drawen  horn  fro 
hor  laboiure,  to  tyme  ]?at  ])ei  have  grauntid  what  silver  )?ei  schal 
paye;  and  J^en  by  feyned  cursyng  \qi  maken  horn  paye  ]>is 
robbyng.  And  by  )?o  knott  of  leesyng  J)ei  schewen  to  whom 
])ei  serven.  pei  seyn,  as  ^d  mot  nede,  }?at  ]?is  ]?ei  done  by 
charite,  and  putten  enplaster  of  cursyng  for  heele  of  monnis 
soule.  Bot  })is  is  open  gabbyng,  as  men  may  wil  knowe,  sith 
be  ^  streyt  covenaunt  Jjei  sellen  tyme  of  synnyng,  ])at  fus  longe 
schal  he  not  be  lettid  for  so  myche  money ;  and  by  so  myche 
as  hit  is  fals  is  ])is  robrye  worse.  And  J?is  falshed  schulden 
lordes  lette,  and  make  ]?is  puple  be  punischid  by  opun  penaunce 
in  hor  body,  as  fastyng,  or  schameful  beetyng ;  and  l?us  were 
not  hor  laboure  lettid,  bot  hor  synne  wil  quenchid.  Bot  by  \o 
gospel  medicyn  prestis  schulden  preche  to  horn,  and  move  horn 
by  Gods  lawe  to  leve  suche  synne,  and  fro  Jjei  weren  thries 


1  byschops,  BB. 

*  Chaucer's  Sompnour,  whom  the 
energetic  Archdeacon   employed  in 


2  by,  BB. 

enforcing  church  discipline,  will  at 
once  occiu-  to  the  reader : — 


•  He  had  a  sompnour  redy  to  his  hond, 
A  slyer  boy  was  noon  in  Engelond ; 
Fnl  prively  he  had  his  espiaile, 
That  taughte  him  wher  he  might  avayle. 
He  couthe  spare  of  lecchours  oon  or  two. 
To  techen  him  to  four  and  twenty  mo. 


Withoute  maundement,  a  lewed  ■>naii 
He  coMtJie  sompne,  up  peyne  of  Cristes  curs, 
A'fid  they  were  glad  to  Jille  luel  his  pztrs. 
And  make  him  grete  festis  atte  nale.' 

Freres  Tale. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC. 


167 


warned,  no  more  comyne  wi]?  horn  })en  wi]?  a  hethen  mon,  for 
jjei  ben  cursed  of  God.  Lord,  where  slepis  )?is  gode  lawe,  and 
when  schal  hit  be  wakened?  Certis,  not  bifore  coveytise  of 
]?ese  clerkes  be  quenchid.  Al))of  comynes  ben  as  beestis  in 
doyng  of  J)is  synne,  nereJ?oles  by  luf  and  drede  \€\  may  be 
drawen  ]?erfro. 

Hit  is  seide  })at  mony  comynes  wil  chafFere  in  \o  new  feyre, 
and  J>us  chaunge  hor  wyfes  and  lye  in  avoutrie.  Certis  suche 
iecchorie  schulden  prestis  better  amende,  or  seculer  lordes,  })en 
done  clerkes  of  chapiter.  Hor  persouns  schulden  telle  horn 
medicyn,  hou  Jjei  schulden  fie  ]?is  synne.  pei  schulden  fie 
dalyaunce  wij>  ^vymmen,  and  dwellyng  in  privey  placis,  for  hit 
is  hard  to  touche  \o  picche  and  not  be  foulid  ])erwij?.  po 
secounde  medicyn  ageyn  ])is  synne  is  mon  to  chastise  his  flesche 
wij?  fastyng  and  wi]>  travel,  and  o|5er  privey  penaunce;  fFor 
flesche  }?at  is  wei  chastisid  stires  late  to  lust ;  and  he  lufs  to  litel 
his  God  J?at  wil  not  sufFere  J)us  for  hym.  po  thridde  medicyn 
ageyne  ]?is  synne  is  to  }?enke  on  Gods  lawe,  and  wij^drawe 
])Oght  and  wille  fro  ])is  dede  of  iecchorye.  /  What  is  he  j^at 
trowes  not  ]?at  he  schal  answere  unto  God  of  alle  \o  dedes  Jjat 
he  haves  done  ageyne  \o  ordynaunce  of  hym?  God  haves 
ordeyned  monkynde  ]?at  hit  schal  be  above  beest,  and  by  his 
resonable  werk  gete  \o  mede  ]?at  evere  schal  laste.  Beestis  ben 
moved  by  kynde  to  do  ]?is  werke  when  horn  liste,  bot  God  hafs 
gyven  mon  powere  and  instrumentis  to  do  J?is  werk,  to  do  hit 
by  Gods  lawe.  And  Jjat  may  he  do  levefuly,  bothe  to  susteyne 
monkynde,  and  to  wynne  ]?o  blis  of  heven.  Soche  resouns, 
wi]?  clene  Hf,  schulden  prestis  telle  ]?o  folk,  and  move  first  to^ 
luf  of  God,  to  leve  ]?is  synne.  And  sith  wi]>  aw^e  ^  jjenke,  mon, 
hou  ]?ou  hafs  of  God  bothe  powere  and  appetit,  and  ]?erwijj 
kyndely  instrumentis,  to  serve  hym^  and  not  Jjo  devel;  and 
fayle  not  in  ]?is  trew  servise,  for  scharpe  vengeaunce  takis  God 
for  suche. 

Explicit:  Deo  Gragias. 


^  h%  BB. 
om.  W. 


So  in  BB ;  W  has  eyhe. 


3  So  in  BB  ; 


should  be  left 
to  the  parish 
priest,  or  to 
the  g'entry,  to 
rectify ;  not  to 
chapter  clerksi 
or  church 
courts. 


i68 


WrCLIF'S  WORKS. 


To  be  merciful 
is  a  Christian 
duty. 


Of  the  SG.ve.n 
corporal  works 
of  mercy,  six 


X. 

PE    SEVEN  WERKYS    OF    MERCY 
BODYLY. 

[The  interesting  double  tract  whicli  follows  is  ascribed  to  Wyclif  by 
Bale  under  the  titles  *  De  operibus  corporalibus '  and  *  De  spiritualibus 
operibus.'  But  the  fact  of  the  chaptering  in  the  New  College  MS.  being 
continuous  shows  that  the  two  were  considered  to  form  one  work, — com- 
posed, it  would  seem,  not  long  after  the  holding  of  the  council  convened 
at  London  by  Archbishop  Courtenay  in  May,  1382.  (See  p.  175.)  The 
evidence  of  style  seems  to  me  strongly  in  favour  of  its  being  authentic. 
The  text  is  based  on  the  New  College  MS.  (Q),  with  the  advantage  of  col- 
lations from  the  only  other  known  copy,  in  the  Library  of  Trinity  Coll., 
Dublin  (CC),  obtained  through  the  kindness  of  Mr.  Hunt,  Assistant 
Librarian,  and  Mr.  French.] 

31F  a  man  were  siker  J^at  he  schulde  to  morowe  come  bifore 
a  juge,  and  ojjer  lese  or  wynne  alle  Jjc  godes  J?at  he  hadde,  and 
also  hys  lif  to,  he  wolde  drede  J?is  jugement,  and  bisie  him  ful 
fast  to  redye  hym  and  hys  to  have  ]?e  sentence  for  hym.  But 
where  is  oure  bileve  of  j)e  day  of  dom,  when  we  trowen  J^at  we 
schal  come  bifore  ]>e  heyest  juge,  and  be  juggid  of  oure  lif  and 
all  ])inge  ])at  we  have,  to  wynne  it  ever  in  blisse,  or  ellis  for  to 
lese  it  ever  more  in  peyne  of  helle,  wi}?  fendis  and  ]?er  angelis  ? 
pis  schulde  be  our  fei]?,  and  sij?en  schulde  we  have  hope,  be 
oure  gode  lif  after  ]>e  lawe  of  God,  to  be  glad  in  charite,  and 
so  J>e  sentence  3even  for  us.  But  sijjen  oure  bileve  techi]?  us 
])at  Crist  jugis  for  none  but  bi  titil  of  hys  mercy,  ne  he  haj?  no 
mercy  but  only  on  hem  ])at  ben  merciful,  eche  man  schulde 
leme  for  to  be  merciful.  And  herfore  sei]?  Crist  in  \e  boke  of  hys 
gospel, — Blessid  be  mercyful  men,  for  ]?ey  schal  have  mercy ! 

per  ben  seven  werkis  of  bodily  mercy,  and  o]?ere  seve  werkis 
of  goostly  mercie ;  and  jjes  love]?  Crist  more,  as  he  love]?  )?e 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC. 


169 


soule  more  ]?an  )je  bodye,  for  it  is  better.  But,  for  bodily 
werkis  arunne  more  knowen  to  us  than  arunne  goostly  werkis, 
J)erfore  bygynne  we  at  j?es  bodily  werkis,  for  so  dos  j?e  gospel. 
Crist  sei}),  when  he  schal  come  at  fe  day  of  dome,  J)er  schal  be 
gederid  before  him  alle  maner  of  folke ;  he  schal  depart  hem 
atwynne,  as  herdmen  don  schepe  fro  gete.  Schepe  j)at  schal 
be  savid  schal  be  on  hys  ri^t  honde,  and  gete  {?at  schal  be 
dampnyd  schal  be  on  hys  left  bond.  And  ]?anne  schal  he  seie 
to  })eise  })at  schal  be  savyd,  Come  my  blessid  fadur  childur, 
{^and  take  \t  blisse  of  heven  J^at  was  ordeyned  to  50U  before  J)e 
world  was  made^  And  for  cause  of  ]?is  blis  Crist  telli]?  be  ordre 
sixe  werkis  of  mercy,  whereby  Jjei  schul  have  blis.  I  hungred, 
he  seij?,  and  ]?anne  5e  fedde  me  in  my  menbris ;  I  j?risted,  and 
3e  ^af  me  drynke ;  and  when  I  was  a  gest,  ^e  herbert  me  in 
50ure  house,  and  gedered  me  to  rest.  I  was  nakid  and  ^e  cled 
me,  seke  and  ^e  visitide  me,  I  was  in  prisoun  and  ]?en  ^e  comen 
and  visitid  me.  pe  sevent  werke  of  mercy  is  seid  in  ]?e  book 
of  Thobie,  biriynge  of  dede  men  ]>at  han  nede  Jjerto.  Alle  )>es 
seven  werkis  of  mercy  don  men  to  Crist  when  fey  don  hem  to 
hys  membris  devoutly  in  hys  name";  for  as  he  hirtus  a  man  Jjat 
hirtis  hys  lymes,  so  he  dos  for  a  man  jjat  doi]?  for  hys  lymes. 

Cap.  II. 

But  here  meven  many  men,  whe}?ur  it  be  werke  of  mercye 
to  do  J?es  dedes  to  hem  ])at  schal  be  dampned  in  helle,  sij)en 
it  is  certeyne  ]?at  non  of  J>es  ben  Cristis  lymes,  and  )je  gospel 
makes  no  minde  of  reward  of  J?is  almes,  but  if  it  be  don  to 
membris  of  Crist.  But  J?is  semes  hevye  and  agayn  resoun, 
si}>en  no  man  but  God  wote  who  schal  be  saved,  ne  who  is 
ordeyned  to  blisse  or  ordeyned  to  be  dampned.  And  only  ]?ei 
]?at  schul  be  blessid  ben  membris  of  Crist,  and  J?us  no  man  for 
doute  schulde  do  J?es  werkis  of  mercy*  But  here  we  seyn  \2X 
iche  man  schulde  be  war  in  wirchynge  ]?at  he  norische  not 
es  of  j?e  fend ;  for  if  he  do  ]?is  wytyngly,  he  werres  a^ens 
ist,  and  mayntens  lymes  of  ])e  fend  to  wirche  a^ens  Crist,  and 
iS  is  opyn  traytorie,  as  iche  man  may  see.  And  herfore  iche 
Cristen  man  schulde  have  bisie  descrecioun  to  whom  he  did 
)>is  almes,  lest  he  reversid  Crist ;  and  so  schulde  he  al  only  do 


are  named  in 
the  parable  of 
the  sheep  and 
the  goats. 


The  seventh- 
burying'  the 
dead— in  the 
book  of  TobiL 
Tob.  iL 


Ought  works  of 
mercy  to  be 
done  to  the 
evil  and 
reprobate? 


lyo 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


great  circum- 
spection should 
be  used : 


for  instance, 
alms  should 
not  be  given  to 
able-bodied 
friars,  but  to 
the  really  poor 
and  infirm. 
I  Tim.  iv.  2. 


almes  to  suche,  })at  he  supposes  by  holy  signes  kepen  Goddis 
lawe,  and  is  in  sadde  purpose  to  stonde  jjerfore.  For  if  a  man 
do  ]?is  almes  to  him  ))at  lyvej?  yvyl  a^en  ))e  lawe  of  hys  God, 
and  stondis  wij)  J)e  fend,  it  is  al  on  to  norische  hym,  wityngly 
or  licldy  ^  and  holde  wi}>  fe  fend  agayn  Jesus  Crist.  And  jjis 
may  we  se  weller  in  bodyly  ensample,  when  ]}0U  refreschid  on 
siche  wise  enemye  to  }>i  frende* 

And  herfore  Crist  askes  two  ])inges  of  J)in  ahnes,  ]?at  J)Ou  do 
it  in  hys  name,  and  also  discretly.  For  many  men  may  as 
ypocritis  aske  in  Cristis  name,  and  in  lyfynge  or  wirchinge  do 
agens  his  lawe.  As^,  ^if  freres  by  gabbingis  blasfeme  upon 
Crist,  and  in  multitude  and  howsynge  ben  chariouse  to  J?e  peple, 
men  schulde  not  do  hem  almes  for  to  lyve  Jjus,  for  Jjanne  Jjei 
mayntene  enemyes  of  Crist  a^ens  him  silf.  As,  if  J)ei  seie  ])at 
all  jjese  godes  ben  don  to  Cristis  worschipe,  and  afterward  ben 
despendid  to  honour  of  God,  sothe  it  is,  but  J)is  is  not  ynow 
to  fee,  for  ]?e  fend  may  not  do  but  if  ])at  it  turne  to  ]?e  wor- 
schipe of  God,  mawgrethe  hys  wille.  As,  when  fe  fend  temptid 
Crist,  hys  dedis  were  wickid,  and  ^it  it  turned  to  worschipe  of 
Crist  and  profit  of  hys  Chirche.  And  ]?us  Crist  ordeyned  hou 
hys  prestis  schulde  serve  hym  be  gode  lif  and  good  dede,  and 
not  by  fals  wordes.  And  syngynge,  or  peyntid  Uousis,  was 
lityl  preysid  of  Crist.  But  Crist  haj?  lymytid  in  hys  lawe  who 
schulde  have  suche  almes, — pore  men  and  blynde,  pore  men 
and  lame,  pore  men  and  febel,  Jjat  neden  suche  helpe.  And  so 
]3es  Starke  beggeres  don  wronge  to  suche  pore  men;  for  ypocrisie, 
by  Poule  seyinge,  is  most  privey  synne  })at  dos  harme  to  ]>e 
Chirche  in  fe  laste  dales.  And  ]?us  schulde  riche  men  of  })is 
worlde  do  suche  almes  to  pore  men  J)at  ]?e  gospellymites  to 
helpe,  and  be  not  desseyved  be  fals  novelries,  ne  j^ei  schulde 
axe  prof  j?at  may  no  wey  faile,  ne  to  li^tly  5yve  Jjer  godes  c, 
but  be  discrete  in  almes  and  founde  hem  in  Goddis  lawe,  for 
J)at  may  no  weie  fayle. 


a  That  is,  knowingly  or  probably. 

'^  Here,  and  frequently,  Wyclif 
uses  *  as '  in  the  sense  of  '  for 
instance.* 

c  That  is,  rich  men  should  nei- 


ther wait,  before  giving  alms,  ti^ 
be  proved    to  demonstration 
the  object  is  a  deserving  one,  n* 
on  the    other    hand  should    their 
liberality  be  lavish  and  undisceming. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC. 


171 


Cap.  hi 

But  it  were  to  witen  of  perpetual  almes,  whether  it  be  eny 
of  ])e  seven  werkes  of  mercy ;  and  certeynly,  but  if  it  be,  it  is 
opun  erroure.  And  ]?is  may  we  see  by  ten  lawes,  J^re  of  \t  old 
iawe  and  seven  of  ]je  newe,  ]?at  tellen  opunly  how  prestis  shulde 
lyfne  a  pore  lif,  as  men  did  in  state  of  innocence, — ^wi|>outen 
superfluyte,  as  Crist  him  silf  lyved;  wijjouten  beggynge  as 
freres,  or  dowynge  as  ojjere  bischopis  and  monkes,  and  oJ»ere 
calde  possessioners ;  al  ])is  is  unleful  or  Goddis  Iawe  is  false. 
If  nobul-men  be  bischopis,  let  hem  Jjenke  on  Crist,  ]?at  was  most 
nobul  man  J?at  evere  was  in  erthe,  for  hys  Fadir  was  God  and 
hys  modur  Marie,  and  bojje  Jjese  ben  best  in  kynde,  as  Crist 
himself  is.  And  sithen  Crist,  nobulest  man  J?at  may  be  in 
erthej)  ^,  was  porest  man  of  alle  whan  he  chese  to  be  bischope, 
o]?er  shulde  ])is  lordis  kyn  be  pore  as  Crist  was,  or  ellis  holde 
hem  in  staat  of  lordis  of  ]?is  worlde.  And  Y  am  certeyne,  lord- 
schipe  ])at  God  ha]>  ^even  lordes  of  ]?is  world  were  ynowe  to 
hem  alle  ^if  it  were  not  yvel  departid.  And  on  ]?is  resoun 
schulde  men  })enke,  bo]?e  lordes  and  J?er,kyn,  and  oj^er  take 
mekely  })e  staat  ]?at  Crist  chees,  or  ellus  holde  hem  in  ]?e  worlde 
as  her  kyn  does,  and  defend  Goddis  Iawe,  or  ellis  be  \€\  false. 
And  so  ]?e  staat  of  monkes  schulde  alle  be  pore  men  and  so 
alle  o]?ur  clerkes  J?at  han  possessiouns.  And  if  \€\  reverse  Jje 
sentence  of  )?is  worde,  \€\  ben  dowble  and  fals,  and  so  hatid 
of  Crist,  and  most  cursed  men  ]?at  ever  God  suffred.  And  so 
schulde  men  loke,  by  resoun  of  Goddis  Iawe,  whe{)er  it  were 
medeful  and  a  werke  of  mercy  to  make  riche  bischopis,  and 
lett  hem  of  ]>e  werke  ]>at  Crist  ordeyned  hem  to  do,  and  drawe 
folke  fro  J?e  world,  or  ellis  for  to  make  hem  to  lyve  so  worldly 
})at  non  synes  so  lusfly,  ne  meduld  hem  wi]>  })e  worlde,  ]?an  don 
suche  bischopis ;  ne  have  more  wast  meyne,  ne  more  wast  dis- 
pence  make  of  Cristis  and  pore  mennis  good.  And  so  }?es 
irreligious  Jjat  have  possessiouns,  ]?ei  have  comunly  rede  and 
fatt  chekis,  and  fatt  aiid  greet  belies.  But  Lord !  what  mede 
were  it  to  feden  and  norischen  Jjus  Anticrist  martres !  Men 
schulde  ]?enke  on  Goddis  worde  seyde  by  Ezechiel,  }»at  }»es  were 

^  So  in  the  MS. ;  read  erthe. 


The  wealth 
which  has  been 
bestowed  on 
her  is  the  bane 
of  the  Church, 


enabling  monks 
and  priests  to 
live  grossly  and 
luxuriouslj^, 
not  according 
to  the  poverty 
of  Christ 


Ezek.  xvL  sq. 


\.T% 


WYCLIF'S  WORKS, 


The  day  of 
judgment, 
though  men 
think  it  far  off, 
is  both  certain 
and  near. 


foure  wickidnesse  don  of  men  of  Sodom,  pride  in  herte,  and 
fulnesse  of  mete  and  of  drenke,  abundaunce  of  richesse,  and 
ydulness  of  travel.  Lord,  what  devocioun  were  to  grounde 
suche  an  ordre  ?  For,  as  Goddis  lawe  sei)?,  alle  J^es  ben  wickid- 
nesse, and  it  is  no  devocioun  to  founde  such  wickidnes.  And 
si]?en  )?es  foure  were  wickidnesse  in  seculer  men,  muche  more 
]?ei  were  wickidnesse  in  prestis,  ))at  Crist  forbed;s  to  lyve  suche 
lyf  or  ]?us  have  possessiouns.  And  so,  as  it  is  seide,  o]?ere 
Goddis  lawe  is  fals,  or  it  is  unleful  prestis  to  lyve  ]?us.  And 
si]?en  God  biddi]?  a  man  to  wirche  in  j>e  state  of  innocence, 
and  J)is  abundaunce  of  richesse  maids  men  to  be  ydul,  men 
may  se  hou  ]?is  dowynge  contraries  ])es  two  lawes,  and  )?e  state 
of  innocence,  and  comawndement  of  God.  But  Lord !  what 
werke  of  mercye  were  to  make  suche  ordres !  And  so  |?ese 
fyve  lawes  of  fe  Olde  Testament  schulde  be  fyve  barly  loves, 
and  scharply  moeve  men  to  holde  ])e  Olde  Testament  and  }>e 
ordynaunce  of  God ;  and  ])es,  wij)  oj^er  seven  loves  of  \t  Newe 
Testament,  schulde  moeve  men  to  destrie  privat  religions,  and 
put  })e  persones  of  hem  in  ordre  ]?at  Crist  made. 

Cap.  IV. 

But  here  men  seyn  j^at  it  is  soJ?e,  when  a  perile  is  nei^ghe, 
Jeanne  men  dreden  it  and  seken  helpe  on  many  weyes.  As, 
if  I  trowed  ])at  be  }>e  lawe  of  man  my  cause  sbhulde  be  jugged 
to  morue,  I  wolde  be  bisie  and  dredeful  ]?at  it  went  on  my  side ; 
but  nowe  ))e  day  of  dome  is  fer  fro  our  lyvynge,  and  our  juge 
is  merciful,  and  we  may  myche  plese  him  bifore  ]?at  tyme  come ; 
whi  schulde  we  ]?an  drede  it  more  fan  o])er  men  done,  si]?en 
helpe  may  come  so  li3tly?  Well  I  wot  })at  J?us  men  speken 
fat  saveren  fe  worlde,  and  fese  ben  men  out  of  fe  feif  for 
mercy  and  longe  tyme.  But  wolde  God  fat  suche  men  knewe 
fus  myche  of  dyvinite,  fat  f e  day  of  jugement,  fat  is  present 
to  God,  is  ful  neye  bisidis  us  S.  and  tyme  mut  nede  come,  and 
f anne  schulde  f ei  have  more  bileve  of  f e  day  of  dome  fan  f ei 
have  of  any  werke  fat  men  don  in  fis  lif.  For  well  I  wot  fat 
suche  werkes  may  li^tly  be  put  of,  if  God  wil  fat  it  be  so,  and 
f  erfore  ben  we  uncerteyne.  But  we  ben  certeyne  of  oure  feif 
^  So  in  CC  5*  6y  sy  sidus^  Q. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC, 


173 


J)at  domsday  mut  nede  cum,  and  we  mut  answere  to  Crist  of 
alle  fat  we  han  don.  And  J?us  us  ow  not  to  be  lefe  of 
jugement  of  men.  And  so  Jjis  greet  dome  of  God  passes 
dome  of  men  in  certeyne  of  commynge  and  in  drede  of 
pereL  And,  as  clerkis  wyten  wel  })at  travelen  in  resoun, 
nofinge  is  more  nye  j>an  J^e  day  of  dome.  Ffor  si]?en  a  man 
may  see  sum  )>inge  Jjat  is  passid,  and  Goddis  si3t  wij?outen 
mesure  is  more  ])an  si^t  of  man,  Jeanne  God  may  see  alle  ]?inge 
fat  ever  was  passid  before,  and  bi  fis  same  resoun  alle  J>inge 
fat  schal  be ;  and  so  alle  ]?e  day  of  dome  is  present  to  God. 
Lord,  who  cowthe  undirstonde  fat  a  sparke  of  fire,  turnede 
aboute  in  derke  ny^te,  semes  to  make  cercul,  but  mennus  si^t 
holdes  prent  of  f  inge  bifore  seen  for  a  littyl  schort  while,  til 
alle  f  e  fire  be  turnede .?  And  so  f  e  greet  si^t  of  God  holdus 
togedur  alle  f inges  fat  han  ben  and  alle  fat  schal  be ;  and  so 
a  fousand  ^eer  ben  frescher  in  Goddus  si^t  fan  is  ^isterday  in 
f  e  mynde  of  man.  And  f  us  presens  or  nei^nesse  schulde  not 
moeve  a  man  to  drede  not  f  e  day  of  dome,  sif  en  it  is  nye  God. 
And  5if  f  ou  tristist  on  Goddis  mercy,  triste  to  hys  ri3tfuhiesse, 
fat  he  5yves  not  man  mercye  but  if  f ei  deserve  it.  And  evere 
f e  lenger  fat  f ou  lyfest  to  lyve  bi  Goddis  lawe,  evere  f e  harder 
it  is  to  f  ^  to  come  agayne.  And  if  f  ou  speke  of  seyntis,  more 
wis  amonge  of  ere  seide  and  last  writen  ^  fat  f  ei  f  ou^t  ay  on  f  is 
tyme.  For  when  I  fenke,  seis  Jerom,  on  fe  day  of  dome, 
I  trembul  in  myn  hert  for  peryles  fat  schal  f anne  falle ;  fi"or 
whef er  fat  I  ete  or  drynke,  me  f enkus  fat  f e  aungel  trumpe 
sownes  in  myn  ere,  and  biddis  rise  to  juggement  b.  pis  jugge- 
ment  schulde  men  drede  for  f es  free  skylles. 

Cap.  V. 

But  men  here  moeven  comunly,  of  what  maner  finge  men 
schulde  gif  f  er  almes  to  lymes  of  Crist.  And  it  is  no  drede 
fat  ne  men  schulde  knowe  bisile  fat  f es  godes  were  justly  geten 
of  whiche  f  ei  do  f  er  almes.  For  sif  en  iche  almes  fat  men  don 
fei  5yven  first  to  God,  and  God  fankes  not  for  suche  godes 


a  The  wisest  among  them  have 
said,  and  it  has  been  among  the 
last  things  that  they  have  written, 
that,  &c. 


b  Something  like  this  maybe  read 
in  St.  Jerome's  Commentary  on  Joel, 
but  I  have  not  discovered  the  pre- 
cise passage  here  quoted. 


Alnas  not 
pleasing  to 
God,  ifthe 
money  was  not 
righteously 
gotten. 


174 


WrCLIF'S  WORKS. 

J>at  ben  not  justly  geten,  it  is  opnn  ]>at  of  just  havynge  schulde 
almes  be  don.  For  si>  ^yvynge  is  not  worjje  but  if  God  ap- 
prove it,  but  God  approves  not  unjuste  havynge  of  ]?inge, 
)>anne  it  is  non  almes  to  dele  of  suche  catel.  Lord,  hou  schulde 
God  approve  ]?at  ]?ou  robbe  Petur,  and  gif  J)is  robbere  to  Poule 
in  ])e  name  of  Crist  ^  ?  pou  puttes  here  on  Crist  consense  of 
mayntenynge  of  ])efte.  And  if  ])0U  seist  ]?ou  ^yvest  )>is  gode  in 
]>e  name  of  God,  }>at  makis  more  ]?i  synne  ^if  ]?ou  lokest  wel, 
for  here  ))0U  takest  witnesse  of  God  ]>at  he  approve  ])i  doiynge. 
And  bi  J)is  skil  ])is  robberes,  j^at  seyn  ]?ei  gatt  ])is  godis  in  greet 
peryl  and  travel,  speken  ageyne  hem  self,  and  accusen  hem  to 
God,  and  putten  on  him  J>er  wickidnes.  But  undirstonde  l>at 
many  men  don  almes  of  ])er  godes,  and  ^it  pei  wan  hem  wickidly, 
but  after  fei  amendid  hem  ;  as  sum  wan  justlye  ])er  godes,  and 
si})en  forfeted  a^en  God.  And  for  tyme  of  ]?is  forfeture  \€\  don 
schrewidly  ])er  almes,  for  God  askes  clennes  of  hert  when  men 
don  jjer  almes. 

But  here  men  dowten  comunly  to  whom  men  schulde  restore 
])e  godes  ];at  ]?ei  have  geten  wi])  wronge,  si})  \€\  schulde  not  do 
]?er  almes  of  suche  goten  godes  bifore  \€\  had  restored  J)er 
]?efte  to  men  ]?at  schulde  have  hem,  and  make  amendis  to  God 
by  J)e  lawe  ]?at  he  askes,  and  to  him  fat  he  is  bounden  to.  But 
ofte  tymes  it  may  falle  J>at  ]?ese  men  ben  dede,  or  ellus  he 
knowes  hem  not,  or  }>ei  dar  not  comme  to  him ;  how  schulde 
he  do  almes  J?at  is  a  riche  robbere,  and  is  wrappid  in  suche 
cases?  it  semes  ])at  he  may  not  be  safe.  And  here  freris 
gaderen  myche  gode  of  suche  maner  robberis;  and  bojje  ])e 
5yver  and  |?e  taker  don  wronge  to  J^er  nei^tbore.  And  herfore 
many  men  supposen  ]?at  werke  of  })ise  freris  schal  J?e  sunner 
fayle,  for  defaute  of  ri^t  grounde.  And  so  summeseyen  ]>at 
pese  freres  serven  of  ]?is  office,  to  be  resett  of  robbers,  and 
to  susteyne  wronges  bytwix  cuntreis  and  cuntreis,  and  not  for 
to  quenche  hem. 

But  to  |5is  doute  may  men  answere  by  resoun  of  Goddes 
lawe,  and  sey  ])at  suche  robbers  schulde  first  have  contricioun^ 

a  It  is  commonly  said  tliat  the  Abbey  to  St.  Paul's   Cathedral  in 

proverb    'robbing    Peter    to    pay  the  seventeenth   centuiy;   but  this 

Paul'   arose   out  of  a  transfer   of  passage  proves  it  to  be  at  least  as 

lands    belonging    to    Westminster  old  as  the  fourteenth  centuiy. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC. 


175 


and  be  in  hole  purpose  never  synne  so  after,  and  make  restitu- 
cioun  to  ]jes  men  J)at  \€\  schulde.  And,  for  ]?is  is  selden  seen, 
herfore  jjis  synne  is  greet,  and  wrappes  hem  in  gnaris  of  ]je 
fend,  of  whom  ]?ei  kunne  not  delyver  hem.  But  first,  me  ))enke, 
]?ei  schulde  restore  men  J)at  \€\  have  robbid,  or  ellis  ney^ghe 
nei3bores  J^at  hadde  ri^t  to  }?ese  godes ;  and  if  )?is  may  not  be 
don,  aspie  pore  men  of  ])e  gospel,  and  ^yve  hem  wisely  Goddis 
godis,  and  lyve  in  penal  povert.  But  ^it  men  douten  comunly, 
whejjur  men  schulde  paye  ]?er  dette  to  ))es  men  J^at  \€\  wote  lyve 
in  wickid  Hfe.  And  it  seemes  nay,  by  resoun  of  God,  for  suche 
men  ben  unwor})i  to  have  ony  godes,  ^he,  to  have  Hfe  ^ovun  of 
]?er  God ;  how  ben  \€\  wor]?i  to  resseyve  ])er  dettes  ?  sij>en  Jjei 
han  lost  titil  of  alle  ri^tfulnesse.  But  here  men  l^enken  by 
Goddis  lawe,  J^at  men  schulde  stire  suche  schrewes  to  serve 
trewly  ])er  God  boj?e  bi  worde  and  dede,  and  paye  hem  her 
dettes,  and  hope  of  \tx  mendement.  Ffor  as  God  wole  }>at  \€\ 
lyve,  so  he  wole  fat  men  ^yve  hem.  And  herfore  techij?  Seynt 
Poule  J?at  Cristen  men  J^at  ben  servauntes  serve  wel  ]?er  he]?en 
lordes,  by  resoun  of  Jjer  God.  And  so  we  graunt  wel  ]>at  suche 
resseyven  unjustly  and  to  \^x  dampnacioun  dettes  Jjat  men 
payen  hem,  and  ^it  fer  dettoures  medefully  ^yven  ]?es  godes. 

Cap.  VI. 
But  here  mut  men  moeve  sumdel  of  speche  of  J^es  freres^  ]?at 
in  Londone,  at  ]?er  cownsel  of  trembulynge  of  J)e  er]?e  a,  seyde, 
for  to  plese  prelatis  and  persones,  ]?at  it  is  an  erroure  to  susteyne 
J>at  dymes  ben  pure  almes,  and  ]?at  men  ))at  ^yven  hem  may 
wifholde  and  ^y ve  hem  to  oJ)ere  pore  men,  for  synne  of  ])er  curat, 
and  faylynge  of  hys  service.  But  many  men  wondren  here  why 
Jjese  freres  seyd  J>us,  si>en  \t\  wold  fat  ]?es  dymes  were  ^yven 
imto  hem,  and  ]?es  persones  were  destried,  and  no  prest  were 
but  Jjei.  Her  workes  schewes  J)is  wel,  howevere  J?ei  speke  by 
syde.  And  so  it  seemes  to  sum  men,  ]?at  |)is- was  a  fagynge  of 
}?e  fendus  childur,  by  lore  of  ]jer  fadur;  as  if  \€\  wolde  bringe 
of  |?is,  fat  almes  ^yven  to  freres  schulde  not  be  pure  almes,  fro 
it  were  brou^t  in  custome,  sifen  custont  makis  lawe,  and  dette 

a  This  allusion  to  the  earthquake  1382,  on  May  19  {Fasc.  Zizaniomm, 
which  occurred  during  the  sitting  of  p.  272),  fixes  so  far  the  date  of  this 
Archbishop   Courtenay's    synod  in      treatise. 


On  the  friars' 
denying,  at  the 
late  Council, 
that  tithes  were 
pure  alms. 


..4- 


176 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


Parishioners 
as  a  body,  but 
not  indivi- 
dually, may 
•withhold  tithes 
from  unworthy 
priests. 


over  almes ;  and  so  mi^t  freres  be  fulli  fals,  and  aske  \e  puple 
jjer  almes  be  titil  of  custome,  al  ^if  ]?ei  were  unwor]?i  and 
traytours  to  rewmes.  But  trist  we  not  to  fals  freris,  ne  fayle 
not  in  treujje,  for  ]?ei  beren  venym  in  J)er  tayle,  speke  )?ei  never 
so  faire.  And  to  fer  speche  of  dymes,  sijjen  \ei  ben  almes,  ]?ei 
ben  pure  almes,  and  not  ellus  but  almes.  And  so  lyved  Crist 
wi]>  hys  apostlis  on  almes  of  J?e  peple,  ]?at  was  pure  almes  al  if 
it  were  dett,  sij)en  al  ]?is  [is]  dett  ]?at  God  askes  and  nedes  man 
to  5yve.  And  so,  if  freres  ben  moeved  here  to  seye  ]>at  dymes  of 
persones  ben  not  pure  almes,  for  ]?ei  ben  here  wi]?  dett,  ]?ei  mut 
seye  ]?at  )?es  persones  lyven  on  pure  almes,  ])at  ban  dymes,  and 
serven  not  ne  ministren  to  per  parischenes,  for  hem  wantis  titul 
of  dett  be  ]?e  lawe  of  God.  But  what  frere  J?at  seis  ]?us  is  not 
a  pure  frere;  for  boJ?e  he  is  a  fals  frere,  and  ])erwi]>  a  fende. 
And  certis  a  pure  God  rulis  not  such  a  frere.  For,  as  ]?ei 
schulde  seie,  God  is  not  pure  God  sijjen  he  is  bo)5e  God  and 
man,  and  ]?es  ben  diverse  kyndes;  and  schortly  J>er  is  no 
creature  \dX  ne  it  ha)?e  diverse  resones  of  diverse  names,  and 
^hitt  it  is  a  pure  ]?inge.  Leve  we  lesingis  of  ]>es  freres,  and 
seye  we  ])at  dymes  ben  bo]?e  almes  of  God,  and  almes  of  ])e 
parischenes ;  ne  schame  we  not  to  be  sustened  of  suche  maner 
almes,  sifen  Crist  and  hys  apostlis  were  susteyned  be  suche. 
For,,  as  Seynt  Poule  teches.  We  schulde  be  payed  of  fode  and 
hylynge,  and  aske  no  more  J^an  nedes ;  and  ^it  Poule  proves  be 
Goddis  lawe,  if  we  serven  treuly,  J?es  godes  ben  dette  over 
resoun  of  mannis  lawe. 

But  to  the  dowte  of  dymes  fat  is  tochid  after,  whe)?er  parisch- 
enes may  leffully  holde  dymes  fro  persones  for  synne  of  Jjes 
persones, — and  freres  seyn  ]?at  ]?is  is  heresie.  O  God !  if  freres 
wolde  fenke  on  Jje  power  of  God,  what  J>inge  he  may  do  by 
men,  and  suffer  fendes  worche,  and  Jeanne  schulde  ]?ei  graunt 
])is  power  J>at  ])ei  here  denyen.  pei  have  for^eten  ])er  owne 
powers  ]jat  ]?ei  seien  ])ei  han,  and  doynge  of  miracles  of  J>e  sacrid 
hoste  ^.     But  leve  we  J)eise  uncrafti  wordus  of  ]?es  freris,  and 


^  This  is  evidently  an  allusion  to 
the  miracle  recorded  by  Knyghton 
(col.  2651),  as  having  happened  in 
the  church  of  the  Black  Friars,  on 
the  Friday  in  Whitsun-week,  1382, 


to  the  knight  Cornelius  Clonne,  to 
confirm  whose  wavering  faith  in  the 
Eucharistic  mystery,  tJe  host  was 
said  to  have  exhibited  itself  to  him 
under  the  guise  of  flesh. 

WYCLIF. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC. 


177 


speke  we  to  ]?e  purpose  of  matir  J>at  is  touchid.  And  certis  me 
]?enkes  ]jat  parischenes  may  in  certeyne  cases  wi})holde  dymes 
fro  hym  ])at  is  calde  )?e  persone,  as  \€\  may  medefiilly  holde 
godes  fro  ]?es  freres,  or  fro  Jewes  or  Sarrasenes,  ]?at  ben  lesse 
evil  ])an  \€\,  But  not  iche  parischen  schulde,  whan  ever  he 
wolde,  holde  fro  hys  person  be  hys  owne  juggement.  But 
marke  we  wel  ]?at  we  have  not  titel  to  ]?es  dymes  be  mannus 
resoun  of  dett,  as  o];er  worldly  men  pleten  ])er  dettoures  in 
forme  of  mannis  lawe.  But  serve  we  trewly  as  God  biddus  to 
our  sugetis,  and  \€\  ben  holden  to  serve  us  in  temporal  godes ; 
and  ellus,  as  me  J^enke,  us  failis  ri^t  to  :dymes. 


pE  SEVEN  WERKYS  OF  MERCY  GOSTLY. 

Cap.  VII. 

Si|?en  we  schulde  serve  our  parischenes  in  spiritual  almes,  as 
]?ei  serven  us  in  bodily  sustinaunce,  it  were  for  to  speke  of 
seven  werkis  of  mercy  ]?at  we  calle  spiritual ;  ]?at  ben  better  ])an 
})es  first,  and  ben  clepid  comunly  by  ]?es  seven  wordes, — Teche, 
Counsel,  Chastise,  Cownfort,  Fforgif,  Suffer,  and  Pray,  panne 
a  man  teches  anoJ?er  bi  ])e  lawe  of  charite,  whan  he  teches  hym 
for  to  love  ]?e  biddynge  of  God.  A  man  cownseles  andjjer  as 
he  schulde  do,  *whanne  he  moevejj'him  to  a  weie  j>at  ledi]? 
surely  to  hevene.  A  man  chastisi]?  ano])er  bi  word  or  bi 
dede*^  or  ellus  bi  wi]?drawynge  of  bodily  helpe,  whan 
he  helpus  ]?at  he  leefes  ]?e  synne  J>at  he  was  inne.  A  man 
cowmfortes  ano}?er  whan  he  solasej)  hys  sowle  to  drawe  in 
Goddis  50ck,  for  hope  of  greet  mede.  A  man  forgyffeth  ano]?er 
trespas  ]?at  he  did  to  him,  whan  he  askes  not  veniaurice  bi 
resoun  of  hys  trespas,  but  helpus  him  to  Godward,  to  tume  to 
gode  lyf ;  and  \\%  may  man  do  sumtyme,  and  punische  men  by 
charite.  But  ofte  tyme  suche  punischynge  saveri]?  of  pride  or 
coveytise,  and  herfore  it  were  nedeful  to  purge  J?is  charite,  and 
loke  J?at  sixtene  condiciouns  suen  it,  as  Poule  telli]?.  And 
})anne   symonye  of  freres  and  covetise  of  lawers  schulde  be 

1  The  passage  between  asterisks,  wanting  in  Q,  is  supplied  from  CC. 
WOEKS.      VOL.    III.  N 


Teaching, 

Counsel, 

Reproof, 

Consolation, 

Forgiveness, 

Patience, 

Prayer. 


178 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


These  works 
superior  to 
the  bodily 
works, 


bat  Ja  these 
days  shame- 
fullyaeglected. 


exiled  fro  J^e  folke,  and  Goddus  word  scliulde  renne,  and  iche 
man  schulde  kepe  charite  to  o})er.  And  \q  first  condicioun  of 
charite  is,  a  man  to  suffur.  Be  lawe  of  charite  a  man  schulde 
sufFur  anojjur,  and  muche  more  a  prelate  schulde  wisely  suffur 
hys  sugettis.  And  syn  a  man  schulde  pray  for  helpinge  of  hys 
enemyes,  as  Crist  did,  with  Steven,  and  resoun  nedis  J?erto, 
miche  more  schulde  a  prest  preye  for  hys  sugettis. 

And  as  a  mannis  soule  passes  hys  bodye,  so  Jjes  seven 
goostly  werkes  passen  J)e  seven  oJ?er.  And  herfore  eche  Cristen 
man  is  holden  to  ]?es  seven,  but  more  is  prelatis,  as  ]?ei  ben 
heyer  in  state.  And  so  men  of  holy  Chirche  schulde  bewar  of 
)?is  heresie,  ]?at  bodily  almes  is  better  ]?an  is  gostly  almes,  and 
evere  })e  more  ]?at  it  be  Jje  bettur  it  is.  And  })us  ]?e  fend  blyndi]? 
prestis  to  coveyte  to  be  riche,  for,  as  Jjei  seyen,  j^er  almes 
schulde  bie  ])er  soule  fro  peyne.  pei  schulde  white  \2X  Crist  him- 
self was  most  pore  man,  and  ordeyned  hiis  apostlis  to  do  J)is 
secounde  almes,  and  not  to  do  J)is  bodyly  almes  for  tmperfit- 
nesse  Jjerof.  For  sij)en  almes  stondes  in  wille  and  profite  to  ]?i 
bro]?ur,  whel?er  is  better,  wille  schewid  to  bringe  mannis  soule 
to  blis,  or  ellus  to  fede  hys  bodye  J>at  lastis  but  awhile  ?  And 
herfore  badde  Crist  to  Petur  j?at  he  schulde  fede  hys  schepe  by 
])e  mete  of  hys  word,  as  he  loved  him.  And  so  Petur  fedde  fe 
folk  in  techinge  of  Goddus  word,  and  lafte  bodily  fedynge,  si]?en 
it  fel  not  to  him.  And  ])us  schulde  prestis  and  prelatis  do,  ]>at 
ben  Petur  vikers.  Syn  }>is  werke  is  better,  J^e  levynge  is  more 
synne.  And  ))is  fendis  heresie  desseyves  ]je  Chirche,  whan  ]jei 
tellen  more  bodily  dette  ]?an  bi  goostly  dette.  And  meddelynge 
of  ])ise  two  dettus  confowndus  Cristis  lawe;  for  if  a  man  schulde 
not  were  woUen  and  lynnen  togedur,  miche  more  he  schulde 
not  medule  ])e  resones  of  J^eise  almes,  and  specialy  syn  l?e 
wersse  doij?  harme  to  ]?e  better. 

Cap.  VIII. 

We  schulde  beleve  ]?at  }?ese  werkes  passen  ojjer  werkis  of 
charite,  and  defaute  or  fraude  in  hem  harmis  more  Cristis 
Chirche  ])an  defaute  of  worldly  godes,  if  men  of  j^e  world 
kouthe  se  it.  And  herbye  aposdis  of  Crist  gendrid  Cristis 
childur ;  but  now  oure  Chirche  is  bareyne  for  defaute  of  suche 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC. 


179 


sede ;  for  now  men  loken  after  bodily  J^inge,  as  bestis,  and  lefen 
|)ingus  spirituale,  for  hem  faylis  feij).  And  herfore  Crist  preyses 
more  heringe  of  Goddis  word,  and  good  kepynge  of  it,  })an 
beringe  of  hiis  modur.  And  s}ti  it  was  a  holy  J>inge  J)us  to 
bere  Crist,  and  norische  him  in  hiis  ^owthe  by  bodily  fode, 
and  ^itt  be  witnesse  of  Crist  it  is  miche  more  holy  to  here 
Goddus  word  and  wor]?ily  kepe  it,  and  5itt  more  ]>an  ))is  is  to 
preche  wel  Goddus  word,  ])anne  it  semes  fat  ]?is  is  moost  hey^e 
werke  of  ojjer,  and  ]?us  \t  mede  of  J?is  werke  passes  o]?er  medes. 
And  herfore  sais  Seynt  Joon,  I  have  no  more  grace  of  ]?is,  ]>an 
to  here  my  childur  wandnr  in  treuthe  of  J^e  gospel,  for  frnte  of 
such  fadurhede  schal  be  joye  of  heven,  of  childur  ]?at  men 
geten  to  heven,  and  ]?is  passes  ai  ?]?e  joye  of  ]?e  worlde.  And 
herfore  men  seyn  \2X  doctours  han  passynge  corown  in  heven. 
But  ]?e  fend,  bi  pride  and  coveytise  of  }>e  worlde,  lettis  frut  of 
])is  sede  by  bryngynge  in  of  Anticrist.  Alle  j?es  ben  Anticristes, 
])at  chaleyngen  by  tityl  of  Crist  for  to  synne  worldlyest  and 
lusty  est  of  o)?ur;  suche  on  is  a  mydday  fend,  opun  a^enns 
Crist,  And  so,  as  hirdes  in  heven  have  joye  of  fer  childur  \2X 
\€\  have  goten  to  heven  be  vertu  of  Goddis  seed,  so  ]?ese  fendes 
schal  in  helle  have  sorowe  of  ojjer  childer,  j)at  \€\  have  brou^t 
unto  helle  be  lawe  of  J?e  fende. 

pis  schulde  Cristen  men  defende  as  j^e  feij?  of  Crist,  Jjat  ]je 
most  holy  werke,  and  most  duwe  to  prelatis,  were  to  sowe 
Cristis  seed  by  charite  among  ]je  peple,  and  so  stonde  for 
Cristis  lawe  to  suflfringe  of  dejj.  And  herfoi^  seis  Crist  ]?at  no 
man  hadde  more  lufe  J^an  on  )?is  wise  put  hiis  lyf  for  profit  of 
hiis  frendis.  And  so  did  Crist  and  Baptist,  and  o)>ere  Cristis 
martires,  ])at  seid  ]?e  treu]?e  of  Goddus  lawe  for  Cristis  love  and 
hiis  Chirche,  and  suffred  dej?  wij?  good  will  for  kepynge  of  hiis 
lawe.  And  si]>en  j?is  is  j^e  best  werke  \2X  man  may  do  in  er]?e, 
\^  most  cursid  werke  J>at  Anticrist  ha}>  fownden  were  to  lette 
]?is  sowynge  of  Jesus  Cristis  worde.  O  if  oure  prelates  lettid 
trewe  prestis  to  preche  Cristis  gospel  and  charge  not  \t  peple, 
and  bringe  in  suche  prechours  J)at  reversen  Cristis  lawe,  and 
pylen  her  herers  ^  a^ens  Cristis  lawe,  how  opun  kalendis  it  were 
of  lordschipe  of  Anticrist !     And  alle  j^es  may  be  brou^t  inne 

^  So  in  CC ;  \us  hererers^  Q. 
N  2 


3  John  4, 


i8o 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


But  the  preach- 
ing of  the 
friars  is  a 
disfiguring'  of 
the  gospel. 


by  lyttul  and  lyttul,  of  levynge  of  Cristis  lawe  and  ypocrisie  of 
])e  fendus. 

Cap.  IX. 

To  Jjis  travelen  ]?eise  newe  sectus,  be  helpe  of  Anticrist,  and 
forsen  hem  by  prelates  of  |)e  emperoures  lawe.  For  freres  in  her 
prechinge  fordon  prechinge  of  Crist,  and  prechen  lesyngus  and 
japes  plesynge  to  J^e  peple ;  and  if  ]?ei  touche  a  worde  jjat  is  in 
Cristis  lawe,  ]?ei  cutten  it  so,  and  reven  it  fro  fowrme  of  Goddis 
wordes,  ]>at  ]?e  peple  schal  not  wite  what  ]?is  word  menes.  And 
so  J?es  freres  faren  wij?  j^e  worde  of  Goddis  lawe  worse  fen 
fendus  turmentours  faren  wij?  ]?er  cloJ)is.  For  ]?ei  docken 
Goddis  word,  and  tateren  it  bi  ^tx  rimes,  ]?at  J^e  fowrme  J)at 
Crist  ^af  it  is  hidde  by  ypocrisie.  And  so  ])es  fendes  prechen 
sutilte  of  hemself,  and  leven  to  preche  of  Jesus  Crist,  and  ])us 
men  ben  desseyved.  And  certis,  as  ]?e  word  of  Jesus  Crist  is 
better  ]?an  fes  clo]?es,  and  use  wi]?  profite  of  hem  schulde  profit 
more  to  man,  so  J^es  ypocritis  of  }>e  fende  don  more  harme  to 
]?e  Chirche  })an  dos  Jjes  turmentours  J?at  fus  defowrmen  j)er 
cloJ)es.  O  !  sij?en  Seynt  Petur  techus,  })at  if  a^  man  speke  ou^t 
he  schulde  schape  him  for  to  speke  as  he  spake  Goddis  wordis, 
how  miche  more  schulde  j^eise  prechours  hold  }>is  rewle,  and 
put  away  japes  and  lesynges  in  j^er  prechynges,  and  speke 
wordes  of  Goddis  lawe,  (for  Jjei  ben  of  vertu  to  teche  men  \q 
ri^t  weye,  hou  J^ei  schulde  come  to  heven),  and  leve  all  oj)er 
wordes  but  if  }»ei  helpe  ])e  prechoure  to  declare  J?e  word  of  God, 
as  releffe  fedus  men.  And  herfore  Jon  Baptist  answered  prestes 
and  Phariseis,  and  prechid  not  hys  heynesse,  but  ]?e  wor])inesse 
of  Crist,  and  seid  himself  was  a  voyce  criynge  in  wildirnesse, 
and  grownded  hiis  word  on  Goddis  lawe  in  Ysaye,  and  so  tolde 
what  office  God  hadde  ordeyned  hym.  And  J)e  same  he 
ordeynes  to  iche  prechoure  of  hys  word,  to  make  redye  Goddis 
weyes,  and  make  ri^t  Jje  pa}?is  bi  whiche  owre  God  schulde 
come,  in  hiis  membris  ])at  lufen  hym,  sone  and  schortly  to 
heven  by  ri^twisnesse  of  ]?eise  biw-eies.  pis  schulde  be  ]?e  werk 
of  prechours,  or  Goddis  lawe  is  fals ;  and  he  ])at  seis  )?e  reverse 
blasphemes  in  Crist,  and  seis  J)at  helpe  of  men  schulde  be 
taken  fro  hem,  and  Crist  schuld  ordeyne  men  to  be  dampned 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC. 


i?5i 


by  Anticristis  lawes.  But,  for  iche  Cristen  man  schulde  hy- 
dowse  jjeses  wordes,  beleve  we  ]>at  ordenaunce  of  Jesus  Crist  is 
best,  bi  ]?e  whiche  he  ordeyned  hiis  prestes  to  despise  )?is 
worlde,  and  teche  hiis  puple  )je  ri^t  weye  J?at  ledis  hem  to 
heven,  bojje  in  maner  of  lif  and  worde  of  ])er  prechynge.  And 
so  prestis  schulde  teche,  be  trewe  lawe  of  God,  how  men 
schulde  come  by  ]?e  strynge  to  |?e  blisse  of  heven,  and  not 
go  downward  to  helle,  ne  tarie  be  croked  weies.  And  if  ]?ou 
doist  away  synne,  J?ou  rediest  Goddis  weye,  and  removest 
stockes,  heye,  and  stobul,  as  Seynt  Poule  teches. 

Cap.  X. 

And  ]?us  is  Goddis  lawe  reversid  by  Anticrist  clerkis,  J)at  gode 
is  calde  evyl,  and  evyl  is  cald  gode.  But  wo  worjje  hem  ]?at 
speken  ]?us,  as  Ysaie  synges.  And  so  wo  schal  come  to  hem 
]?at  turnen  werkes  of  mercy  to  felnesse  of  werkes  of  ]?e  fende, 
to  drawe  sowles  to  helle;  as  he  )?at  turnes  Cristis  lawe,  and 
richej?  ^  prestes  to  ])e  world,  is  seide  to  do  hem  almes,  for  he 
contraries  Crist  and  makes  hem  gloriouse  to  fe  worlde,  J?at 
Crist  forbede  many  weies.  And  }>us  ordynaunce  of  Crist  is  put 
aback  be  ])e  fende,  and  where  men  seyden  }?at  it  were  gode 
sowles  go  to  blis,  now  seis  Anticrist  indede,  it  is  gode  hem  to 
go  to  helle ;  and  where  weyes  \zX  Crist  hadd  ordeyned  to  governe 
hiis  Chirche  schulde  be  susteyned  and  kepte,^si]?en  God  himself 
biddus  so,  Anticrist  seis  apertly  \2X  it  were  greet  schame  to 
lyve  or  to  speke  so,  sijjen  )?e  world  askes  })e  contrarie.  And  so 
}jei  ben  greet  heretikes,  ]?at  speken  of  Goddus  lawe,  or  agayn 
Anticrist  lawe,  as  enemyes  to  J?e  Chirche.  And  he  J?at  spekes 
J)at  God  assoyles  or  cursus  for  hiis  lawe  schal  be  halden  for 
a  foole,  si'pen  Anticrist  contraries.  And  so  assoylynge  stonden 
in  billus  and  wordes,  and  so  we  chargen  sensible  J?inges,  and 
leven  Goddus  lawe,  as  God  were  aslepe  and  Anticrist  were  ful 
lord.  For  beleve  schulde  teche  us  j^at  no  man  were  cursud  but 
if  God  cursid  him  for  faylynge  in  hiis  lawe,  ne  no  man  is 
assoyled  but  if  Crist  assoyle  him  far  mayntenynge  of  hiis  lawe, 
hou  evere  Jje  world  blaber.  And  herfore  schulde  J?es  lordes 
begynne  at  hemself^  and  amende  ]?es  errours  ]?at  regnen 
^  So  in  CC ;  ricbesse,  Q. 


There  is  a 
school  of  error 
abroad  which 
alters  and 
deforms  the 
precepts  of  the 
gospel. 
Is.  V.  20. 


It  is  as  if  God 
were  asleep 
and  Antichrist 
ruled  every- 
where. 


iSa 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


amonge  \e  peple,  before  |)ei  go  to  straunge  londes  to  werre  wi|j 
J)ere  enmyes.  But  certis  men  ban  non  enmyes  more  ))an  is  ]?er 
homely  meynes ;  and  bere  jiei  schulde  begynne  to  wirche  by  ]?e 
rule  of  charite.  For  who  lufes  more  in  charite  hys  enmyes  ]>an 
hys  frendes  ?  or  who  wolde  prick  to  Cawnterburie,  to  fi^t  ]?er 
wij?  hys  enmyes,  whan  he  hadde  in  jje  myddys  })is  lond  moo 
enmyes  alle  aboute  hym?  And  Jjus  ))e  lawe  of  charite,  and 
also  J?e  werkis  of  mercy,  schulde  moeve  men  to  chaunge  })er 
ordre  and  sumdel  trowe  to  Crist ;  for  alle  ]?e  harme  ]?at  comes 
to  men  is  for  chawngynge  of  Cristis  ordynaunce, 

Lorde!  gloriouse  were  \i  Churche  if  it  stode  clenly  bi  |?e 
ordynaunce  of  Crist,  wijjowten  fendes  novelries!  J?an  schulde 
men  begynne  to  werre  on  enmyes  nexst  hem,  as  mede  and 
nede  and  kynde  teches  Cristen  men. 


•5<^*e»a*^:- 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC. 


183 


XL 


FIVE    QUESTIONS    ON    LOVE. 


[This  short  but  highly  interesting  piece  is  a  letter  written  by  Wyclif 
to  some  unknown  friend,  who  had  put  five  questions  to  him  respecting 
the  love  of  God.  Bale  mentions  it  under  the  title  of  '  Ad  quinque  quae- 
stiones ;'  and  the  Wyclif  MSS.  at  Vienna-and  Prague  contain  several  copies 
of  a  Latin  version  of  it,  the  ending  of  which  however  appears  to  be  dif- 
ferent. Its  authenticity  can  hardly  be  doubted.  The  text  is  founded  on 
New  Coll.  95  (Q),  the  only  copy  known  to  exist.] 

A  SPECIAL  frend  in  God  axi})  bi  charite  J?.es  fyve  questiouns 
of  a  mek  prest  in  God.  First,  what  is  love.  Aftirward,  where 
is  love,  pe  ]?ridd  tyme  he  axij?  hou  God  schuld  medefully  be 
loved,  pe  fourJ)e  tyme  he  axi]>  hou  a  trewe  man  may  knowe 
whejjer  he  love  his  God  in  Jje  fom-me  J?at  God  axi]?  ]?at  a  man 
love  him.  pe  fifjje  tjnne  he  axi]?,  in  what  staat  of  J)ialif  a  mani 
may  best  love  his  God,  and  more  medefully  to  come  to  hevene. 
Alle  jjes  questiouns  ben  hard  to  telle  hem  trewly  in  Englisch, 
but  3it  charite  dryvej?  men  to  telle  hem  sum  what  in  Englische, 
so  })at  men  may  beste  white  bi  ]>is  JEnglisch  what  is  Goddis 
wille. 

To  fe  firste  questioun  ]?at  is  axid  seien  men  on  ]?is  maner  ; 
])at  love  is  a  maner  of  werk,  ]?at  come]?  of  a  mannis  wille  to 
wole  good  to  loved  ]?ing ;  and  so  love  is  in  mannis  herte,  and 
man  o))er  maner  in  lovyng^  But  to  ]?e  ]?rid  questioun  answeri]). 
Crist  in  Jones  gospel.     Crist  sei]?, — He  Jjat  ha])  my  maimde- 


a  This,  the  reading  "of  the  only 
MS.,  appears  to  be  corrupt.  A 
collation  of  the  Latin  version  of 
the  tract,  copies  of  which  exist,  in 


five  MSS.  at  Vienna,  (see  Shirley's 
Catalogue^  p.  22)  is  much  to  be. 
desired. 


Questions 
proposed. 


184 


Four  states  of 
life,  now  prac* 
tised  in  the 
Church,  are 
unlawfiil. 


Christians 
ought  to  be 
able  to  study 
the  gospel  in 
their  native 
tongue. 


In  these  times 

men  must  be 

ready  to  suffer 

death  for  the  ,, 

sakeof  God's"' 

law. 

Ps.  cxvi.  16, 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 

mentis  and  kepij?  hem  in  his  lif,  he  is  ]?at  ilk  J^at  lovej?  me. 
And  ]?us  he  maki]?  redy  love  to  God,  ])at  studiej?  wel  Godis 
lawe,  as  J)e  first  Psalme  sei]?.  As  to  J)e  four}>e  questioun, — a 
man  muy  wite  bi  himsilf  wher  he  })enki]?  on  Goddis  lawe  and 
love]?  it  and  kepi]?  it,  and  }>anne  Crist  seij?  ])at  he  love]?  God. 
As  anentis  J?e  fifjje  questioun, — ^it  is  knowun  bi  Goddis  lawe, 
]?at  ]?er  ben  in  ]?e  Chirche  J)re'  statis  ]?at  God  ha]?e  ordeyned; 
state  of  prestis,  and  state  of'  kny^tis,  and  jje  }nM  is  staat  of 
comunys.  And  to  ]?es  ]?ree  ben  }?re  o]?ere,  comyn  and  leeful 
bi  Goddis  lawe,— state  of  virgyns,  and  state  of  wedloke,  and 
}?e  state  of  widewis.  State  of  virgyns  is  ]?e  hiest,  bi  witnesse  of 
Crist  and  seyntis  in  hevene.  Sum  state  is  here  good  for  o  man, 
and  sum  is  good  for  anbj?er;  and  God  move]?  a  man  to  his  best, 
state  ^if  he  lette  not  bi  his  synne. 

But  foure  statis,  of  ^  ]?e  emperour  clerkis,  of  munkis^  of 
chanouns,  and  of  freris,  semyn  perelous,  and  not  ordeyned  of 
God,  but  suffrid  for  mannys  synne.  And  J?erfore  men  schulden 
be  war  to  take  of  ]?es  foiire  statis,  for  o]?er  statis  {jat  God  ha]? 
ordeyned.  bringen  men  bettere  to  blis-  of-  hevene;  and  he  is 
a  miche  fool  ]?at  leeve^  ]3.e  bettere  and  chesij?  J7e  werse.  And 
]?us  it- helpij?  heere  to  Cristen  men,  to  studie  }?e  gospel  in  J?at 
tunge  in-  whiche  ]?ei  knowen  best  Cristis  sentense.  For  our 
bileve  techi]?  us  ]?at  ech  Cristen  man  is  holdyn  heere  to  sue 
Crist  in  maner  of  lyvyng,  sum  ferrer  and  sumnerrer,  aftir  }?at 
God  5yve]?  him  grace;  and  he  j?at  sue]?  Crist  most  ny^e  love]? 
him  most,  and  is  most  lovyd  of  God.  And  si>  lif  and  dedis  of 
Crist,  and  his  lore,  ben  in  ]>q  gospel,  it  is  opyn  to  profit  of  men 
to  studie  ]?is  bok,  >to  love  Crist. 

But  over  ]?is  axi]?  ]?is  frend  of  God,  what  wif  Davi]?  hadde  in 
]?es  two  versis  ]?at  he  sei]?  in  ]?e  Sauter, — and  })ei  ben  comynly 
known  in  Latyn,— O  Lord,  I  confesse  to  }?ee  ]?at  I  am  ]?i  ser- 
vaunt,  in  bodie,  soule,— and  I  am  son  of  J?in  hand-mayden,  for 
Y  am  trewe  child  of  holy  Chirche.  pou  hast  brokun  my 
bondis,  of  synne,  and  bondis  bi  whiche  my  soule  iove]?^  my 
fiesche ;  to  ]?ee  I  schal  sacre  an  ost  of  heriyng.  And  Jjus  Y 
schal  clepe  inne  to  me  }?e  name  of]?eLord,  to  dwelle  in  me. 
And  J?es  same  wordis  maie  martris  seie,  ]?at  loven  so  miche 
Goddis  lawe,  J?at  ]?ei  wole  sufFre  peyne  of  dee}?,  for  love  and 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC,  185 

mayntenyng  of  J?is  lawe.  And  bettere  cause  of  martirdom 
schewid  God  never  to  plese  him.  And  sij)  a  man  mut  nedis 
die,  and  Goddis  lawe  haj>e  nowe  manye  enemyes,  a  man  schulde 
wisely  putt  him  for})  to  suffre  now  ]jus  gloriously. 

War,  man,  lette  not  for  synne, 

Prest,  kny^t,  ^emon,  ne  page, 

3 if  3ee  wole  of  God  have  large  wage : 

Amen,  Amen,  Amen. 


=<g><^>^* 


1 86  WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


XI  I. 

[ON  THE  SUFFICIENCY  OF  HOLY 
SCRIPTURE.] 


[Of  this  striking  'fly-leaf*  the  only  copy  known  to  exist  is  in  the  library 
of  Trinity  College,  Dublin  (AA).  It  appears  to  be  entered  by  Bale  in  his 
catalogue  twice  over,  once  as  *  De  Sathanae  astu  contra  fidem/  inc,  media 
multa  diabolus  quaerit,  and  again  as  *  De  veritate  scripturae/  inc,  diabolus 
quaerit  multis  modis.  It  is  strange  that  it  should  never  before  have  been 
printed.] 


The  fend  seki]?  many  weyes  to  marre  men  in  bileve,  and 
to  stoppe  bodily  ]?is,  ])at  no  bookis  ben  bileve.  For  ^if  ]?ou 
spekist  of  the  Bible,  ]?anne  seyen  Antecristis  clerkis,  how 
provest  ]>ou  })at  it  is  holy  wryt  more  thanne  annother  writen 
book  ?  Here  we  seyen,  as  Crist  seith,  that  kynrede  of  hordom 
sekijj  signes.  And  J^erfore  men  moten  use  cautels,  and  axe 
hem  questiouns  a^en,  whether  Crist  lefte  his  gospellis  here  for 
to  counforte  his  Chirche.  And  ^if  thei  seyen  that  he  dide, 
axe  hem  whiche  ben  ]?es  gospels,  and  hem  we  clepyn  holy 
wryt.  And  J?us  we  axen  of  o)?ir  partis  J)at  trewe  men  clepyn 
hooly  wryt.  But,  for  Cristen  men  schulde  speke  pleynly  to 
Antecrist,  we  seyen  that  hooly  wryt  is  taken  on  free  maneres 
comynly.  On  the  firste  manere  Crist  him  silf  is  clepid  in  the 
gospel  holy  wryt,  whanne  he  seij>  ))at  J?e  writynge  may  no^t 
be  fordon  )>at  J^e  Fadir  haj?  halwid  and  sent  into  the  world  \ 
On  the  secounde  manere  holy  wryt  is  clepid  truj?is  J)at  ben 
conteyned  and  signyfied  bi  comyn  biblis,  and  ])es  truj?is  may 
no^t  faile.     On  ])e  ]>ridde  maner  holy  wryt  is  clepid  bookis  J)at 

*  This  mistranslation  of  John  x.  35,  36,  is  found  in  the  earlier  Wycliffite 
versions,  but  is  corrected  in  the  later. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC. 

ben  writen  and  maad  of  enk  and  parchemyn.  And  j)is  speche 
is  nou^t  so  propre  as  the  first  and  the  secunde.  But  we  taken 
of  bileue  jjat  I>e  secunde  writ,  of  tru]?is  writen  in  the  book  of 
lyf,  is  holy  wryt,  and  God  sei]?  it,  and  J?is  we  knowen  by  bileve. 
And  as  oure  si^t  make]?  us  certyn  of  J?at  J>ing  ]?at  we  seen, 
so  oure  bileue  makij?  us  certyn  J)at  Jjes  trew]?is  ben  holy  wryt. 
3if  holy  wryt  on  the  fridde  manere  be  brent  or  cast  in  the  see, 
holy  writ  on  the  secunde  manere  may  no3t  faile,  as  Crist  seij>. 
In  Dei  nomine,  Amen. 


187 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS, 


Two  kinds  of 
matrimony : 


r.  The  espou- 
sals between 
God  and  holy 
souls. 

Hos.  i.  19. 


XIII. 
OF  WEDDID  MEN  AND  WIFIS 

AND  OF 

HERE  CHILDREN  ALSO. 

[The  only  known  copy  of  the  following  tract  is  in  the  library  of  Corpus 
Christi  College,  Cambridge,  MS.  296  (for  a  description  of  the  manuscript,  see 
the  Introduction  to  this  volume).  It  is  not  mentioned  even  by  Bale,  and 
the  only  reason  for  ascribing  it  to  Wyclif  is  that  it  is  found  in  a  volume 
which  Archbishop  Parker,  in  the  sixteenth  century,  believed  to  contain  only 
tracts  of  Wyclif's  composition,  and  under  that  belief  bequeathed  to  the 
college.  St.  Augustine's  being  called  here  *Seynt  Austyn,'  instead  of 
simply  *  Austyn,'  as  in  the  Homilies,  appears  a  suspicious  circumstance, 
yet  capable  perhaps  of  explanation,  if  we  suppose  the  tract  to  have  been 
composed  by  Wyclif  in  his  younger  days.  But,  whatever  may  be  thought 
of  its  authenticity,  it  possesses  sufficient  intrinsic  interest  to  justify  its 
appearing,  for  the  first  time,  in  print.] 

Cap.  I. 

OuRE  Lord  God  Almy^ty  speki]?  in  his  lawe  of  tweie  matri- 
moneys  or  wedlokis.  pe  first  is  gostly  matrimonye,  bitwixe 
Crist  and  holy  Chirche,  J)at  is,  Cristene  soulis  ordeyned  to 
blisse.  pe  secunde  matrimoyne  is  bodily  or  gostly,  bitwene 
man  and  womman,  bi  just  consent,  after  Goddis  lawe. 

Of  }>e  first  matrimoyne  speki]?  God  bi  ]?e  prophete  Osie  to 
holy  Chirche ;  and  to  ech  persone  of  holi  Chirche  God  himself 
seiJ7,  I  schal  spouse  j^e,  or  wedde  j?e  to  me,  in  ri^twisnesse,  in 
dom,  in  mercy,  and  in  fei]?;  and  I  schal  wedde  ]?e  wijjouten 
ende.  pis  is  ]je  first  matrimoyne  and  best,  as  God  and  ]?e 
soule  of  trewe  men  ben  beter  })an  mennys  bodies.  And  ]?is 
beste  matrimoyne  is  broken  for  a  tyme  bi  brekynge  of  saad 
fei)>,  and  defaute  of  ri^twis  lyvynge.     And  herefore  God  sei]) 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC, 


189 


oft  bi  his  prophetis,  })at  his  peple  dide  fornicacioun  and  avou- 
trie,  for  Jjei  worschipen  false  goddis ;  and  Seint  Jame  sei)>  jjat 
men  }jat  loven  jje  world  ben  gosdy  avoutreris.  For  j?us  writi]> 
he ;  5ee  avoutreris,  wite  ^e  not  ]}at  frendischipe  of  )>is  world  is 
enemyte  of  God  ?  And  J?us  alle  men  ]?at  loven  more  worldly 
worschipe  or  goodis  of  )>e  world  J)an  God  and  his  lawe  and 
trewe  lif,  ben  avoutreris  gostly,  ^if  fei  weren  Cristene  bifore ; 
and  )?is  is  worse  avoutrie  J?an  brekynge  of  fleschly  matrimonye. 

Of  j?e  secunde  matrimoyne,  J?at  is  bodily,  spekij?  God  in  J?e 
firste  bok  of  holy  writt,  whanne  he  maade  matrimoyne  bitwene 
Adam  and  Eve  in  Paradis  in  staat  of  innocence,  bifore  ]?at  fei 
synneden.  And  for  }>at  God  hymself  made  J?is  ordre  of  matri- 
moyne, and  he  not  so  made']?es  newe  religions,  it  is  betre  and 
more  to  preise  ]}4n  jjes  newe  ordris.  Also  Jesus  Crist  wolde 
not  be  borne  of  )>e  virgine  Marie,  ne  conseyved,  but  in  verrey 
matrimoyne,  as  J)e  gospel  of  Luc,  and  Seynt  Ambrose,  and 
oj^ere  seyntis  witnessen.  Also  Jesus.  Crist  was  present  in  his 
owene  persone  wi])  his  modir  in  bodily  matrimoyne,  to  approve 
it,  as  ]?e  gospel  of  Jon  techi]?,  whanne  he  turned  watir  into 
wyn.  Also  ]?e  Holy  Gost  warne]?  Cristenmen,  hou  in  ))e  laste 
dales  summe  heretikis  schuUen  departe  fro  feij)  of  Goddis  lawe, 
^evinge  entente  to  spiritis  of  error,  and  to  techynge  of  develis, 
spekynge  lesyngis  in.  ypocrisie,  forbedynge  men  and  wymmen 
to  be  weddid,  and  techynge  men  to  abstene  hem  fro  metis, 
J)e  whiche  God  ha]?  maad  to  be  eten  of  trewe  men,  wij)  ]?ank- 
yngis  and  heriyng  of  God.  Also  ]?is  bodily  matrimoyne  is  a 
sacrament  and  figure  of  ]?e  gostly  wedlok  bitwene  Christ  and 
holy  Chirche,  as  Seynt  Poul  sei]?.  Also,  })is  wedlok  is  nedful 
to  save .  mankynde  bi  generacioun  to  ]?e  day  of  dom,  and  to 
restore  and  fulfille  J^e  noumbre  of  aungelis,  dampned  for  pride, 
and  ]?e  noumbre  of  seyntis  in  hevene,  and  to  save  men  and 
wommen  fro  fornycacion.  And  Jjerfore  he  ]?at  forbedi]>  or 
letii]>  verxey  matrimonye,  is  enemy e  of  God  and  seyntis  in 
hevene  and  alle  miankynde.  And  herefore  man  ponischide 
fornycacion  and  avoutrie  in  Jje  olde  lawe  bi  stonynge  to  de]?, 
and  in  jje  lawe  of  grace  bi  dampnynge  in  helle,  but  ^if  men  be 
verrey  contrit  ]?erfore. 

And  herefore,  si]?  fornicacioun  is  so  perilous,  and  men  and 


James  iv.  4. 


2.  Ordinary 
marriage ;  its 
justifications 
and  ends. 


>>^X 


The  marriage 
of  priests 


190 


WYCLIF'S  WORKS. 


allowed  by 
God;  evils 
of  enforced 
celibacy. 


Continence, 
however,  is  the 
highest  state, 
if  a  man  has 
the  special 
^ift  to  prac- 
tise it 


wymmen  ben  so  frele,  God  ordeynede  prestis  in  ]?e  olde  lawe 
to  have  wyves,  and  nevere  forbede  it  in  Jje  newe  lawe,  neijjer 
bi  Crist  ne  bi  his  apostlis,  but  rajjere  aprovede  it.  But  now, 
bi  ypocrisie  of  fendis  and  fals  men,  manye  bynden  hem  to 
presthod  and  chastite,  and  forsaken  wifis  bi  Goddis  lawe,  and 
schenden  maydenes  and  wifis,  and  fallen  foulest  of  alle.  For 
many  ben  prestis  and  religious,  in  doynge  and  ojjere  %  for  to 
have  lustful  lif  and  eisy,  ^ong  and  strong  of  complexion,  and 
faren  wel  of  mete  and  drynk,  and  wolen  not  traveile,  neij?er  in 
penaunce,  ne  studie  of  Goddis  lawe,  ne  techynge,  ne  laboure 
wijj  here  hondis ;  and  herefore  ]>ei  fallen  into  lecherie  in  dyverse 
degrees,  and  in  synne  a^enst  kynde.  For  many  gentil-mennis 
sonys  and  doutres  ben  maad  religious  a^enst  here  wille,  whanne 
pei  ben  childre  wijjouten  discrecion,  for  to  have  J)e  heritage 
holly  to  0  child  J?at  is  most  lovyd.  And  when  ]?ei  come  to  age, 
what  for  drede  of  here  frendis,  and  what  for  drede  of  povert  in 
cas  jjat  ])ei  gon  out,  and  for  jpocrisie  and  flatirynge,  and  faire 
bihestis  of  Jjes  religious,  and  for  drede  of  takynge  of  here 
bodi  to  prison,  Jjei  doren  not  schewe  here  herte  ne  leven  ])is  stat, 
]jou5  ]?ei  knowen  hemself  unable  })erto.  And  hereof  come]) 
lecherie  and  sum  tyme  morj^erynge  of  many  men. 

ISfeJjeles,  Jjou^  matrimonye  be  good  and  gretly  comendid  of 
God,  ^it  clene  virgynite  is  moche  betre, — and  wedlok  also,  as 
Seynt  Poul  sei]?  opynlit*;  for  Jesus  Crist,  ])at  lyvede  most 
perfitly,  was  evere  clene  virgine,  and  not  weddid  bodely,  and 
so  was  his  modir  evere  virgine,  and  Jon  Evaungelist,  Seynt 
Austyn  and  Jerom  specially  witnessen  wel  ])is  in  many  bokis. 
Ne]?eles  virgynite  is  so  heye  and  so  noble  Jjat  Crist  comaundid 
it  not  generaly,  but  saide,  who  may  take,  take  he  it.  And 
)?erefore  Poul  5af  no  comaundement  of  virgynite,  but  ^af  conseil 
to  hem  {)at  weren  able  Jjerto.  And  })us  prestis  ])at  kepen  clene 
chastite  in  bodi  and  soule  doun  best;  but  many  taken  ))is  charge 
not  discretly,  and  sclaundren  hemselfe  foule  bifore  God  and 
his  seyntis,  for  newe  bondis  maade  nedeles  of  synful  men.  And 
J)is  is  a  gret  disceit  of  })e  fend  under  colour  of  perfeccion  and 
chastite.     For  he  stirej?  men  to  hei^e   poyntis  of  perfeccion, 

a  I  cannot  understand  this  phrase. 

^  If  the  text  is  not  corrupt,  the  reference  must  be  to  2  Cor.  xi.  2, 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC, 


191 


when  he  knowi)>  or  supposij?  hem  unable,  not  for  here  goode, 
but  for  to  falle  foulere  and  depere  in  more  synne,  as  Seynt 
Austyn  techij>.  And  Jjus  j/e  fend  Sathanas  transfigure})  or 
turnejj  hem  falsly  into  an  angel  of  li3t,  to  disceyve  men  bi 
colour  of  holynesse. 

Cap.  IL 

See  now  how  ]?is  wedlok  owi}>  to  be  kept  in  bo]>  sides.  First 
]>is  wediok  shulde  be  maad  wij?  ful  consent  of  bojje  partis,  prin- 
cipaly  to  ]?e  worschipe  of  God,  to  lyve  clenly  in  ]?e  ordre  fat  he 
made,  and  bringe  for]?  childre  to  fulfiUe  J^e  chosen  noumbre  of 
seyntis  in  blisse,  and  not  to  have  flescly  lustis  wi]?oute  reson 
and  drede  of  God,  as  nnilis  and  hors  and  swyn  ]?at  han  no 
undirstondynge.  For  Jje  angel  Raphael  warned  Tobie,  ]?at  \^ 
fend  ha]?  maistrie  upon  siche  men  ]?at  ben  weddid,  to  have  ]?us 
lustis  of  flesch  as  bestis  wij^oute  resoun  and  drede  of  God. 
Als9  ]>is  contract  shulde  not  be  maade  bitwixe  a  5onge  man 
and  an  olde  bareyne  widewe^  passid  child-berynge,  for  love 
of  worldly  muk,  as  men  ful  of  coveitise  usen  sumtyme, — for 
J)an  come]?  soone  debat  and  avoutrie  and  enemyte,  and  wast 
of  goodis,  and  sorowe  and  care  ynow^.  And  it  is  a  gret  dispit 
to  God  to  coloure  ]?us  here  wickide  coveitise,  lecherie,  and 
avoutrie  bi  ])e  holy  ordre  of  matrimoyne.  And  many  men 
synnen  moche,  for  \€\  defoulen  many  wymmen,  and  letten  hem 
fro  matrimoyne,  and  undon  hem  in  \\%  world,  and  sumtyme 
ben  cause  of  here  dampnacion;  for  \€\  ben  maad  comyn 
wymmen,  whanne  ]?ei  han  lost  here  frendishipe,  and  kunnynge 
no  craft  to  lyve  by.  Many  hote  and  coragious  men  wolen  not 
take  a  pore  gentil  womman  to  his  wif  in  Goddis  lawe,  and  make 
here  a  gentil  womman,  and  save  here  owene  soule,  but  lyven 
in  ]3e  devehs  servyce  al  here  lif,  or  ]?e  more  part ;  and  defoulen 
many  templis  of  God  to  gret  peril  of  here  soule,  and  abiden  to 
have  a  riche  womman  for  muk,  and  panne  wasten  here  goodis 
in  harlotrie  and  nyse  pride,  in  avoutrie  on  gaie  strumpatis,  and 
evere  lyven  in  wra]?e  and  chydynge,  and  in  bondage  of  synne 
to  ])e  fendis  of  helle.  Also  summe  my^tty  men  marien  here 
children,  where  ]?at  here  herte  consenti})  not  wilfully,  but  feynen 
for  drede.     For  comynly  ]?ei  loken  alle  aftir  richesse  and  wor- 


What  consti- 
tutes a  true 
marriage ; 
evils  of  mer- 
cenary and 
ambitious 
marriages. 


igz 


WYCLIF'S  WORKS. 


The  relations 
between  the 
parties  con- 
sidered. 


Jjinesse  to  fe  world,  and  not  after  goodnesse  of  virtuous  lif. 
And  so  God  and  his  side  is  putte  bihynde,  and  ]?e  devel  and  ]?e 
world  and  f>e  flesch  han  now  here  maistrie. 

For  j?re  skillis  may  a  man  knowe  fleschly  his  ri^tful  wif^ 
J?e  firste  for  to  geten  children,  to  fulfille  Jje  noumbre  of  men 
and  wymmen  J^at  schullen  be  savyd;  \^  secunde  to  kepe  his 
wif  fro  lecherie  of  o]?ere  men ;  ))e  ]?ridde  is  to  kepe  himself  fro 
lecherie  of  ofere  wymmen.  And  no  party  may  kepe  him  chaste 
fro  ]?e  dedis  of  wedlok  wijjouten  assent  of  ]?e  to)>er  comynly, 
for  ])e  man  haj?  power  of  ]?e  wifis  body,  and  }>e  wif  ha]?  power 
of  ]3e  mannys  body,  as  Seynt  Poul  sei]>.  And  ^if  ]?e  partie 
desire^  to  be  chast,  suffre  he  wiJ?owten  his  owene  luste  ]?e  tojjer 
part  in  dedis  of  matrimoyne,  and  he  geti]>  him  jjank  of  God, 
bo]?e  for  suffrynge  of  his  make,  and  for  \^  wille  ])at  he  ha]>  to 
chastite ;  for  God  takij?  reward  to  ])e  goode  wille,  and  not  onely 
to  J>e  dede.  Also  men  seyn,  ^if  bojje  parties  assenten  wilfully 
to  perfit  chastite,  bojje  of  wille  and  dede,  ])at  it  is  betre  ])an  to 
use  for])  |)e  dedis  of  matrimonye;  and  ^if  ]?ei  assenten  bo])e 
parties  at  ])e  begynnynge  to  lyve  evere  chast,  wi]?outen  bodily 
knowynge,  };at  it  is  })e  best  kept  matrimoyne  of  all  oj^ere,  as 
diden  oure  Lady  and  Josep,  whanne  \t\  ben  weddid.  Loke 
\2X  eche  partie  lyve  wel  anentis  God  and  \t  world,  and  stire 
eche  o}>ere  to  charite,  ri^twisnesse,  and  mekenesse  and  pacience, 
andalle  -goodnesse.  And  be  ech  man  war  \2X  he  procure  no 
fals  devours,  for  money,  ne  frendischipe,  ne  enemye ;  for  Crist 
biddi]?  no  man  departe  atwyn  hem  l?at  God  ha]?  joyned ;  but 
only  for  avoutre  ]?at  part  J^at  kepi])  him  clene  may  be  departid 
fro  ]5e  to])eris  bed,  and  for  noon  o)?er  cause,  as  Crist  sei])  hym- 
self.  And  ^it  ])anne  ])e  clene  part  my^t  lyve  chast  evere  while 
])e  to])er  lyve]?,  or  ellis  be  reconseled  a^en  to  ])e  part.  Nejjeles 
])e  clene  may  dwelle  for])  wi])  ])e  toJ)er  lyve])  ])at  forfetis  ^  'bi 
weie  of  charite.  And  men  supposen  ])at  })at  weie  is  gret  charite, 
^if  ])ere  be  evydence  \2X  })e  to])er  part  wolle  do  wel  aftirward. 


^  corrected ;  wille ^  X.  ^  corrected ;  deserve,  X. 

if  lyve]^  be  struck  out;  the  sense  is  restored. 


text  corrupt ; 


WYCLIF. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC, 


Tf93 


Cap.  III. 

See  now  how  J^e  wif  owe])  to  be  suget  to  ]?e  housbonde,  and 
he  owi]?  to  reule  his  wif,  and  how  J^ei  bo]?e  owen  to  reule  here 
children  in  Goddis  lawe.  Ffirst  Seynt  Petir  biddij?  ]?at  wijQs  be 
suget  to  here  housbondis,  in  so  raoche  }>at  3if  ony  bileve  not  bi 
word  of  prechynge,  ])at  J?ei  ben  wonnen^  wij^oute  word  of 
prechynge  bi  j?e  holy  lyvynge  of  wymmen,  whanne  men  biholden 
J)e  chast  lyvynge  of  wymmen.  And  J>es  wymmen  schulden  not 
have  wi|)Outen  forj?  tiffynge  of  her,  ne  garlondis  of  gold,  ne  over 
precious  or  curious  clojjinge,  but  ]?ei  schulden  have  a  clene 
soule,  peisible  and  meke  and  bonere,  J^e  whiche  is  riche  in  j^e 
si^tte  of  God.  And  sumtyme  holy  wymmen,  hopynge  in  God, 
honoureden  hem  in  ]?is  manere,  and  weren  suget  to  here  owene 
housbondis,  as  Sara,  Abrahamys  wif,  obeischid  to  Abraham, 
clepynge  hym  lord ;  and  wymmen  wel  doynge  ben  gostly  dou^tris 
of  Sarra.  AUe  })is  seij?  Seynt  Petir.  Also  Seynt  Poul  speki]? 
]?us  of  housbondis  and  wiiis;  I  wole  pat  men  preie  in  eche 
place,  liftynge  up  clene  hondis,  })at  is,  clene  werkis,  wi]?outen 
wrafjje  and  strif  Also  I  wolle  ]>at  wymmen  ben  in  covenable 
abite,  wij?  schamefastnesse  and  sobirnesse.  ournynge  hem  or 
makynge  fair,  not  in  wrij)en  here,  ne  in  gold,  ne  in  margery 
stones,  or  perils,  ne  in  precious  clo}?,  but  )?at  Jjat  bicomej? 
wymmen  bihetynge  pite,  bi  goode  werkis.  A  womman  owe)?  to 
lerne  in  silence,  wij>  alle  obedience  and  subjeccioun.  But  Poul 
seij>,  I  suifre  not  a  womman  to  teche,  ]?at  is,  openly  in  chirche, 
as  Poul  seij)  in  a  pistel  to  Corynthis,  and  I  suffre  not  a  wom- 
man to  have  lordischipe  in  here  housbonde,  but  to  be  in  silence 
or  stillnesse.  For,  as  Poul  sei|)  in  many  placis,  )?e  housbonde 
is  heed  of  ]?e  wif;  and  Poul  tellij?  }?is  skille,  J?at  Adam  was  first 
formed  and  Eve  aftirward,  and  Adam  was  not  disceyved  in  fei]), 
but  jje  womman  was  disceyved  in  feij?,  in  trespasynge  a^enst 
Goddis  comaundement.  Alle  J?is  seij>  Poul  in  dyverse  placis  of 
holy  writ.  Also  Poul  biddij>  ]?at  bischopis  and  prestis  techen 
wifis  to  love  here  housbondis,  to  be  prudent  and  chaste  and 
sobre,  and  to  have  care  of  ])e  hous,  and  benynge  and  under- 


WOllKS. 


^  corrected ;  X  has  vjymviett. 
VOL.  III.  O 


Scriptural  view 
of  the  mutual 
duties  of  hus- 
band and  wife. 

I  Pet.  iii  I. 


194 


WrCLIF'S  WORKS. 


Eph.  V.  22. 


lont,  or  suget,  to  here  housbondes, — ]5at  })e  word  of  God  be  not 
blasphemyd.  And  J?at  olde  wymmen  schullen  be  in  holy  abite, 
not  puttynge  fals  cryme  or  synne  to  o]?ere,  ne  suynge  ^  to  moche 
wyn,  and  to  be  wel  techynge,  so  J)at  ]?ei  teche  prudence.  Also 
Poul  techi]?  ]?us, — ]?at  wymmen  ben  underlont,  or  suget,  to  here 
husbondis,  as  to  J^e  Lord.  For  ])e  husbonde  is  hed  of  fe  wom- 
man,  as  Crist  is  heed  of  J?e  Chirche,  he  is  saveour  of  ]?e  body 
}?erof,  ]?at  is,  Jje  grete  multitude  of  alle  wor]?i  to  be  savyd.  But 
as  holy  Chirche  is  suget  to  Crist,  so  be  wymmen  sugetis  to 
here  housbondis  in  alle  ])ingis.  Husbondis,  love]?  ^oure  wifis, 
ri3t  as  Crist  lovede  holy  Chirche,  and  toke  himself  wilfully  to 
peyne  and  dej>  for  holy  Chirche,  to  make  it  clene  and  holy; 
and  made  it  clene  bi  waschynge  of  watir  in  \q  word  of  lif,  to 
^eve  fe  Chirche  glorious  to  himself,  not  havynge  wem  ne 
revelynge  ^  ne  ony  siche  filjje,  but  ])at  it  be  holy  and  wi]?outen 
spot  oJ?er  wem.  And  housbondis  owen  to  love  here  wifis  as 
here  owene  bodies,  for  he  J?at  love]?  his  wif  love)  hymself. 
For  no  man  hatid  evere  his  bodi,  but  norischij?  and  for)?eriJ?  it, 
as  Crist  do]?  holy  Chirche.  For  we  ben  membris  of  his  body, 
of  his  flesch,  and  of  his  bones.  For  ])is  Jjyng  a  man  schal 
forsake,  or  leve,  his  fadir  and  his  modir,  and  schal  cleve  to  his 
vidf,  and  ]>ei  schullen  be  tweiyne  in  o  flesch.  pis  sacrament  is 
greet,  but  I  saye,  sei]?  Poul,  in  Crist  and  in  holy  Chirche.  But 
forsoJ>e,  56  husbondis,  eche  by  himself,  love  he  his  wif  as  hym- 
self, and  drede  ])e  wif  here  housbonde.  3^  children,  obeischij) 
to  3oure  eldris,  fadir  and  modir,  in  J?e  Lord,  for  ]jis  J^ing  is 
ri3tful.  Worschipe  \\  fadir  and  ]?i  modir, — ^J?at  is  l>e  iirste 
comaundement  in  biheste ;  }>at  Crist  be  wel  to  ]?e,  and  }?at  ]?ou  ^ 
be  longe  lyvynge  upon  er]?e.  And,  ^e  fadris,  nyle  ^e  stire 
30ure  children  to  wra]?J)e,  but  norische  hem  and  brynge  hem 
forJ>  in  disciplyne,  or  lore,  and  chastisynge  of  God.  Alle  J»is 
sei]?  Seynt  Poul  togidre.  Also  Poul  comaundi]?  ]3us  in  anoj^er 
pistel;  Wymmen,  be  ^e  underlont  to  ^oure  husbondis,  as  it 
bihovej?  in  j^e  Lord,  ^e  men,  love  ^oure  wifis,  and  be}?  not 
bitter  to  hem.  Children,  obieschij?  to  ^oure  eldris  bi  alle  ]?ingis, 
for  f>is  is  plesaunt  to  j^e  Lord.     3^  fadris,  stire}?  not  30ure  chil- 


^  coiTected;  sofiynge  or  sonyfige,^.. 
supplied  ;  not  in  X. 


ryveling  in  Wycl.  Vers. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC. 


^95 


dren  to  indignacion,  lest  Ipei  of  litel  witt  ofFenden,  or  trespasen, 
a3enst  God  or  man  a. 

Here  sturdy  husbondis  and  crael  fi^tteris  wi)?  here  wifis,  wi]?- 
oute  resonable  cause,  ben  blamyd  of  God.  But  manye,  whanne 
J?ei  ben  drounken,  comen  horn  to  here  wifis,  and  sumtyme  fro 
here  cursed  strumpatis  and  jectouris  of  contre,  and  chiden  and 
flatten  wi]>  ])er  wif  and  meyne,  as  })ei  weren  Sathanas  brollis ; 
and  sufiren  neijjer  reste,  pees,  ne  charite  be  among  hem.  But 
dere  schalle  ])ei  abie  J)is  bitternesse,  for  ^if  |>ei  wolen  have  mercy 
of  God  J>ei  moten  have  mercy  of  ojjere  men,  ]?ou3  ]?ei  hadden 
discervyd  betynge, — amende  hem  in  faire  manere. 

Cap.  IV. 

Of  ])is  may  weddid  men  and  wifis  knowen,  hou  J^ei  owen  ^ 
lyve  togedir,  and  teche  here  childre  Goddis  lawe.  For  at  ]>q 
bigynnynge  a  childe  may  esily  be  tau^t,  and  goode  J?ewis  and 
maneris,  accordynge  wi]?  Goddis  lawe,  esily  be  prentid  in  his 
herte ;  and  j?anne  he  may  esily  holden  hem  forjje,  and  encresse 
in  goodnesse.  And  )?erfore  Poul  biddij?  }>at  ]?e  fadir  norische 
his  children  in  ]>e  lore  and  chastisynge  of  God ;  and  God  com- 
aimdij)  in  };e  olde  lawe  J>at  Ipe  fadris  schulden  telle  to  herre 
children  Goddis  hestis,  and  J;e  woundris  and  myraclis  jjat  he 
dide  in  ]?e  lond  of  Egipt,  and  in  j?e  Rede  See,  and  in  })e  watir 
of  Jordan,  and  in  Jjc  lond  of  biheste.  And  moche  more  ben 
fadir  and  moder  holden  to  teche  here  children  ]>e  bileve  of  ]?e 
Trinyte,  and  of  Jesus  Crist,  ho  we  he  is  verray  God  wij)0uten 
bigynnynge,  and  was  maad  man  Jjorou]?  moste  brennynge 
charite,  to  save  mankynde  bi  stronge  penaunce,  hard  torment, 
and  bittir  de]>.  And  so  alle  comen  in  poyntis  of  Cristene  bileve, 
but  J?ei  ben  most  holden  to  teche  hem  Goddis  hestis,  and  Ipe  werkis 
of  mercy,  and  poyntis  of  charite,  and  to  governe  wel  here  fyve 
wittis,  and  to  drede  God  bifore  alle  o]?ere  J?ingis,  and  to  love 
him  most  of  alle  l?ingis,  for  his  endeles  my^t,  endeles  wisdom, 
endelesse  goodnesse  mercy  and  charite^.    And  3if  ]?ei  trespasen 

^  con-ected;  bowen,  X. 

^  The  foregoing  passages   from  in  the  Lambeth  MS.  408,  called  in 

Scripture  do  not  agree  with  either  Shirley's  Catalogue  (p.  38)  Specuhim 

Wycliffite  version.  Vitae  Cbrisiia7iae,  corresponds  closely 

^  The  collection  of  didactic  pieces  to   the  catechetical  materials   here 

O  2 


Marital 
cruelties  and 
irreg-ularities. 


On  the  duties 
of  parents 
towards  their 
children, 


196 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


which  cannot 
be  devolved 
upon  the  god- 
parents. 


An  enumera- 
tion of  the 
various  forms 
of  vicious 
training  which 
sons  often 
receive  from 
tlieir  fathers. 


a^enst  Goddis  hestis,  J^ei  owen  to  blamen  hem  J?erfore  scharply, 
and  chastise  hem  a  j?ousand  fold  more  ]>an  for  dispit  or  un- 
kyndenesse  don  a^enst  here  owene  persone.  And  J)is  techynge 
and  chastisynge  schulden  in  fewe  ^eeris  make  goode  Cristene 
men  and  wymmen,  and  namely  goode  ensaumple  of  holy  lif  of 
olde  men  and  wymmen,  for  J>at  is  best  techynge  to  here 
children. 

And  Cristene  men,  aboute  many  prestis  ^,  chargen  godfadris 
and  godmodris  to  techen  ]?e  children  J^e  Pater  Noster  and  j?e 
Crede ;  and  \\s  is  wel  don;  but  it  is  most  nede  to  teche  hem  J)e 
hestis  of  God,  and  ^eve  hem  good  ensaumple  bi  here  owene  lif. 
For  fou^  })ei  ben  cristenyd,  and  knowen  ]?e  comyn  poyntis  of 
bileve,  ^it  ]?ei  schullen  not  be  savyd  wi]>oute  kepynge  of  Goddis 
hestis,  but  be  ful  hard  and  depe  dampnyd  in  helle,  more  ]?an 
he];ene  men.  And  it  hadde  betre  be  to  hem  to  nevere  have 
resceyved  Cristendom,  but  ^if  ])ei  enden  trewely  in  Goddis 
comaundementis,  as  Seynt  Petir  techij>  pleynly. 

But  summe  techen  here  children  jeestis  of  bataillis,  and  fals 
cronyclis  not  nedful  to  here  soulis.  Summe  techen  novelries  of 
songis,  to  stire  men  to  jolite  and  harlotrie.  Summe  setten  hem 
to  nedeles  craftis,  for  pride  and  coveitise ;  and  summe  suflfren 
hem  in  ydelnesse  and  losengerie,  to  breden  for})  strumpatis  and 
])eves ;  and  summe  wij?  grett  cost  setten  hem  in  lawe,  for  wyn- 
nynge  and  worldly  worschipe,  and  here  to  costen  hugely  in 
many  weies.  But  in  alle  Jjis  Goddis  lawe  is  putt  bihynde,  and 
]?erof  spekij?  unnefis  ony  man  a  good  word,  to  magnifye  God 
and  }>at,  and  to  save  mennis  souHs.  Sume  techen  here  chil- 
dren to  swere  and  stare  and  %tte,  and  schrewe  alle  men  aboute, 
and  of  fis  han  gret  joie  in  here  herte.  But  certis  })ei  ben 
Sathanas  techeris,  and  procuratouris  to  lede  hem  to  helle,  bi 
here  cursed  ensaumple  and  techynge,  and  norischynge  and 
meyntenynge  in  synne;    and  ben  cruel  sleeris  of  here  owene 

^  corrupt;  perhaps  we  should  correct,  above  alle  many  prestis;  for  we  can 
hardly  give  to  the  words  the  sense  of  the  Greek  idiom  ol  dfx(pl  Uepi/ckea. 


stated  to  be  necessaiy.  Also,  eveiy 
one  acquainted  with  the  MSS.  of  the 
fourteenth  and  fifteenth  centuries,,  to 
be  found  in  any  large  libraiy,  will 


recognize  the  care  taken  by  our 
ancestors  to  supply  just  those  de- 
mands for  religious  instruction  that 
are  here  indicated. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC. 


J97 


children,  ^e,  more  cruel  }>an  ]?ou3  ]?ei  hackeden  here  children  as 
small  as  morselis  to  here  poot  or  mou]?.  For  bi  ]?is  cursid 
techynge,  and  endynge  J?erin,  here  children  bodies  and  soulis 
ben  dampnyd  wijjouten  ende  in  helle.  And  J?ou3  here  bodies 
weren  ])us  hackid  nevere  so  smale,  bo]?e  bodi  and  soule  schal  be 
in  blis  of  hevene,  so  Jjat  \€\  kepen  trewely  Goddis  comaunde- 
mentis.  And  of  siche  necligent  fadris  and  modris,  Jsat  techen 
not  here  children  Goddis  lawe,  and  chastisen  hem  not  whanne 
fei  trespasen  a3enst  Goddis  hestis,  Seynt  Poul  spekij?  a  dredeful 
word.  He  ]?at  ha})  not  care  of  his  owene,  and  most  of  his 
homly  in  houshod,  haj?  resceyved  ^  j?e  fei]?,  and  he  is  worse  pan 
a  man  out  of  Cristendom.  And  siche  fadris  and  modris,  ])at 
meyntenen  wityngli  here  children  in  synne,  and  techen  hem 
schrewdnesse,  ben  werse  J?an  J?e  cursed  fadris  ]?at  killeden  here 
children,  and  oifr  hem  up  to  stockis,  worschipynge  false  maun- 
metis.  For  \o  children  in  here  30ug]?e  weren  dede  and  distried, 
and  diden  no  more  synne;  but  J^es  children  of  cursed  fadris 
and  modris,  ])at  techen  hem  pride,  jjefte,  lecherie,  wra]?])e, 
coveitise,  and  glotonye,  and  meyntenen  hem  perinne,  ben  holden 
in  long  lif,  and  encresen  in  synne  to  more  dampnacion  of  ech 
party.  And  j?us  litel  wonder  ]30U3  ^^  ^  ^^^^  vengaunce  on  oure 
peple  bo]?  old  and  ^ong,  for  alle  comynly  dispisen  God,  and  han 
joie  and  myrj?e  at  his  dispit  and  reprovynge.  And  God  mot 
ponische  ])is  synne  for  his  ri3tful  majeste. 

Cap.  V. 

But  |30U3  husbondis  han  Jjus  power  over  his  wifis  bodi, 
ne}>eles  ]?ei  owen  to  use  ]?is  doynge  in  mesure  and  reson,  and 
sumwhat  refreyne  here  foule  lustis,  and  not  take  superfluyte 
of  hot  wynes,  and  spised  alle,  and  delicat  metis,  to  delite 
hem  in  ]?is  occupacion,  but  jjenk  fat  ]?ei  ben  gestis  and  pil- 
grimes  in  ]?e  world,  and  han  not  here  a  dwellynge-place  for 
evere.  And  Jjerfore  j^ei  mosten  ^eve  hem  to  holynesse,  wi]?outen 
whiche  no  man  schal  se  God ;  and  abstynen  hem  fro  fieschly 
desiris  }?at  flatten  a^enst  ])e  soule,  as  Petir  and  Poule  techen  bi 
auctorite  of  God  hymself ;   and  J^enke  on  )?is  word  of  Seynt 


^  error  of  scribe ;  correct  denyed. 


supplied ;  not  in  X. 


Sobriety  and 
self-control 
are  incumbent 
on  persons 
engag-ed  in  the 
married  state. 


198 


WrCLIF'S  WORKS. 


I  Cor.  vii.  29. 


The  wife 
should  exert 
a  purifying'  and 
softening  in- 
fluence on  the 
husband. 


Three  failings 
commonly 
found  in 
married  peo- 
ple : 

I.  that  they 
care  more  for 


Poule ; — pe  tyme  is  schort ;  ]?e  to]?er  part  is  }>at  fei  ]?at  han  wifes 
ben  as  havynge  noon ;  ]?at  is  to  seie,  }?at  ]?ei  usen  hem  for  and  in 
drede  of  God,  and  mesure,  not  to  fulfille  here  lustis,  as  bestis 
wij)0ute  undirstondynge ;  and  J)at  ])ei  have  mynde  of  \t  dredful 
comynge  of  Crist  to  \t  laste  dom,  hou  ])ei  schullen  Jeanne 
answere  for  eche  dede,  eche  word,  and  eche  })0U3t, — and  eche 
evyl  sufFraunce  of  here  children  and  meyne,  and  princypaly  of 
evyl  ensaumple  to  here  sugetis.  And  ne  cavyllacion  ne  pro- 
curatour  schal  be  ]?ere,  but  here  owene  goode  lif  to  save  hem,  or 
cursed  lif  to  dampne  hem.  And  fleschly  lustis,  and  glotonye, 
dronkenesse,  and  overe  moche  Hkynge  in  fleschly  dedis,  maken 
men  most  to  for^ete  ]?is  dredful  dom.  And  J^erfore  ])e  gospel 
sei]),  ]?at  ])e  ))ridde  servaunt  ])at  hadde  weddid  a  wif,  seide  J^at  he 
my^tte  not  come  to  J)e  soper  of  Crist;  and  j?at  servaunt  is 
undirstonden,  he  pat  ^eve])  hym  to  overe  moche  likynge  in 
fleischly  lustis.  And  J?erfore  biddi]?  Crist  in  |?e  gospel,  ]?at  we 
take  hede  ]?at  oure  hertis  ben  not  chargid  wi]?  glotonye  and 
dronkenesse  and  bisynesse  of  ]>is  lif,  for  ]?e  day  of  dome  schal 
come  as  a  snare,  or  grane,  upon  alle  J?o  j?at  sitten  upon  |?e  face 
of  alle  ]?e  erjje. 

But  ben  wifis  war  \2X  ])ei  stiren  not  here  husbondis  to  wra]>)?e, 
ne  envye  a^enst  here  nei^eboris,  i^e  to  falsnesse  and  overe 
moche  bisynesse  of  J)e  world,  to  fynde  to  costy  array.  For  ]?e 
wif  was  made  to  be  an  helpere  lich  to  ]>e  husbounde,  eche  to 
helpe  o]?er  in  clennesse  and  holy  lif,  and  trewe  anentis  God  and 
man.  But  ^if  J^e  husbonde  be  stired  to  vengaunce  and  pride 
and  envye,  ]?e  wyf  owe]?  to  stire  hym  to  penaunce  and  pacience, 
mekenesse  and  charite,  and  alle  good  manere  of  Cristene  lif. 
And  whanne  Goddis  lawe  biddi]?  J^e  husbonde  and  ]?e  wif  love 
eche  o])er,  be  J>ei  war  ))at  Jjei  turnen  not  })is  love  al  to  fleschly 
love,  and  not  to  love  of  Jje  soule,  for  jjei  ben  bolden  moche 
more  to  love  j)e  soule  ])an  J?e  body,  for  God  love]?  J?at  more  J?an 
J)e  bodi,  and  for  fe  soule  Crist  diede.  And  certis  love  of  }?e 
body  is  verrey  hate,  but  ^if  it  be  in  helpe  to  save  J?e  soule,  and 
kepe  it  in  holy  lif. 

But  ^it  \xe  grete  defautis  fallen  many  tymes  in  weddid  men 
and  wymmen.  pe  firste  defaute  is,  as  Seynt  Jon  wi]?  ]?e  gildene 
mou]?  sei}),  ))at  J?ei  maken  sorowe  3if  here  children  ben  nakid  or 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC, 


199 


pore,  but  J)0U3  here  children  ben  nakid  fro  virtues  in  soule,  \€\ 
chargen  no]?ing.  And  wijj  moche.  traveile  and  cost  J^ei  geten 
grete  richessis  and  hei3e  statis  and  beneiicis  to  here  children,  to 
here  more  dampnacion  ofte  tymes,  but  J>ei  wolen  not  gete  here 
children  goodis  of  grace  and  virtuous  lif,  ne  sufFre  hem  to 
resceyve  siche  goodis,  frely  proprid  of  God,  but  ietten  it  as 
moche  as  ]?ei  may;  and  seyn,  5if  here  child  drawe  hym  to 
mekenesse  and  povert,  and  flee  coveitise  and  pride,  for  drede  of 
synne  and  for  to  plese  God,  Jjat  he  schal  nevere  be  man,  and 
nevere  coste  hem  peny,  and  cursen  hem,  ^if  he  lyve  wel  and 
teche  o]3ere  men  Goddis  lawe,  to  save  mennis  soulis.  For  bi 
J)is  doynge  |?e  child  geti]?  many  enemyes  to  his  eldris,  and  J?ei 
seyn  \2X  he  sclaundri]?  alle  here  noble  kyn,  j^at  evere  ^  weren 
helde  trewe  men  and  worschipful. 

pe  secunde  defaute  is,  ]?at  wifis  ^even  here  husbondis  goodis 
to  stronge  beggeris  and  riche,  and  o]?ere  curleris,  to  geten  hem 
swete  morselis,  and  sum  tyme  spende  here  husbondis  goodis 
aboute  holouris  and  lecherous,  }>e  while  here  husbondis  traveilen 
fare^  in  ferre  contreies  or  grevous  traveiles.  And  to  holden 
holy  and  excuse  ]?is  wickidnesse,  wifis  many  tymes  don  a  litil 
almes  opynly,  and  fynden  ypocritis  to  seyn  massis,  and  maken 
])e  sely  husbondis  to  meyntene  siche  ypocritis  in  here  falsnesse, 
to  robbe  |?e  pore  peple,  and  to  lette  trewe  men  to  teche  Goddis 
lawe,  and  to  favoure  false  sclaunderis  of  here  brej?ren.  And  ^if 
wifis  favouren  and  meyntenen  siche  ypocritis,  and  stiren  here 
husbondis  j^erto,  for  prive  lecherie  bitwen  hemself,  and  for 
fals  sykernesse  }>at  Jje  ypocritis  maken  to  hem,  \ovc^  \€i  dwellen 
stille  as  swyn  in  synne,  it  is  so  mochel  j^e  worse. 

pe  })ridde  defaute  is  )?is ;  ^if  Almy^tty  God,  of  his  ri5twisnesse 
and  mercy,  take  here  children  out  of  [)is  world  bi  fair  dee]?,  j^es 
riche  wifis  wepen,  grucchen,  and  crien  a^enst  God,  as  God 
schulde  not  do  a^enst  her  wille ;  and  axen  God  whi  he  takij> 
ra]?ere  here  children  fro  hem  ])an  pore  mennis,  si)?  J?ei  may 
betre  fynde  here  children  j?an  may  pore  men  heren.  See  now 
}>e  woodnesse  of  \\%  grucchynge !  It  is  gret  mercy  of  God  to 
take  a  child  out  of  J>is  world;    for  ^if  it  schal  be  saaf,  it  is 


^  corrected ;  hevere,  X. 


dele/ar^. 


the  temporal 
than  the 
spiritual  wel- 
fare of  their 
children; 


2.  that  wives 
waste  their 
husbands'  sub- 
stance on 
begging  friars  ; 


3.  that  parents, 
and  especially 
mothers,  repme 
aprainst  the 
providence  of 
God  when 
their  children 
die  early. 


200 


Wr CLIP'S  WORKS. 


Several  con- 
siderations, 
tending  to 
inculcate  and 
recommend 
fidelity  to  the 
marriage  bond. 


delyverid  out  of  woo  into  blisse,  lest  malice  turnyd  J)e  undir- 
stondynge  of  J?e  child  to  synjie,  and  ]?at  is  gret  mercy  of  God, 
and  herefor  alle  men  schulden  be  glade.  5^^  i^  schal  be 
dampnyd,  ^it  it  is  mercy  of  God  to  take  hym  soone  to  de]?, 
leste  it  lyve  lengere,  and  do  more  synne,  and  Jjerfore  be  in  more 
peyne.  And  si]?  J?ei  grucchen  ))us  a3enst  Goddis  ri^tful  dom, 
jjei  putten  on  God  Jjat  he  is  unri^tful, — unwitty, — ]?at  he  knowi]? 
not  whanne  is  best  tyme  of  ]?e  child,  and  out  of  mercy  and 
charite  ponysche  so  sore  ])e  child  and  his  eldris.  But  certis 
J?an  ])ei  ben  cursed  Luciferis  children,  weiward  Anticristis,  and 
unkynde  heretikis  and  blasphemes,  perfore  be  ]?ei  glade,  and 
))anke  Jjei  God  for  al  his  mercyes,  and  benefices,  and  ri3tful 
domes.    Amen  a. 

Also  loke  }>at  ech  parti  enforce  hymself  to  kepe  ]>is  ordre 
maad  of  God,  and  breke  it  not  for  no  temptacion  ne  likynge  of 
flesch.  And  hereto  helpen  many  resones.  First,  for  God  Jjat 
is  auctor  of  |?is  ordre  love]?  it  to  be  kept  in  clennesse,  and 
present  in  every  place,  and  for  his  ri^twisnesse  mot  ponyschen 
hym  }>at  breki]?.  it.  And  no  defoulynge  ]7erof  may  askape  un- 
peyned,  for  he  knowe]?  alle  ])ingis,  be  ]?ei  nevere  so  preve ;  and 
no]?ing,  be  it  nevere  so  my5tty,  may  a^enstonde  his  ponysch- 
ynge.  Also  ]?enk  hou  soone  ]?is  stenkynge  flesch,  J?at  now 
delite]?  in  lecherie,  schal  turne  alle  to  aschis,  and  poudre,  and 
er]?e,  and  wermes  mete;  and  for  so  schort  likynge  to  lese 
everelastynge  blisse,  and  to  gete  everelastynge  peyne  in  helle, 
in  body  and  soule,  were  a  cursed  chaunge ;  and  no  man  wot 
hou  soone  he  schal  die,  and  in  what  staat.  Also  goode  angelis, 
keperis  of  men  and  wymmen,  schewen  to  God  a  grevous  pleynt, 
whanne  ]?is  holy  ordre  is  ]?us  broken,  and  Cristene  soulis, 
templis  of  ]?e  Holy  Gost,  ben  |?us  wickidly  bleckid  wi]?  fil]?e  of 
synne,  and  maad  liche  to  J?e  fendis  of  helle.  And  for  ]?is  skille, 
men  and  wymmen  schulden  be  wel  occupied  in  goode  werkis, 
and  not  ydel ;  for  ydelnesse  is  ]?e  develis  panter,  to  tempte  men 
to  synne;  and  lyven  in  devout  preieris  and  resonable  and^ 
abstynence  of  mete,  and  namely  of  bote  drynkis  and  my^tty, 

^  dele  and. 
«i  The  treatise  seems  to  have  originally  ended  at  this  point. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC^  %o\ 

and  visite  here  pore  nei^eboris  })at  ben  bedrede,  and  clofe  hem, 
and  herberwe  hem,  to  gete  remission  of  over  moche  likynge  in 
fleschly  dedis ;  and  evere  one  to  God,  wij)  gret  desir  and  good 
Hf,  ])at  he  graunte  hem  grace  to  kepe  clenly  J)is  holy  ordre,  and 
do  verrey  penamice  for  here  olde  synnes,  to  ende  in  perj&t 
charite,  and  so  evere  have  here  verrey  spouse,  Jesus  Crist,  in 
blisse  of  hevene  wi]?outen  ende.    Amen. 


— «•^•«>^•■^:>^— 


203 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


The  qualifica-  . 
tions  which        i 
laymen  should 
look  for  when 
they  undertake 
to  find  priests. 


XIV. 
DE   STIPENDIIS   MINISTRORUM. 

[This  tract,  witli  the  Latin  title  as  given  above,  is  mentioned  in  Bale's 
list  of  Wyclif  s  writings.  The  text  is  based  on  a  careful  transcript  from 
C.  C.  C.  C.  296,  which  has  had  the  benefit  of  a  revision  by  Mr.  W.  Aldis 
Wright,  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.  The  Dublin  MS.  C.  III.  12,  also 
contains  this  tract,  of  the  authenticity  of  which  I  entertain  little  doubt.] 

HOU  MEIf  SCHULLEN   FYNDE   PRESTIS. 

pENKi]?  wisly,  5e  men  ])at  fynden  prestis,  ]?at  ^e  don  ]?is 
almes  for  Goddis  love,  and  helpe  of  ^oure  soulis,  and  helpe  of 
Cristene  men,  and  not  for  pride  of  ]?e  world,  to  have  hem 
occupied  in  worldly  office  and  vanyte,  and  ]?ei  criynge  in 
mennus  eris.  For  ^if  ^e  don,  it  is  for  worldly  pride;  for  to 
have  a  grete  name  of  grete  ahnes-doeris  ^e  lesen  ^oure  mede, 
and  money  J?at  ^e  spenden  J?us,  and  getten  wraj?]?e  of  God,  as 
Crist  seij?  opynly  in  )?e  gospel.  And  ^if  ^e  fynden  hem  for 
Goddis  love,  and  helpe  of  30ure  souKs,  and  gostly  helpe  of 
Cristene  men,  ^e  schullen  fynde  hem  to  lerne  Goddis  lawe, 
to  know  hou  ]?ei  schulde  serve  God  in  holy  lif,  and  techen 
o]?ere  men  ]?e  gospel,  to  save  here  soulis  j>erbi.  For  J?ei  neden 
to  have  bokis  of  holy  writt,  as  J)e  bible  and  exponitouris  on  Jje 
gospellis  and  pistelis,  more  ))an  Graielis^  and  oj^ere  bokis  of 
song ;  and  ben  more  bounden  to  lerne  holy  writt,  and  preche 
j)e  gospel,  and  Goddis  hestis,  and  werkis  of  mercy,  }>an  to  seie 
matynes  and  masse  and  evensong  bi  Salisbury  uss.  And  in 
what  place  or  werk  \t\  plesen  most  houre  God  bi  holy  lif,  and 
stiren  men  to  kepe  Goddis  hestis,  in  j)at  place  and  }>at  werk  ]?ei 
proiiten  most  to  here  maistris  and  alle  Cristene  men.     And  be 


*  Graiel,  or  Grayel,  is  a  corrup- 
tion of  Graduale,  the  name  given  to 
the  collection  of  short  passages, 
chiefly  taken  from  the  Psalms,  which 
are  sung  at  mass  between  the  epistle 


and  the  gospel.  By  a  licence  of 
language  each  such  separate  passage 
has  come  to  be  called  a  Gradual. 
Compare  Halliwell's  Archaeol.  Dic- 
tionary, sub  voce. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC. 


H03 


J)es  maistris  Jjat  fynden  prestis  wel  i-war,  J?at  ]?ei  suffren  not 
hem  to  lyve  in  synne  and  ydelnesse  and  vanytee,  and  ]?at  ^ei 
meyntenen  hem  not  }?erinne.  For  J)an  Jjei  meyntenen  Goddis 
enemys  in  dispisynge  of  God,  and  so  bicomen  Goddis  traitours 
hemself ;  namely,  whanne  ]?ei  knowen  j^e  opyn  defaute  of  here 
prestis,  and  may  so  soone  amende  hem,  or  ellis  not  fynde  hem 
for]).  5i^  I'^i  ^on  not  ]?is,  ]>ei  ben  gilty  and  consentouris  and 
auctouris  of  here  synnes.  And  loke  ]>at  fes  maistris,  cherische 
and  meyntene  here  prestis  in  goode  lif  and  trewe  techynge  and 
lernynge  of  holy  writt,  a^enst  Anticristis  ^  clerkis  and  here  cruel 
censmis.  And  ])is  schulde  make  Goddis  prestis  of  holy  lif  and 
trewe  techynge  encresse,  and  synne  be  dispisid  and  forsaken, 
and  vertues  lovyd  and  hauntid,  and  goode  Cristene  peple  drede 
God  and  his  lawe,  and  love  hym  before  alle  J?ingis,  and  J?es 
maistris  to  have  moche  ]>ank  of  God  and  alle  his  halwes,  and 
costen  no  more  }>an  ]?ei  don  nowe,  ne  so  moche,  but  lasse  and 
betre  for  bo]?e  partis,  and  for  Cristene  and  hej?ene. 

God  forbede  ]?at  ^  ony  Cristene  man  understonde,  J^at  Jjis  here 
synsynge  ^  and  criynge  ]?at  men  usen  now  ^  be  j?e  beste  servyce 
of  a  prest,  and  most  profitable  to  mannus  soule.  For  Jesus 
Crist  and  his  apostlis  useden  it  [not^],  ne  chargeden  prestis 
]?erto ;  but  J>ei  preiden  devoutly  and  stilleliche,  in  ny^ttis  and 
hillis,  and  precheden  ]>e  gospel  opynly  and  frely,  and  dieden 
})erfore.  For,  as  Austyn^  and  Gregory  witnessen,  preire  is 
betre  don  bi  compunction  and  wepynge  and  holy  desir  of  ri^t- 
wisnesse,  J?an  bi  grete  criynge  and  blowynge  of  mannus  vois. 
perfore  seynt  Gregory  ordeynede  }>at  prestis  schulden  5eve 
hem  to  prechynge  of  l^e  gospel,  as  ]?e  cronycle  of  SistrenJ>e<i 
telle]?. 

^  supplied 


^  corrected ;  awtcristis,  X. 
conjecturally. 

^  incensing. 

^  Compare  the  description  of  the 
*  newe  prei}Tige  bi  gi-et  criynge  and 
hey  song'  in  Tract  XVIII  of  this 
volume. 

^  The  passage  in  St.  Augustine 
refen-ed  to  is  perhaps  the  Enarratio 
m  Ps.  xxxvii.  §  14.  That  quoted 
from  St.  Gregory  may  be  the  fol- 
lowing passage  in  lib.  xxii.  of  the 


2  corrected ;  ]>an,  X. 


Moralia,  §  43  :  *  Aetemam  .  .  vitam 
si  ore  petimus,  nee  tamen  corde 
desideramus,  clamantes  tacemus. 
Si  vero  desideramus  ex  corde,  etiam 
cum  ore  conticescimus,  tacentes 
.clamamus.' 

•^  '  Sistrenjie '  must  mean  Cistren- 
sis,  i.  e.  Ranulf  Higden.;  but  I  have 
not  been  able  to  discover  the  pas- 
sage here  cited  in  the  Polycbronicon, 


The  new  sys- 
tem of  loud 
intoning  is  not 
the  best  way 
of  serving  God 
or  benefiting 
our  neighbour. 


304 


WrCLIF'S  WORKS. 


XV. 
A    SCHORT    REULE    OF    LIP. 


[Bale  does  not  appear  to  have  known  of  this  interesting  tract,  the  only 
known  copy  of  which  was  in  the  MS.  C.  C.  C.  C.  296,  until  I  found  a 
second  (Laud  174)  among  the  Laudian  MSS.  in  the  Bodleian  Library* 
Though  it  is  destitute  of  external  evidence^,  except  such  as  it  may  be  sup- 
posed to  derive  from,  its  presence  in  the  Corpus  volume,  the  character  of 
the  style  and  composition  dispose  me  to  consider  it  authentic.  It  has  been 
printed  by  the  Religious  Tract  Society,  in  the  work  entitled  British  Re- 
formers; Dr.  Vaughan  also  reprinted  the  greater  part  of  it  in  his  'Tracts 
and  Treatises  of  Wycliffe.'    The  text  is  based  on  the  MS.  Laud  174.] 


A  SCHORT  BEULE  OF  LIF  FOB  ICH  MAK  EST  GENEBAL,  AND  FOR 
PBESTIS  AND  LOBDIS  AND  LABOBEBIS  IN  SPECIAL,  HOW  ICH 
MAN  SCHAL  BE  SAVYD  IN  HIS  DEGBE,  IF  HE  WILE  HYM 
SILF. 

First,  whanne  \ou  risist  or  fulli  wakist,  J)enk  on  ]?e  goodnesse 
of  God;  fFor  his  owne  goodnesse  and  non  o])er  nede  he  made 
al  ])ing  of  nou^t,  bo]?e  angels^  and  men,  and  alle  o]?er  creatures 
good  in  her  kynde.  pe  seconde  tyme  ]?enk  on  ]?e  gret  passion 
and  wilful  dej>  ]>at  Crist  suifrid  for  man-kynde.  Whan  no  man 
mi^t  make  satisfaccion  for  ]?e  gilt  of  Adam  and  Eve,  and  o}?er 
moo,  ne  non  angel  owe  ne  my^t  make  ase])  J^erfor,  ]?an  Crist 
of  his  endeles  charite  suiferid  so  gret  passioun  and  peynful  de|?, 
]3at  no  creature  my^t  sufFre  soo  myche.  And  J?enk  ]?e  J>rid  tyme, 
how  God  ha]?  savyd  ^e  fro  dee)?  and  o]?er  miscevis,  and  suflfrid 
many  ]?ousyndis  to  be  lost  jjat  ni^t,  sum  in  watir,  sume  in  fier, 
sume  bi  sodeyn  dee]?,  and  sume  to  be  dampnyd  wi])Outen  ende. 
And  for  ]3eise  goodnessis  and  mercies  ])anke  ]?i  God  wi]?  al  ]?in 
hart,  and  preye  hym  to  ^ive  J?e  grace  to  spende,  in  ]?at  day  and 
^.  corrected ;  angles,  FF. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC. 


205 


evermore,  alle  Jje  mi^tis  of  ]?i  soule,  as  mynde,  reson,  witt  and 
wille,  and  alle  })e  mi^tis  of  \\  bodi,  as  streng)?e,  bewte,  and  ]?i  five 
wittis,  in  his  servise  and  his  worschipe ;  and  in  no  ]?ing  forfete 
a3enis  his  comaundementis,  but  redi^  to  performe  werkis  of 
merci,  and  to  ^ive  good  ensample  of  holi  lif,  bo]?e  in  word  and 
in  dede,  to  alle  men  aboute  ]?e. 

Loke  afterward  J)at  }?ou  be  wel  ocupied,  and  in  no  time  ydul 
for  temptacion.  Take  meete  and  drinke^  in  mesure,  ne  to 
costli  ne  to  licoronse,  and  be  not  to  corious  J?eraboute,  but 
such  as  God  sendi]?,  wi]?  treu]?  take  it,  in  such  mesure  J?at  ])0u 
be  freischer  in  mynde  and  wittis  to  serve  God,  and  algatis  J?ank 
hym  of  his  ^ift.  Over  })is  loke  ]?ou  do  ri^t  and  equite  to  alle 
men,  bofe  to  sovereynys,  peris,  sogetis,  or  servantis;  and  stire 
alle  men  to  love  treu]?  and  merci,  and  over  }>es  charite;  and 
suffre  no  man  be  at  discencion,  but  acorde  hem  if  J)Ou  maist  on 
any  good  maner.  Also  most  of  alle  )?inges  drede  God  and  his 
wrajje,  and  most  of  all  ]?ingis  love  God  and  his  lawe  and  his 
worchip ;  and  aske  not  principalli  worldly  mede,  but  in  all  ])in 
herte  desire  ]?e  blisse  of  hevene,  up  merci  of  God  and  ]?in  owne 
goodnesse  of  li5f.  And  J^enk  myche  of  )?e  dredful  dome  and 
peynes  of  helle,  to  kepe  j^e  ou^t  of  synne,  and  on  ])e  endles 
gret  joies  of  hevene,  to  kepe  Jje  in  vertuous  lif  and  ]?ou  up  J)i 
kunnyng  teche  o]?er  ))e  same  doyng.  And  in  ]?e  ende  of  ]?e 
day  J)enk  where  \om  hast  afendyd  God,  and  how  myche  and 
howe  often,  and  ]?erfor  have  entere  sorwe,  and  amende  it  wil 
))0u  may;  and  J>enk  how  manye  God  haj?  suffrid  periche  ])at 
day  manye  weyes,  and  summe  to  be  dampnyd  wi])Outen  ende, 
and  how  graciousli  he  haj?  savyd  ]?e,  not  for  })i  desert,  but  for 
his  owne  merci  and  godnesse.  And  |?erfor  J?ank  hym  wi})  al 
j?in  hert,  and  preye  hym  of  grace  to  duelle  and  ende  in  his 
trewe  service  and  veri  charite,  and  to  teche  o]?er  men  ]je  same 
doyng. 

If  J70U  be  a  prest,  and  nameli  a  curate,  lyve  J?ou  holili,  passyng 
ojjer  in  holy  preyere  and  holy  deseir  and  fenkyng,  in  holy 
spekyng  counselyng  and  trewe  techyng,  and  ever  that  Goodis 
hestis  and  his  gospel  be  in  \\  mou]>,  and  evere  dispice  synne, 
to  drawe  men  ]?erfro.  And  j^at  J?i  dedis  ben  so  ri^tful,  ]?at  no 
^  corrected ;  red^  FF,  2  corrected ;  dringe,  FF. 


w6 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


man  schal  blame  hem  wi])  reson,  but  \m  opyn  dedis  be  a  trewe 
book  to  alle  sogettis  and  lewid  men,  to  serve  God  and  do  his 
hestis  J?erbi.  Ffor  ensample  of  good  ^,  and  opyn  and  lastyng, 
sterri]?  rude  men  more  ]?an  trewe  prechyng  bi  nakid  word. 
And  waste  not  ])i  goodis  in  gret  festis  of  riche  men,  but  lyve 
a  mene  life  of  pore  mennys  almes  and  godis,  boj^e  in  mete  and 
drynk^  and  cloJ?es;  and  ]?e  remenand  ^ive  treuli  to  pore  men 
])at  have  nou3t  of  J?er  owne,  and'  may  not  labore  for  febulnesse 
or  sekenesse,  and  jjan  j?ou  shalt  be  a  trewe  prest  bo{)e  to  God 
and  man. 

If  J30u  be  a  lord,  loke  fou  lyve  a  ri3tful  lif  in  ]?in  owne  per- 
sone,  bo])e  anentis  God  and  man,  keping  ))e  hestis.  of  God, 
doyng  )}e  werkis  of  mercy,  reuling  wel  \i  five  wittis,  and  doyng 
reson  and  equite  and  good  conscience  to  alle  men.  pe  seconde 
tyme,  governe  wel  J^i  wif,  J?i  childryn,  and  ]?i  homely  meyne  in 
Goddis  lawe,  and  sufFre  no  synne  among  hem,  ney];er  in  word 
ne  in  dede,  up  ]?i  my^t,  J>at  Jjei  may  be  ensample  of  holynesse 
and  ri^twisnesse  to  alle  ojjer.  For  J)Ou  schalt  be  dampnyd  for 
here  yvel  li^f  and  ]?in  yvel  suffrance,  but  if  fou  amende  it  up 
\i  my^t.  pe  j^ride  tyme,  governe  wel  ])i  tenantis,  and  mayn- 
teyne  hem  in  ri^t  and  reson,  and  be  merciful  to  hem  in  J?er 
rentys  and  worldly  mercimentis,  and  suffere  not  J)i  officeris  to 
do  hem  wrong  ne  extorcions,  and  chastice  in  good  manere 
hem  Jjat  ben  rebel  a^ens  Goddis  hestis  and  vertuous  lyvyng, 
mor  ]?an  for  rebelte"  agens  ]>in  owne  cause  or  persone.  And 
holde  wijj  Goddis  cause,  and  love,  rewarde,  preyse,  and  cheriche 
]?e  trewe  and  vertuous  of  Hf,  more  fan  if  )?ei  don  only  \m.  owne 
pro%t  and  worschip ;  and  maynteyne  trewli,  up  J^i  kunnyng  and 
mi^t^,  Goddis  lawe  and  trewe  prechours  ]?er-of,  and  Goddis 
servantis  in  rest  and  pes,  for  bi  |)is  reson  ])0U  boldest  ]>i  lord- 
chip  of  God.  And  if  ))0u  faylest  of  ])is,  ])0U  forfetist  agens 
God  in  al  }?i  lordchip,  in  bodi  and  sowle ;  principalli  if  J>ou 
maynteynest  Anticristis  disciplis  in  her  erroures  a^ens  Cristis 
lif  and  his  techyng,  for  blyndnesse  and  covetise  and  worldli 
frencipp,  and  helpist  to  slaundere  and  pursue  trewe  men,  J?at 
techen  Cristes  gospel  and  his  Hf.    And  warne  ]?e  pepul  of  here 


good  lif^  X. 


2  corrected;  dryng,  FF.         ^  So  in  X  ;  myth,Y¥. 


EXEGETICAL  AND  DIDACTIC. 


^07 


grete  synes,  and  of  fals   prestis  and  ypocritis  fat  disceyvyn 
Cristen  men,  in  fei]?  and  virtuous  lif,  and  worldli  goodes  also. 

If  J?ou  be  a  laborer,  lyve  in  mekenesse,  and  trewly  and  wyl- 
fuUy  do  \\  labour ;  ))at  if  ]?i  lord  or  J)i  mayster  be  an  he])en  man, 
]?at  by  Jji  mekenesse  and  wilful  and  trewe  servise,  he  have  not 
to  gruche  a^ens  J^e,  ne  sclandere  \\  God  ne  Cristendom  \  And 
serve  not  to  Cristen  lordis  wij?  gruchyng,  ne  onli  in  here  pre- 
sens,  but  trewli  and  wilfuUi  in  here  absens,  not  only  for  worldly 
drede  ne  worldly  reward,  but  for  drede  of  God  and  good  con- 
science, and  for  rewarde  in  hevene.  For  J^at  God  j?at  puttij? 
J?e  in  suche  service  whot  what  stat  is  best  for  j^e,  and  wile 
rewarde  fe  more  Jjan  alle  erjjeli  lordis  may,  if  j)OU  dost  it  trewli 
and  wilfulli  for  his  ordinaunce.  And  in  alle  ]?ingis  bewar  of 
grucchyng  a^ens  God  and  his  visitacion,  in  gret  labour  and 
long^,  and  gret  sikenesse,  and  oj^er  adversities,  and  bewar  of 
wra])e,  of  cursyng  and  waryying,  or  banning,  of  man  or  of  best. 
And  ever  kepe  pacience  and  mekenesse  and  charite,  bo)?e  to 
God  and  man.  And  j)us  eche  man  ^  in  ])es  ])re  statis  owi}>  to 
lyve,  to  save  hym  silf  and  help  oj^er ;  and  )7us  schulde  good  lif, 
rest,  pees,  and  charite  be  among  Cristen  men,  and  J?ei  be  savyd, 
and  he])en  men  sone  convertid,  and  God  magnified  gretly  in 
aUe  nacionys  and  sectis,  J>at  now  dispisen  hym  and  his  lawe, 
for  })e  wikkid  ly vyng  of  fals  Cristen  men  ^. 

At  ]?e  day  of  doom  Crist  clial  seye  to  J?at  waryed  companie  ]?at  on  his 
lift  hond  schal  be,  for  >ei  did  not  jje  werkis  of  mercy, — '  Wende  36  for- 
waryed  wrechis,  awey  fro  me,  into  j^e  everelastyng  fier  of  helle,  orde3nied 
to  ]7e  devel  and  alle  his  angelis.  pere  schal  be  weping  and  gnashyng  of 
te>,  as  ^e  J?at  ben  hatid  of  God  and  al  his  halewys/  And  whan  ]?e  for- 
cursid  schal  see  j?at  ^ei  ])us  ben  dampnyd,  and  knowyn  J;er  is  no  helpe  ne 
mersy  to  fynde,  j^an  may  l^ei  seye  jje  wordes  of  Job — wij?  sy3yng  M  sore  ; 
J>at  day  mot  periche  >at  I  was  bom  onne,  and  l>at  earful  ni3t  J?at  I  was 
conceyvyd  onne ;  hat  ne  I  hadde  be  fed  in  my  modir  wombe.    Wher-to,  my 


^  So  in  X ;  FF  om.  in  gret  labour, 
eche  man. 

»  *  Cristendom,'  like  Cristenthum 
in  German,  means  Christianity,  not 
Christendom. 

^  At  this  point  the  tract  ends  in 
the  Cambridge  MS. ;  nor  does  there 
appear  to   be  any  real  connection 


2  So  in  X ;  FF  om.  and  \>us 


between  the  subject  of  the  addi- 
tional paragraph  found  in  Laud  174, 
and  that  of  the  rest  of  the  tract; 
I  have  accordingly  printed  it  in 
smaller  type,  as  of  doubtful  authen- 
ticity. 


Job  iii.  3. 


-->5^.,. 


308 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


Jer.  iL  26. 


modir,  settist  >ou  me  on  ]>i  knees,  and  weysclie  me,  and  rokkid  me,  and 
fed  me  on  >i  brest  ?  Alas  )?at  wyle !  so  myche  swynk  sclie  looste,  \Q.t  nor- 
chyd  a  brond  to  duelle  in  helle  fieri  For  requiem  Jjat  prestis  synggyn, 
ne  non  o])er  ])yng,  schal  belpe  pern  in  her  gi-et  woo  ])at  dyen  in  dedly  synne. 
For  in  hem  God  hadde  non  rest  ]?e  wyle  ];ei  lyvedyn  here  in  synne,  and 
Jerfor  schal  pei  never  have  rest  ]?e  wile  God  is  in  hevene.  And  as  Jjei 
[fomiden]  ^  non  ende  of  synne  ])e  wyle  >ei  lyveden  here,  ]}erfor  schal  ])ei 
never  fynde  ende  of  here  pe)Tie  ])ere.  Seynt  Bernard  beri])  witnesse  Jser-to, 
]jere  he  ])us  seij?,  ])at  synne  ])at  wi]?  penance  is  not  here  fordon,  or  wif 
sorwe  of  herte  ha])  not  here  amendid  it,  wij^outen  doute  he  schal  periche 
wijjouten  ende*^.  Ffor  soply  to  ])e  ri3twisdomous  man  it  falli]?,  jjat 
]7ei  ben  never  wi])Owtyn  peyne  whan  \d  been  dede,  ])at  here  synne  wolde 
never  leve  ]3e  while  j^e  lyveden  here.  And  J?erfor  Jeremie  sei]?, — ri3t  as 
a  J>eef  is  confondid  whan  he  is  takyn,  so  schal  be  confondid  ]>&  hous  of 
synful  men.  Alas !  what  schame  and  repref  schal  be  whan  ])Q  Kyng  of 
kynggis  schal  sitte  wi]>  al  hys  meyne  of  seyntis,  and  schal  blame  synful 
man,  brynggyng  in  his  nekke  ])e  fardel  of  his  wickidnesse  in  sist  of  al  >e 
world !  And  >erfor,  bre>eryii,  leve  we  synne,  and  serve  we  God  ]>&  Fadir 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Crist  and  oure  Savyour,  to  whom  be  glorie,  joie,  worchip, 
and  honor,  unto  world  of  worldis  wijjouten  ende.     Amen. 

^  supplied  conjecturally. 


>  St.  Bernard  says  {De  Conver- 
sione,  cap.  iv.)  '  Poenitentiam  agere, 
remedium  doloris  est;  .  .  .  quisquis 
ante  obitum  carnis  non  redierit  ad 


se-ipsum,  in  se-ipso  maneat  necesse 
est  in  aetemum.*  But  I  doubt  whe- 
ther this  be  the  precise  passage 
referred  to. 


WYCLIF. 


PART    II. 


CONTROVERSIAL   WORKS, 


WOBKS.      VOL.   III. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


2,11 


XVL 

[SIMONISTS  AND  APOSTATES.] 

[Of  this  tract,  in  English,  there  is  only^one  known  MS.,  that  at  New 
College,  Oxford,  (Q  in  the  present  edition).  But  there  is  a  Latin  version  of 
it  among  the  Wyclif  MSS.  at  Vienna, — a  fact  which  forms  the  principal 
ground  for  ascribing  it  to  our  author.  Its  position  in  the  New  College  MS., 
between  the  '  Letter  to  Urban,'  and  the  '  Letter  on  the  Love  of  God,' — 
pieces  of  imdoubted  authenticity, — is  also  pretty  good  proof  that  the  com- 
piler of  that  MS.  considered  it  to  be  from  the  hand  of  Wyclif.  There  is  no 
sure  indication  of  date ;  but  from  the  absence  of  allusion  to  certain  favourite 
topics  of  the  reformer's  last  years,  such  as  the  doctrine  of  the  Eucharist  and 
the  papal  schism,  I  am  inclined  to  infer  that  it  is  a  comparatively  early 
production.     This  tract  is  No.  56  in  Shirley's  Catalogue^ 

pER  ben  two  maner  of  heretikis  of  whiche  Englond  schuld 
be  purgid,  and  symonieris  ben  ]?e  first.  And  alle  siche  ben 
symonieris  ))at  occupien  bi  symonye  Jje  patrimonye  of  Crist, — 
be  ])ei  popis,  be  fei  bischopis,  curatis,  or  provendereris.  And 
lite  prestis  or  none  ben  ciene  of  )?is  symonye.  For  to  spek 
generali  of  jjis  synne  of  symonye,  it  is  unleful  chaffaringe  wi]? 
spiritual  goodis;  and  so  bo])e  partis  ben  bleckid  wi]?  ]?is  synne. 
3if  freris  sellen  her  prechyng,  her  preying,  and  her  schryvyng, 
J)e  symonye  is  jje  worse  in  siche  ypocritis.  If  |?es  possessioners 
bien  hem  )?us  rentis,  and  propringe  of  chirchis,  wi]?  oJ?ere  privy- 
legies,  ])ei  ben  opyn  heretekis  to  harm  of  ]?e  Chirche.  And  ]jus 
5if  seculer  prestis,  o))er  more  or  lesse,  bien  her  dignytees,  to  be 
greet  in  ]je  worlde,  and  leven  })e  servise  of  God  and  profit  to  his 
Chirche,  J>ei  ben  opyn  heretikis,  and  oJ?ere  j?at  mayntenen  hem. 

pe  seconde  heretikis  in  J?e  Chirche  ben  apostataas  ^,  and  ben 

^  con-ected;  apostaas,  Q. 
P  2 


\A/sr 


H12, 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


alle  siche  ]?at  gon  abac  in  Cristis  ordre,  for  ]jei  trowen  not 
fully  J)at  Crist  was  most  pore  man  a.  And  mony  degrees  of  \e 
Chirche  ben  bleckid  wij?  ])is  heresie ;  as  alle  men  )>at  coveiten 
more  siche  statis  for  worschip  of  Jje  world,  or  richesse  J?erof, 
]?an  for  worschip  of  Crist  and  profit  of  his  Chirche,  and  for 
medeful  lif  to  sue  Crist  in  povert.  Alle  siche  rotid  in  ]?is  ben 
apostataas ;  and  ^if  j^ei  mayntenen  }>is  errour  a^ens  Goddis  lawe, 
]?ei  ben  perelous  heretikis  to  harm  of  Cristis  Chirche.  And 
siche  wolen  depart  men  fro  God  and  hevenlie  ^iftis,  and  dis- 
troye  rewmes  by  synne  and  discenciouns.  And  herfore  alle 
Cristen  men  schulden  fle  )>is  perel.  And  fus  haj;  God  meved 
men  now  to  spek  of  heretikis  more  ]?an  )?ei  diden  bifore,  to 
discryve  hem  bi  Goddis  lawe.  For  certis  holy  Chirche  schal 
never  be  wiJ?oute  debate,  J)e  while  siche  heretikis  ben  so  J?ick 
sowun.  And  siche  men  ben  heretikis  ))at  ben  a5enns  Goddis 
lawe,  or  in  word  or  in  lif,  alle  ^if  j^ei  holden  wij?  mannus  lawe ; 
and  jugemerit  of  prelatis  makij?  not  siche  heretikis,  but  \e  fend 
and  synful  lif,  ]?at  partis  hem  from  Goddis  lawe.  And  jjevis 
in  J)e  Chirche,  moost  heretikis  of  alle,  wolen  clepe  trewe  men 
heretikis,  and  unable  her  witnesse;  as  a  J)ef  in  a  derknesse 
biddi]?  a  trewe  man  stonde,  for  he  wold  ])at  no  man  spak  a^enns 
him.  And  heere  we  schulden  leeve  mannus  lawe  and  jugement 
of  f  e  world,  and  holde  hool  Goddis  lawe,  and  mak  it  oure  juge. 
And  men  weren  traytours  to  God  ^if  J?ei  hidden  pis  sentence ; 
si)?  opyn  werkis  of  heretikis  crien  hem  to  ]>e  Chirche.  And 
armis  of  men  ])at  tellen  J?is  schulden  be  on  two  maners;  J>ei 
schulden  knowe  Goddis  lawe,  and  so  bi  werkis  knowe  heretikis, 
and  arme  hemsilf  wif  patiense,  and  above  wij>  charite,  and  putte 
hem  to  perel  of  de]>  for  distroying  of  }?is  synne.  *  Fac  quod  in 
te  est,  et  sic  perficis  illud ;  propheta  dicente,  Zelus  domus  tue 
comedit  me.' 


^  This  looks  as  if  Wyclif,  supposing 
him  to  be  the  author,  had  adopted 
the  notion  of  the  spiritual  Francis- 
cans, so  much  debated  in  the  four- 


teenth century,  concerning  the  abso- 
lute poverty  of  Christ.  See  Mil- 
man's  Latin  Christianity,  vol.  vii. 
ch.  6. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


313 


XVII. 

[  CHURCH    TEMPORALITIES.  ] 

[This  tract,  whicli  ha  s\iever  before  been  printed,  is  entered  in  Bale's  list 
(the  identity  being  proved  by  the  recurrence  of — substantially — the  same 
initial  words),  under  two  different  titles, '  Cogendos  sacerdotes  ad  honesta- 
tem/  and  '  De  Civili  Dominio.'  Lewis,  in  his  list  of  Wyclif  s  works,  enters 
the  same  tract  three  times  over;  see  Nos.  57,  115,  and  145.  For  the 
reasons  assigned  in  the  note  on  p.  218,  I  think  it  probable  that  it  was 
composed  about  the  year  1378.  There  are  two  known  MSS., — one  at 
C.  C.  C.  Cambridge,  the  other  at  Dublin;  the  present  text  is  founded  on 
the  former.] 

FfOE  )3BE  SKItLIS  LORDIS  SCHULDEN  GONSTBEYNE  CREBilS  TO 
LYVE  IK  MEKENESSE,  AVILFUL  POVERT,  AND  DISCRETE 
PEIJ^-AUNCE   AND    GOSTLY   TRAVEILE. 

Opyn  techynge  and  Goddis  lawe,  old  and  newe,  opyn  en- 
saumple  of  Cristis  lif  and  his  glorious  apostiiS;  and  love  of  God, 
drede  of  peynes  and  Goddis  curs,  and  hope  of  grete  reward  in 
})e  blisse  of  hevene  schulde  stire  alle  prestis  and  religious  to 
lyve  in  gret  mekenesse  and  wilful  povert  of  ]?e  gospel  and 
discrete  penaunce,  and  traveile  to  stoppe  pride,  coveitise,  and 
fleischly  lustis,  and  ydilnesse  of  worldly  men,  and  renne  faste  to 
hevene  bi  ri^it  weie  of  Goddis  comaundementis,  and  to  forsake 
trist  in  wel]?e  of  })is  fals  world,  and  alle  manere  falsenesse  Jjerof  ; 
for  Jje  ende  of  ]?is  false  worldly  hf  is  bitter  de]?  and  stronge 
peynes  of  helle  in  body  and  soule  wijj-outen  ende. 

pre  ])ingis  schulden  meve  lordis  to  compelle  clerkis  to  ])is 
holy  lif  of  Crist  and  his  aposths.  pe  firste  is  drede  of  Goddis 
curs  and  peynes,.  in  J)is  world,  in  purgatorie,  and  helle;  and 
desirynge   of  Goddis   blissynge,  and  pees,  and  prosperite  of 


Priests  and 
monks  should 
of  themselves 
lead  a  holy 
and  self-deny- 
ing life  in 
Christian 
poverty. 


to  which,  if 
necessary, 
secular  lords 
ought,  for 
three  reasons, 
to  compel 
them- 


ai4 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


First  reason : 
because  power 
to  punisli'  the 
eviiairdreweird 
^e  good  is 
oommitted  to- 
them  by.God. 


Rx)m..L  32i 


rewmes.  pe  secunde  is  wynnynge  of  holy  lif,  bo]?e  of  clerkis, 
lordis,  and  comyns.  pe  J?ridde  is  streng]?inge  of  rewmes,  and 
distroiynge  of  synnes  in  eche  staat,  and  \t  Chirche.  First, 
kyngis  and  lordis  schulden  wite  })at  ]?ei  ben  mynystris  and 
vikeris  of  God,  to  venge  synne  and  ponysche  mysdoeris,  and 
preise  goode  doeris,  as  Petir  and  Poul  techen.  And  herefore 
techi]>  Seynt  Ysidre  in-.  ]?e  lawe  of  J>e  Chirche  a,  fat  J)is  is 
office  of  kyngis  and  lordis,  bi  drede  and  bodely  rigor  [to]  ^ 
constreyne  men  to  holde  Goddis  lawe,  whanne  ])ei  wolen  not  bi 
prechynge  of  prestis ;  and  God  schal  axe  rekenynge  of  worldly 
lordis,  where  holy  Chirche  encrese  bi  here  governaile.  panne, 
si|)  prestis  leven  mekenesse,  and  taken  worldly  pride  and  bost, 
and  forsaken  wilful  povert  of  ]?e  gospel,  and  taken  worldly 
lordischipis  bi  ypocrisie  of  veyn  preieris,  wij?  brennynge 
coveitise,  wrongis,  extorsions,  and'  sillynge  of  sacramentis,  and 
Feven  discret  penaunce  and  gostly  traveile,  and  lyven  in 
glotonye,  wastynge  pore  mennys  goodis,  and  in  ydelnesse  and 
vanyte  of  ]?is  world,  lordis  ben  in  dette  to  amende  fes  synnes. 
For  ellis  ]jei  loven  not  God,  for  ]?ei  don  not  execucion  of 
Goddis  hestis,  and  venge  not  wrong  dispit  of  God;  but  fei 
venge  wrongis  don  to  hemself,  and  Ibken  J?at  here  owene 
comaundementis  ben  kept  up  grete  peyne.  Also  Poul  sei]?,  ]>at 
not  only  men  doynge  synne  ben  wor]?i  of  def,  but  also  ]?ei  ]?at 
Gonsenten  to  hem.  pan,  si})  lordis  may  amende  ]?es  grete 
synnes  of  pride,  coveitise,  and  extorsions,  and  symonye  of 
clerkis,  ]?ei  ben  dampnable  wij>  ]?e  synneris  but  ^if  Jjei  don ;  and 
))an  ))ei  ben  cursed  of  God  for  brekynge  of  his  hestis,  and  for 
\t\  loven  not  Jesus  Crist.  And.  grete  vengaunce  come]?  for 
meyntenynge  of  synne,  and  brekynge  of  Goddis  hestis,  as 
Goddis  lawe  schewij?  in  many  placis.  And  sij)  adversities  and 
werris  comen  for  synnys  regnynge  J^at  ben  not  amendid,  lordis 
schulden  have  neijjer  prosperite  ne  pees  til  j^es  synnes  ben 
amendid.  For  no  man  wi]>stondynge  Jjus  Goddis  lawe,  schal 
have  pees.     For  lordis  han  here  lordischipis  bi  God  to  distroie 

^  supplied. 


a  There  is  a  passage  to  this  effect 
in  the  Decretum  of  Gratian  (Pars  II, 
Causa  23),  quoted  from  S.  Austin : 


but  I  cannot  discover  any  dictum 
of  Isidore  on  the.  subject. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS, 


215 


S}Tine,  and  meyntene  ri^twisnesse  and  holy  lif ;  ]?anne,  ^if  J)ei 
paien  not  to  God  J}is  rente,  wite  J^ei  wel  God  mot  ponysche 
hem,  as  he  techij)  in  his  lawe.  And  certis,  3if  lordis  don  wel 
J)is  office,  \€\  schullen  sikerly  come  to  f  e  blisse  of  hevene. 

Cap.  II. 

pe  secunde  profit  is  ^vynnynge  of  holy  lif  on  eche  side.  For 
nowe  prelatis  and  grete  religious  possessioners  ben  so  occupied 
aboute  worldly  lordischipis  and  plea  and  bysinesse  in  herte, 
\2X  \€\  may  not  be  in  devocion  of  preiynge,  and  Jjou^t  of 
hevenely  ]?ingis,  and  of  here  owene  synnys  and  ojjere  mennys, 
and  studie  and  prechynge  of  ]je  gospel,  and  visitynge  and  con- 
fortynge  of  pore  men  in  here  diocisis  and  lordischipis.  And 
J30  goodis  ]?at  ben  overe  here  owene  sustenaunce  and  neces- 
saries, J)at  schulde  be  departid  among  pore  men  most  nedi, 
ben  now  wastid  in  festis  of  lordis  and  riche  men,  in  festis  and 
robis  and  ^iftis  of  men  of  lawe,  in  alle  contrees  where  here 
lordischipis  ben,  and  in  riche  clerkis  of  fe  Chauncerie,  of  ]?e 
Comyn  Benche  and  Kyngis  Benche,.  and  in  ]?e  Checher  a  and 
of  justicis  and  schereves  and  stiwardis  and  bailifis,  ]?at  litil  or 
nou^t  come]?  to  hem,  or  here  chirchis  and  coventis,  but  name  of 
J)e  world,  and  J^ou^t  and  bisynesse  and  care  and  sorowe.  And 
for  drede  of  losse  of  J?es  temporaltees,  \€\  doren  not  reprove 
synne  of  lordis  and  my'^iiy  men,  ne  frely  dampne  coveitise  in: 
worldly  men,  ne  in  meyntenynge  of  fals  plee;  for  \€\  ben. 
opynly  smytted  in  alle  ))es  synnys,  and  many  moo.  And  ])us  is- 
trewe  techynge  of  Goddis  lawe,  and  ensaumple  of  holy  lif,  wijj- 
drawen  fro  lordis  and  comyns  for  }jes  worldly  lordischipis  of 
clerkis,  and  symonye,  pride,  extorsions,  and  alle  manere  synne 
and  meyntenynge  of  synne  is  brou^t  in^ 

And  3it  Jjei  have  parische  chirchis  aproprid  to  worldly  riche 
bischopis  and  abbotis  })at  ^  han  many  }?ousand  mark  more  J?an 

^  corrected;  \an^  X. 


a  The  three  courts, — of  the  Com- 
mon Bench  (or  Common  Pleas),  of 
the  Exchequer,  and  of  the  King's 
Eench, — were,  as  is  well  known, 
finally  established  as  separate  tri- 
bunals  on   tbe    mins  of  the  Aula 


Regia  by  Edward  I,  who  abolished 
the  office  of  Chief  Justiciary,  and 
transferred  much  of  his  jurisdiction 
to  the  Court  of  Chanceiy,  the  au- 
thority of  which  thenceforth  rapidly 
increased. 


Second  reason ; 
because  tlie 
result  would 
be  increased 
holiness  of  life 
on  both  sides. 


Mischiefs 
caused  by 
wealth  and 


Evils  of  the 
system  of 
impropriating 
parochial 
tithes  to 
bishops  and 
abbots. 


2,l6 


Third  reason : 
because  the 
wealth  and 
temporal  power 
thus  taken 
from  the 
Church,  would, 
if  distributed 
among-  laymen, 
greatly 
strengthen 
the  kmgdom. 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 

ynowe.  And  \is  appropringe  is  geten  bi  fals  suggestion  maad 
to  Anticrist,  be  lesyngis  maade  to  lordis,  and  coveitise  and 
symonye,  and  wastynge  of  pore  mennis  goodis.  And  ^it  J>ei 
don  not  \e  office  of  curatis,  nei]?er  in  techynge,  ne  prechynge, 
ne  ^evynge  of  sacramentis,  ne  resceyvynge  of  pore  men  in  J?e 
parische ;  but  setten  j^ere  an  ydiot  for  viker  or  parische  prest, 
|)at  kan  not  and  may  not  do  \e  office  of  a  good  curat,  and  ^it  Jje 
pore  parische  fyndij)  hym.  And  no  tonge  may  telle  in  jjis 
world  what  synne  and  wrong  comej?  herby.  For,  as  Robert 
Grosted  seij?,  whanne  apropriacion  of  parische  chirchis  is  made 
to  siche  religious,  of  alle  evelis  fat  come)?  bi  weiward  curatis  is 
maad  a  perpetuacion. .  And  >us  jjei  han  worldly  lordischipis, 
and  reulen  not  ))e  peple  ne  meyntene  ]?e  lond  as  lordis.  And 
whanne  care  of  soulis  and  dymes  and  offryngys  ^  and  governe 
not  J?e.  peple  in  techynge  and  prechynge  and  sacramentis,  as 
curatis,  and  han  richessis  and  tresour  more  )?an  eny  worldly 
man,  and-  traveilen  not  ]?erfore.  as  marchauntis  and  laboreris. 
And,,  as  Bernard  seip,  jjei  taken  }>e  wynnynge  and  giftis  of  eche 
degre  in  \t  Chirche,  and  traveilen  not  >erfore.  And  )?erfore  ]?ei 
shulden  be  where  is  noon  ordre,  but  everelastynge  errour  and 
peyne.  pis  covetise,  symonye,  and  moo  synnys,  schulden  goo 
awey  fro  clerkis  ^if  j^ei  hadden  no  seculer  lordischipis;  and 
holy  lif  and  povert  schulde  turne  to  hem,  and  newe  techynge 
and  good  ensaumple  to  alle  manere  men. 

Cap.  hi. 

pe  ]>ridde  profit  is  stablynge  of  rewmes  and  distriynge  of 
synnys.  For  parische  chirchis  approprid  J?us  schulden  frely  be 
50ven  to  clerkis  able  of  kunnynge  and  lif,  and  trewe  techynge 
in  word  and  dede.  And  {;anne  schulde  ]?e  clergie  be  strengere, 
and  peple  of  betre  lif.  And  seculer  lordischipis,  ]?at  clerkis  han 
ful  falsly  a^enst  Goddis  lawe,  and  spende  hem  so  wickedly, 
schulden  be  ^oven  wisly  bi  fe  kyng  and  witti  lordis  to  pore 

^  text  of  X  corrupt. 


^  The  reference  is  perKaps  to  a 
passage  in  a  sermon  by  St.  Bernard 
on  the  conversion  of  St.  Paul  {Opera, 
I,  956,  ed.  •  Paris,  1690),  where  he 


says,  spealdng  of  bad  priests, '  Nunc 
autem  dati  sunt  sacri  gradus  in  oc- 
casionem  tui-pis  lucri,  et  quaestum 
aestimant  pietatem.* 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


%ij 


gentilmen,  ])at  wolden  justli  governe  Jje  peple,  and  meyntene  ))e 
lond  a^enst  enemy es ;  and  ]?an  my^te  oure  lond  be  strengere  by 
many  ]?ousand  men  of  armes  ]?an  it  is  now,  wij?outen  ony  newe 
cost  of  lordis,  or  taliage  of  ]?e  pore  corny ns,  [and]  ^  be  dis- 
chargid  of  gret  hevy  rente,  and  mckid  customes  brou^t  up  bi 
coveitouse  clerkis,  and  of  many  talliagis  and  extorsions,  bi  whiche 
]?ei  ben  now  cniely  pillid  and  robbid.  And  ]3us  bi  restorynge 
of  lordischipis  to  seculer  men,  as  J?ei  duwe  bi  holi  writt,  and  bi 
bryngynge  of  clerkis  to  mekenesse  and  wilful  povert  and  bisy 
gostly  traveile,  as  lyveden  Crist  and  his  apostlis,  schulden  synne 
be  distried  in  ech  degree  of  ]?e  Chirche,  and  holy  lif  brou^t  in, 
and  seculer  lordis  moche  streng]?id,  and  j^e  pore  comyns 
relevyd,  and  good  governaile,  bo]?e  gostly  and  worldly,  come 
a^en,  and  ri3twisnesse  and  treuf>e,  and  reste  and  pees  and 
charite.  And  hereto  schulde  ech  Cristene  man  helpe,  bi  al  his 
wille,  herte,  kunnynge,  and  powere. 

And  ^if  worldly  clerkis  of  }>e  Chaunserie  or  Chekir  seyn  ]?at 
})e  kyng  and  lordis  may  not  ]?us  amende  })e  clergie,  and  turnen 
here  temporaltees  into  seculer  mennis  hondis,  for  drede  of  curs, 
seie  ]?at  ]?ei  blaberen  moche  of  Anticristis  curs  and  his  clerkis, 
and  magnyfien  }>at  for  here  owene  pride  and  coveitise,  but  ]?ei 
speken  not  of  curs  of  God,  ]?at  oure  lordis  rennen  inne,  for  Jjei 
meyntenen  not  Cristis  ordynaunc'e'  in  [jc  clergie.  And  to 
Luciferis  clerkis,  }>at  it  is  al  on  to  blabere  J^at  oure  lordis  may 
not  take  a^en  ]?e  temporaltees  fro  Anticristis  clerkis,  and  to 
blabere.  )?at  oure  lordis  may  not  holde  and  meyntene  Goddis 
hestis  and  Cristis  owene  ordynaunce.  Be  ]?es  worldly  clerkis 
war,  jjat  J)ei  conseilen  not  oure  lordis  to  renne  inne  to  Goddis 
curse,  to  meyntene  hei3e  prelatis  and  religious,  a^enst  staat  of 
apostlis  and  here  owene  profession,  for  gold,  robis,  and  fees, 
]?at  ]?ei  taken  of  Anticristis  clerkis.  But  wite  lordis  wel,  ]?ou3 
alle  clerkis  in  er))e  cursen  hem,  for  as  moche  as  ]?ei  traveilen? 
wi]?  clene  conscience  to  brynge  clerkis  to  J?is  holy  lif,  ensaumplid 
and  comaundid  of  Crist,  and  to  restore  seculer  lordischipis  to 
seculer  men  as  jjei  schulden  bi  Goddis  lawe, — }2X  God  and  alle 
angelis  and  seyntis  blisse  hem  for  J)is  ri^twisnesse ;  and  ]?anne 

^  supplied. 


Ban  and  ex- 
communication 
should  be 
defied. 


2,l8 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


mannis  curs  harme}>  no]>ing;  ne  enterditynge,  ne  ony  sensuris 
])at  Sathanas  may  feyne  \ 

Almy3ty  God,  stire  oure  clerkis,  oure  lordis,  and  oure  comyns, 
to  meyntene  ])e  ri^tful  ordynaunce  ]?at  Jesus  Crist  maade  for 
clerkis,  and  to  drede  curs  of  God,  and  not  curs  of  Anticrist, 
and  to  desire  spedly  ]>e  honour  of  God  and  blisse  of  hevene, 
more  ]?an  here  owene  honour  and  worldly  joie. 


a  This  bold  declaration  seems  to 
refer  to  the  attempt  of  Gregory  XI 
in  1377  ^o  procure  a  formal  con- 
demnation in  England  of  nineteen 
conclusions  attributed  to  Wyclif, 
several  among  which  (particularly 
the  sixth,  seventh,  seventeenth,  and 
eighteenth),  embody  opinions  simi- 
lar to  those  propounded  in  the  pre- 
sent tract.  See  Lewis'  'Life  of 
Wyclif,'  p.  46.  For  instance,  the 
ninth  conclusion  ran  thus :  *  Si  Deus 


est,  domini  temporales  possunt  legi- 
time ac  meritorie  auferre  bona  for- 
tune ab  ecclesia  delinquente.'  And 
with  regard  to  the  efficacy  of  church 
*  curses,'  or  excommunications,  the 
ninth  conclusion  maintained, — '  Non 
est  possibile  hominem  excommuni- 
cari  ad  sui  dampnum,  nisi  excom- 
municetur  primo  et  principaliter  a 
se  ipso."  The  four  following  con- 
clusions are  all  in  the  same  strain. 


<^^^<^^^ — 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS, 


2,ig 


XVIII. 


DE    PRECATIONIBUS    SACRIS. 

[This  tract,  never  before  printed,  is  found  in  Bale's  list  under  the  title 
*  De  precationibus  sacris/  It  is  contained  in  the  Corpus  volume,  and  in 
two  MSS.  at  Dublin.  I  do  not  see  that  any  reasonable  doubt  can  be  enter- 
tained of  its  authenticity.  There  is  no  means  of  fixing  the  date  of  com- 
position exactly ;  but  the  absence,  in  a  tract  of  this  length,  of  all  reference 
to  either  of  those  topics  which  were  of  gravest  interest  to  Wyclif  in  his  last 
years,  the  papal  schism  and  the  doctrine  of  the  Eucharist,  inclines  me  to 
place  it  in  or  before  1379.     '^^^  *^^^  ^s  based  on  C.  C.  C.  C.  296.] 

How  PREIERE  OF  GOOD  MEN  HELPi]?  MOCHE,  AND  PREIERE  OP 
SYNFUL  MEN  DISPLESi)?  GOD,  AND  HARME]?  HEMSILF  AND 
OJ^ERE   MEN. 

OuEE  Lord  Jesus  Crist  techi]?  us  to  preie  evermore,  for  alle 
nedful  J)ingis  bojje  to  body  and  soule.  For  in  ]je  gospel  of 
Seynt  Luk,  Crist  sei]?  ]?at  it  is  nede  to  preie  evermore,  and 
Seynt  Poul  biddij?  Cristene  men  preie  wi]?oute  cessynge,  or 
lettynge.  And  ])is  is  understonden  of  preiere  of  charite,  and 
not  of  preiere  of  mannis  voys,  as  Seynt  Austyn  declari]?  wel » ; 
for  ellis  my^tte  no  man  fulfille  J?is  heste,  to  preie  evermore. 
For  as  longe  as  a  man  lyvef  just  lif,  kepynge  Goddis  hestis 
and  charite,  so  longe  he  preie]>  v^el  whatevere  he  do^;  and 
whoevere  lyvej?  beste,  he  preie]?  best.  Also  Seynt  Jame  seij), 
jjat  ]>e  besy  and  lastynge  preiere  of  a  ri^tful  man  is  moche  worjji. 
And  ]?er  while  Moyses  was  in  Ipe  Mount,  and  held  up  his  hondis, 
and  preiden  for  his  folk,  his  folk  hadden  victorie  of  here 
enemys;  and  whanne  he  cessed  to  preie  ]?us,  his  peple  was 


The  efficacy 
of  prayer. 


James  v.  16. 


^  See  the  very  beautiful  passage 
here  referred  to  in  St.  Augustine's 
Ennrratio  in  Ps.  xxxvii.  §  14. 


•  He  prayeth  well  who  loveth  well 
Both  racin  and  bird  and  beast.' 

Coleridge's  Ancuttt  Marnier. 


%%o 


WYCLIF'S  WORKS, 


if  made  in  the 
name  of  Christ 
and  for  spi- 
ritual good. 


overcomen,  as  Jje  secunde  book  of  Holy  Writt  techi}).  3if 
prestis  dwellij?  in  J?e  hill  of  hey  gostly  lif,  and  aspien  disceitis 
of  l^e  fende,  and  schewen  hem  to  J)e  peple  bi  trevve  prechynge, 
and  holden  up  here  hondis,  ))at  is,  opyn  goode  werkis,  and 
lasten  in  hem,  and  preien  bi  brennynge  desir  to  performe  ri^t- 
wisnesse  of  Goddis  lawe  and  ordynaunce,  Cristene  peple  schal 
have  victorie  of  ]?e  fende  of  helle  and  cursed  synne,  and  ]>an 
schal  reste  and  pees  and  charite  dwelle  amonge  hem.  And 
^if  prestis  cessen  of  j)is  holy  lif  and  good  ensaumple,  and  ]?is 
desir  of  ri^twisnesse,  Cristene  peple  schal  moche  be  overcome 
bi  synne,  and  have  pestilence  and  werris  and  woo  ynou^-,  and, 
but  5if  God  helpe,  )>e  more  endeles  woo  in  helle.  Also  kyng 
Ezechie  bi  holy  preiere  and  wepynge  and  sorowe  gat  remission 
of  his  synnys,  and  fiftene  ^eer  of  his  lif;  and  ]?e  sonne  wente 
abac,  or  turnede  ^  a^en,  ten  lynes  in  J?e  orologie,  as  Ysaies  book 
witnessi]?.  Also  ]je  sonne  and  ]?e  mone  stonden  stille  al  day, 
to  5eve  li5t  to  pursue  Goddis  enemyes,  willynge  to  quenche 
Goddis  name,  his  lawe,  and  his  peple,  bi  j?e  holy  preiere  of  Jie 
noble  duk  Josue. 

perfore  seij?  Crist  to  his  disciplis, — ^\i  ^e  axen  my  Fadir  ony 
])ing  in  my  name  he  schal  ^eve  it  to  50W.  But  we  axen  in  ])e 
name  of  Jesus  whanne  we  axen  \m%  nedeful  or  profitable  for 
savynge  of  mennis  soulis,  so  J^at  we  axen  ]?is  devoutly,  of  gret 
desir,  and  wittily,  or  mekely  and  lastyngly,  bi  saad  feij?,  ri5tful 
hope,  and  lastynge  charite.  And  whatevere  we  axen  ]?us,  we 
schuUen  have  of  ]?e  Fadir  of  hevene.  Also  Crist  seij>  J?us  in  J?e 
gospel,  5if  5e,  evele  men,  kunnynge  ^eve  ^  goode  J?ingis  to  ^oure 
children,  whiche  goode  J?ingis  ben  ^oven  to  50W,  how  moche 
more  schal  30ure  fadir  of  hevene  ^eve  a  good  spirit  to  men  }>at 
axen  him.  panne,  si]?  kynde  techi]?  synful  men  to  5eve  goodis 
to  here  children,  how  moche  more  wole  Godde,  auctor  of  good- 
nesse  and  charite,  ^eve  to  his  children  ]?at  he  love]?  so  moche 
gostly  goodis  profitable  to  ]?e  soule.  perfore  axe  of  God 
hevenely  goodis,  as  grace,  wille,  witt,  and  my^t,  to  serve  God 
to  his  pleasaunce, — and  not  worldly  catel,  but  in  as  moche  as 
it  is  nedeful  to  susteyne  ))is  lif  in  tru]?e  and  service  of  ]?i  God. 


^  corrected  ;  turnende,  X. 
kunnynge  ^eve  le. 


^   cori'ected ;  X  has,  ^eve  evele  in&t 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


%%\ 


perfore  Crist  techij?  us  J)at  \^hatevere  we  preien  and  axen  we 
schulde  bileve  and  truste  wi]?outen  ony  doute  to  have  it,  and  it 
schal  be  don  us.  And  ^if  twei  or  J?re  of  50U  consenten  togedre 
of  ony  fing  on  erfe  f>at  }?ei  schulden  axe,  it  schal  be  don  to 
hem. 

perfore  Crist  tau^te  and  comaundid  us  to  preie  }?e  Pater 
Noster,  j^at  is  best  and  h3ttest  and  most  siker  preiere  of  alle. 
For  ))at  conteyne]?  al  nedful  ]?ing,  and  profitable  for  body  and 
soule,  and  noon  error  ne  singularite  a3enst  Goddis  wille ;  and 
Jesus  Crist  made  it,  and  comaundid  it  in  schorte  wordis,  for 
men  schulden  not  ben  hevy  ne  werie  to  seie  it,  ne  combrid 
to  lerne  it.  And  herfore  Seynt  blame})  men  j>at  leven  j)is 
Pater-Noster,  tau^t  and  comaunded  of  God,  and  chesen  sin- 
guler  preieris  maade  of  synful  men.  And  herbi  it  is  opyn,  ]?at 
holy  men,  dwellynge  in  charite  to  God  and  alle  men  lyvynge  in 
erj)e,  bo)?e  frendis  and  enemys,  Cristene  and  hej?ene,  profiten 
moche  by  devout  preieres,  but  most  bi  holy  lif,  and  brennynge 
desir  of  ri^twisnesse. 

Cap.  II. 

See  now  how  wickid  mennis  preiere  displesi]?  God,  and 
harmej?  hemself  and  Jje  peple.  God  himself  sei})  to  evele  men 
Jjat  preien  to  hym  in  nede  on  ])is  manere :  '  I  have  clepid  and 
^e  han  forsaken,  and  han  dispisid  alle  my  blamyngis,  and  I 
schal  liejje  in  ^oure  perischynge,  and  schal  scorne  50U  whanne 
\2X  ]?ing  l>at  ^e  han  dred  schal  come  to  50W.  panne  ])ei 
schullen  clepe,  and  I  .schal  not  here;  \€\  schuUen  rise  here- 
lyche,  and  \€\  schullen  not  fynde  me;  for  J?ei  hatiden 
disciplyne/  ]?at  is,  lernynge  and  chastisynge,  *and  J)us  res- 
ceyveden  not  ])e  drede  of  \t  Lord.  And  J?ei  assentiden  not 
to  my  conseile,  and  depraveden  and  mysdemeden  al  my  cor- 
reccioun,'  ])at  is,  reprovynge  warnynge  and  chastisynge  of 
synne.  And  bi  Jje  prophete  Ysaie  God  seij)  \\x%  to  wickide 
men:  '3^  princes  of  Sodom,  here  fe  Lordis  word;  J?e  peple 
of  Gomor,  perseyve})  wij?  heris  ]?e  lawe  of  oure  Lord  God. 
oure  encence  is  abhomynacioun  to  me;  I  schal  not  suffre 
50ure  neomye  a,'  Jjat  is  a  principal  feste,  '  and   Sabaoth  and 

a  A  mistake  of  the  scribe  for  second  Wycliffite  version  at  this 
*neomenye,'  which  is  found  in  the      place. 


All  right 
prayer  is  en- 
sampled  in  the 
Pater  Noster. 


The  ijrayers  of 
the  wicked  are 
an  abomination 
to  the  Lord. 

Prov.  L  24. 


%%% 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


Mai.  ii.  13. 


Ps.  cix.  6. 
Matt  XV.  9, 


o])ere  festis ;  ^oure  compaynes  ben  y vele ;  my  soule  ha])  hatid 
^oure  festis  of  calendis  and  solempnyties ;  J?ei  ben  made  to  me 
hevy  and  noiful.  And  whanne  [^e^]  schiilden  holde  forjj^onre 
hondis,  I  schal  turne  myn  ei^en  awey  fro  50U ;  and  whanne  ^e 
schullen  make  many  preieris,  I  schal  not  here,  for  ^om^e  hondis 
ben  ful  of  blood/  ]?at  is,  of  wrong  sleynge  of  men,  or  fo.ule 
synnes.  Also  God  sei])  Jjat  ])e  preiere  of  ]?at  man  J;at  turne]> 
awey  his  ere,  J^at  he  here  not  J)e  lawe,  is  abhominable  or 
cursed.  Also  God  seij?  bi  J)e  prophete  Malache :  '  And  now 
to  50U,  prestis,  is  J>is  comaundement,  ^if  ^e  wolen  here.  And 
5if  3e  wolen  not  putte  on  ^oure  herte  to  ^eve  50U  glorie  to  my 
name,  si|>  ^  ]?e  Lord  of  compaynyes,  or  hostis,  I  schal  sende  into 
50U  nedynesse  and  schal  curse  to  ^oure  blyssyngis  ;  and  I  schal 
curse  to  hem,  for  ^e  han  not  seet  ])is  comaundement  on  oure  ^ 
herte.  Loo,  I  schal  caste  to  50W  j^e  armie,  and  sprede  abrood 
upon  3oure  face  fe  J?ost,  or  dirt,  of  ^oure  solempnyte.'  Also 
bi  j?e  same  prophete  seij?  God  to  prestis  and  naynistris  of  fe 
temple ;  *  Woo  is  among  50W,  \2X  schal  sitte,  and  encence  myn 
auter  wilfully  and  frely,  wi})Outen  mede?'  as  who  sei]?,  noon. 
'  pe  Lord  of  companyes  sei]?,  ])er  is  no  wille  to  me  among  50W, 
and  I  schal  resceyve  no  ^iftis  of  sacrifice  of  ^oure  bond.'  And 
God  seij)  bi  ]?e  same  prophete  to  prestis,  ^  3^  ^^^  coverid  ]>e 
auter  of  j^e  Lord  wij?  teris  and  wepynge  and  mornynge,'  ])at  is 
of  widewis  and  pore  men  ))at  [^e]  oppressen,  and  disceyven, 
'  so  ])at  I  schal  no  more  biholden  to  ]?e  sacrifice,  and  I  schal 
not  resceyve  only  pleasaunt  ]>mg  of  5oure  bond.'  perfore  seij? 
Davyd ;  *  5if  ^  have  biholden  wickidnesse  in  myn  herte,  ]?e  Lord 
schal  not  here  bi  grace;'  Jjat  is,  ^if  I  wilfully  and  gladly  do 
wickidnesse.  And  God  seis  to  ]>e  synful  man,  'Whi  tellist 
])0U  my  rijjtwisnesse,  and  takist  my  testament  bi  ]?i  mou]?  ? ' 
And  ]?e  Holy  Gost  sei]>  of  Judas  Scariot,  '  His  preiere  be  maad 
into  synne/  And  oure  Lord  Jesus  sei]?,  'pis  peple  worschipi]5 
me  wi}>  lippis,  but  here  herte  is  fere  fro  me.  But  J?ei  techen 
loris  and  maundementis  of  men,  worschipen  me  wi])0uten 
cause,'  ))at  is,  siche  men  as  techen  and  chargen  mennis  lawis 
and  tradicions  and  comaundementis,  more  ])an  holy  writt  and 


1  not  in  X. 


a  mistake  for  sei\). 


should  be  ^otire. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS,  223 

Goddis  hestis,  veynly  and  falsly  worschipen  God.     Also  Jesus 
seij?  to  wickid  men  ;  '  What  seie  ^e  to  me,  Lord,  Lord,  and  don 
not  Jje  ]?ingis  ]>qX  I  comaundede  ? '    For  Jesus  seij?,  '  Woo  to 
50W,  Scribis  and  Phariseis,  >^ocritis,  j^at  eten  widewis  houses, 
preiynge  longe  preieris;  Jjerfore  ^e  schulle  take  grettere  juge- 
ment/     And  in  j?e  gospel  of  Seynt  Jon  is  writen  ]?us  :  '  And  ^e 
witen  ))at  God  heri|?  not  synful  men,  but  ^if  ony  man  wor- 
schipij)  God  and  doij)  his  wille,  God  herij?  hym/     And  whanne 
a  prest  sei})  his  masse  out  of  good  lif  and  charite,  and  makij? 
J?e  sacrament,  he  etij?  and  drynkij?  his  owen  dampnacion,  not 
demynge  wisly  ]>e  body  of  oure  Lord,  as  Seynt  Poul  techij)  in 
holy  writt.     perfore  Crisostom  sei{)  on  jje  gospel  of  Mathew  a ; 
As  a  J)ing  may  be  wi])OUte  odour  or  savour,  but  odor  may  not 
be  wifjouten  sum  ))ing,  so  a  good  dede  wijsouten  preierejis 
sumwhat,  but  preire  wijjouten  goode  dede  is  nou^t.    And  Seynt 
Austyn  sei]?  on  jje  Sauter ;  3if  J'OU  passe  mesure  in  mete  and 
drynk,   and    lyve    in    glotonye   and    dronkenesse,   whatevere 
heriyingis^  J>i  tonge  speke,  J)i  lif  blaspheme]?  God  b.     perfore 
Seynt  Poul  seij).  Many  men  knowliehen  j>at  ]>ei  knowen  God, 
but  )?orow5  here  dedis  ]>ei  denyen  God.     And  Seynt  Gregory 
writti])  ]>us  in  many  bokis,  A  man  seet  in  grevous  synnys,  ]?er- 
while  he  is  overchargid  wi]>  his  owen,  he  do))  not  awey  oJ?er 
mennis  synnes.     For  it  is  knowen  to  alle  men,  ]?at  whanne  he 
))at  dispise)?  is  sent  forj?e  to  preie,  ]>e  herte  of  him  ])at  is  wor])i 
is  stired  to  more  wra})]?e  and  vengaunce.     So)?ly  it  is  writun,  pe 
sacrafies  of  wickide  men  ben  abhominable  to  ]>e  Lord ;  J?e  vowis 
of  sacrifices  of  just  men  ben  pleasaunt.     For  in  ]>e  dom  of  God 
Almy3tty,  it  is  not  sou^t  what  is  ^oven,  but  of  whom,     perfore 
it  is  written  in  holy  writt ;  pe  Lord  biheld  to  Abel  and  to  his 
^iftis.    Whanne  Moyses  schulde  seie  J)at  ]>e  Lord  tok  reward  to 
^iftis,  bisily  he  sette  bifore  Jjat  God  biheld  Abel ;  of  whiche  J?ing 
it  is  schewed  opynly  ]?at  ]>e  offerere  pleside  not  of  ^iftis,  but 
^iftis  pleseden  of  }>e  offerere  or   ^evere.      Forso])e  Jje   heiste 

^  supplied  conjecturally ;  hereVpgis,  X. 

^  S.  Joh.  Chiy^sost.  in  cap.  Matt.  deratione    voracitatis     excedas,    et 

vii.  Homilia  xviii.  vinolentia    te     ingurgites,    quantas 

''  S.  Aug.   Enarr.   in   Ps.   cxlvi:  libet  laudes  Dei   lingua  tua  sonet, 

*  Si  modum  naturae  debitum  immo-  vita  blasphemat.' 


2:^4 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


Such  prayers 
are  also  con- 
demned by  the 
canon  law, 
which  forbids 
to  hear  the 
masses  of 
priests  living 
unchastely. 


God  approve]?  not  J?e  ^iftis  of  wickid  men,  ne  biholdij?  in  here 
ofFryngis,  ne  schal  have  mercy  of  synnys  in  fe  multitude  of 
here  sacrifices.  Also  Jje  Lord  is  fer  fro  wickide  men,  and  he 
schal  graciously  here  J?e  preieris  of  juste  men.  Al  J?is  seij? 
Seynt  Gregory  in  )?e  popis  lawe. 

Cap.  III. 

Now  see  how  streit  is  mannys  lawe  a^enst  synful  mennys 
preiere.  pe  pope  comaundi])  in  his  lawe,  ))at  no  man  here  fe 
masse  of  ]?at  prest,  whanne  he  whot  wijjouten  doute  J)at  he  ha]) 
a  concubyne  or  lemman ;  and  ]?is  lawe  is  confermyd  of  ])e  holy 
Seyne  under  gret  curs.  Over  ])is  sei]?  })e  Pope  Alisaundre  a  ; 
We  comaunden  and  bidden  ]>at  no  man  heire  J>at  prestis  masse, 
whom  he  whot  wi]?outen  ony  doute  to  have  a  lemman,  or  a 
womman  prively  weddid.  Wherof  also  ^t  holy  Seyne  con- 
fermede  ])is  lawe,  and  sei})^,  Whatevere  man  of  prestis,  of 
dekene,  or  sub-dekeneS  holde  and  wedde  opynly  a  concubyne, 
or  forsaki])  not  ^if  he  have  weddid  here,  aftir  ])e  statut  of  Seynt 
Lionir  ]?e  pope,  or  Pope  Nychol,  of  chastite  of  clerkis, 
we  comaunden  on  Goddis  halve,  and  bi  auctorite  of  Petir 
and  Poul,  and  algatis  a^en-seyn,  fat  he  synge  no  masse,  and 
rede  ne  gospel  ne  pistel  at  masse,  and  Jjat  he  dwelle  not  in  ])e 
quere  at  dyvyn  service,  wi}>  hem  \2X  ben  obeischaunt  to  J>at 
constitucion  of  chastite;  and  ])at  he  resceyve  not  part  of  ])e 
chirche.  Also  Pope  Gregory  sei])  ]>us  :  5if  fer  ben  ony  prestis, 
dekenys,  or  subdekenys,  \2X  lyve  in  synne  of  fornycacioun, 
on  Goddis  halve,  and  bi  auctorite  of  Seynt  Petre,  we  forbeden 
hem  })e  entre  of  }?e  Chirche  til  Jjei  don  penaunce  and  ben 
amendid.  But  ^if  ony  of  hem  have  levere  to  dwelle  in  here 
synne,  none  of  50W  presume  or  be  hardy  to  here  here  oflice 
or  service,  for  here  blessynge  turne]?  into  cursynge,  and  here 
preiere  turne]?  into  synne ;  as  oure  Lord  witnessij?  bi  J>e  prophete 

^  corrected ;  so-dekene^  X. 


a  Probably  Pope  Alexander  II, 
(1061-1073),  "who  wrote  a  letter  to 
this  effect  to  the  Dalmatian  church. 

'^  By  the  '  holy  Seyne '  seems  to 
be  meant  Gregory  the  Great,  though 
I  have  not  discovered  the  passage 


cited  in  his  works.  If  he  be  meant, 
the  words  *  or  Pope  Nychol'  must 
be  taken  for  an  interpolation  of  the 
writer,  for  the  first  pope  of  the  name 
of  Nicholas  flourished  not  earlier 
than  the  ninth  centuiy. 

WYCLIR 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS, 


^'2.5 


Malachie.  I  schal,  seij)  God,  curse  to  ^oure  blissingis.  So]i\y 
]>ei  |)at  wolen  not  obeie  to  ]?is  most  holsum  precept  rennen 
into  synne  of  ydolatrie,  }?at  is,  honourynge  of  false  goddis, 
witnessynge  )?e  holy  prophete  Samuel  and  Seynt  Gregory. 
It  is  synne  of  whicchis,  of  men  out  of  Cristene  byleve  to  not 
be  obedient;  and  to  wille  not  to  assente  and  acorde  is  synne 
of  ydolatrie  \ 

Also  it  is  written  |)ere  )>us ;  5^^  ony  bishop,  or  prest,  or 
dekene,  fro  hennys  for])  take  any  womman,  or  forsake  here 
not  5if  he  have  taken  ony,  falle  he  fro  his  owen  degre  til  he 
come  to  satisfaccion,  and  dwelle  he  not  in  quere  of  men  Jjat 
■syngyn  Goddis  servyce,  and  take  he  not  ony  part  of  ]?ingis  of 
]>e  Chirche.  Also  ^if  ony  bischop  consente,  bi  preiere  or  pris, 
to  fornycacion  of  prestis  or  dekenys  in  his  parische,  or  ]?at  he 
impugnej?  not  bi  autorite  sich  synne  don,  be  he  suspendid  of 
his  office,  ]>2Lt  is  disposid  as  ]>e  lawe  sei}>.  Also  Austyn  seij>, 
)?at  so))ly  no  man  do]?  more  harm  in  ]>q  Chirche  J?an  he  )?at  do|? 
weiwardly,  and  ha]?  name  of  ordre  of  holynesse  or  presthed. 
For  no  man  presume]?  to  reprove  hym  whanne  he  mysdo]?,  and 
ye  synne  is  drawen  gretly  into  ensaumple,  whanne  a  synful 
man  is  worschipid  for  reverence  of  ordre.  And  so  }?at  bischop 
]?at  amendi]?  not  synne  of  siche  men,  is  more  wor]?i  to  be  clepid 
an  -^  unchast  hound  j?an  a  bischop. 

Nowe  si]?  lecherie  maki]?  prestis  unable  to  entre  into  holy 
Chirche,  and  seie  masse,  and  have  part  of  tij?es  and  ofFringis, 
and  ]?at  men  schullen  not  here  her  servyce,  whanne  here  synne 
is  opyn,  moche  more  schulde  }?es  peynes  renne  for  grettere 
synnys,  as  pride,  envye,  coveitise  and  glotonye,  usure,  J?efte  of 
Goddis  word,  and  symonye,  )?at  passi]?  alle  o]?ere  synnes.  For 
]?e  grevousere  synne  is  wor]?i  more  peyne.  For  pride  makij? 
men  forsake  God,  kyng  of  mekenesse,  and  take  Lucifer  to  here 
fals  kyng,  as  God  sei]?  in  Holy  Writt ;  and  envye  and  wra})])e 
makiJ?  men  forsake  God  of  charite  of  mercy  and  pacience,  and 
bicome  children  of  Bellial,  as  Goddis  lawe,  reson,  and  seyntis 

1  and  in  the  MS. 

»  This  is  a  translation  of  an  entire  canon  of  Gregoiy  VII,-  see  Decrelum, 
Pars  I,  dist.  8i,  can.  15. 

WORKS.      VOL.  III.  Q 


But  there  are 
other  sins  be- 
sides incon- 
tinence which 
mar  the  prayers 
of  priests,  such 
as  pride, 
covetousness, 
gluttony  J 


'X!Z6 


WYC LIE'S  WORKS. 


d  simony, 
■which  is  almost 
universal. 


techen.  Coveitise  and  usure  maken  men  forsake  God  of 
treuj?e  and  ri^twisnesse,  and  worschipen  false  goddis,  as  Seynt 
Poul  sei]?.  Glotonye  and  dronkenesse  makij?  men  to  wor- 
schipen false  goddis,  and  forsake  Almy^tty  God  in  Trinyte, 
]>at  is  God  of  mesure  and  reson.  For  Poul  sei]?,  J)at  glotonys 
maken  here  stynkynge  bely  her  God.  And  ^ifte  of  Goddis 
word,  and  evyl  ensaumple  to  Cristene  men,  is  worse  })an  bodily 
synne  of  Sodom,  as  Goddis  lawe  and  Grosted  witnessen ;  as 
Goddis  word  and  mannis  soule  ben.  betre  ]?an  seed  of  mannis 
body.  And  ]?us  J)efte  and  gostly  lecherie  of  Sodom  don  curatis 
and  prestis,  whanne  \t\  techen  not  trewely  bi  word  and  goode 
ensaumple  holy  writt,  as  }»e  wise  clerk  Grosted  shewi]?.  Man- 
sleynge  is  not  only  bi  dede  of  hondis,  but  also  bi  consent 
and  counseil  and  auctorite.  And  si]?  prestis  ]?us  consenten 
to  false  werris,  and  many  j?ousand  de])is,  J?ei  ben  cursed 
manquelleris  and  irreguler,  bi  Goddis  lawe  and  mannis,  and 
reson  J?erto. 

Symonye  is  so  gret  heresie  ])at  alle  synnes  ben  countid  for 
nou^t  in  comparison  ])erof,  as  ])e  lawe  sei]? ;  insomoche  ])at  ech 
synfol  prest  may  seie  masse,  and  make  ]?e  sacrament,  |?ou5  he 
do  it  to  his  dampnynge;  outaken^  a  prest  comynge  to  J)is 
ordre  bi  symonye.  panne  sij)  no  man  come]?  to  }?is  ordre  or 
benefice  wi]?outen  symonye,  almost  man  may  drede  of  irre- 
gularite,  and  privyng  of  beneiicis,  and  lesynge  of  salaries,  and 
of  degradynge ;  and  J?at  here  preiere  is  cursed,  and  J?ei  in  weie 
of  dampnacion,  fro  ]?is  cursed  symonye.  For  whoevere  come]? 
to  presthod  or  benefice  bi  ^ifte  of  money-wor)?,  bi  preiere  or 
servyce,  come]?  in  by  symonye,  as  Seynt  Gregoir  and  ]?e  lawe 
techi]?.  And  whoevere  come]?  to  ]?is  ordre  or  benefice,  mot  bi 
mekenesse  seke  Goddis  worschipe,  and  helpe  of  Cristene  soulis, 
and  for  devocioun  to  lyve  in  holynesse  and  ^eve  good  ensample. 
But  to  lyve  in  pride  and  lustis  of  fieisch,  as  ydelnesse,  glotonye, 
dronkenesse,  and  lecherie,  comen  not  in  bi  Crist,  but  bi  ]?e 
fend;  and  [he  is^]  Goddis  traitour  and  heretik  til  he  amende 
)?is  entente,  and  do  wel  ]?is  gostly  oflSce,  as  Crist  tau^te.  And 
ful  fewe  ben  clene  to  preie  for  ]?e  peple,  for  gretnesse  of  here 


^  should  be  out- taken. 


^  his  in  X, 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


227 


owene  synnes  in  here  entre,  and  evyl  contenaunce,  and  meyn- 
tenaunce,  and  excusynge  of  here  synne,  and  oj^ere  mennis 
synne,  for  money  and  worldly  rank,  a^enst  God .  in  his  ri^tful 
dom,  and  for  hard  endurynge  in  here  synnes. 

Cap.  IV. 

But  a^enst  ]?es  lawes,  bojje  Goddis  and  mannis,  and  resoun, 
and  seyntis,  ))e  fend  techij)  his  disciplis  a  newe  glose,  to  seie 
fat  J)0U5  men  ben  not  worJ)i  to  be  herd  in  preiynge  for  here 
owene  good  lif,  ^it  here  preiere  is  herd  in  merit  of  holy  Chirche, 
for  ]?ei  ben  procuratours  of  ]?e  Chirche.  Certis  ]?is  is  a  foul 
soifyme,  a  foul  and  a  sotil  disceit  of  Anticristis  clerkis,  to 
coloure  here  synne  J^erbi.  For  ])is  glose  is  foul,  but  contrarie 
to  Goddis  wordis;  and  none  of  ]?ese  grete  holy  doctours 
knewen  ]?is  feyned  sotilte  of  wordis  til  Jje  fend  was  unbounden. 
Whi  schulde  God  here  graciously  sich  a  cursed  mannis  preiere, 
for  he  dispisi})  God  in  his  holy  servyce,  and  falsly  disceyve]? 
Cristene  men,  and  evyl  takij?  ])e  honour  of  presthed,  a^enste 
Goddis  heste  ?  For  God  comaundij?  bi  Seynt  Poul  ]?at  no  man 
take  to  hym  honor  but  he  ]?at  is  clepid  of  God,  as  Aaron.  And 
]3e  peple  gessi]?  to  fynde  a  trewe  servaunt  of  God,  and  clene 
of  lif,  and  devout,  to  helpe  hem  a3enst  here  synnis  and  com- 
braunce  of  ]>e  fend ;  and  ^if  he  be  not  sich,  he  disceyve)?  foule 
Cristene  peple.  For  God  biddij?  )?at  his  prestis  ben  holy,  for 
he  is  holy ;  and  ]jat  no  prest  havynge  notable  fil]?e  of  his  body  ^ 
schal  mynystre  in  ]?e  peple,  ]?at  is,  }>at  no  preste  havynge  fil]?e 
of  orible  synne  in  his  soule  presume  to  do  ]?e  holy  office ;  for 
5if  he  do  it  in  })is  cursed  lif  he  getij?  himself  dampnacion,  as 
Seynt  Poul  seij). 

pes  Anticristis  sophistris  schulden  knowe  wel,  J)at  a  cursed 
man  do]?  fully  ))e  sacramentis,  fou^  it  be  to  his  dampnynge,  for 
\€\  ben  not  autouris  of  ])es  sacramentis,  but  God  kepi)>  J)at 
dygnyte  to  hymself ;  but  of  preieris  is  al  J?e  contrarie,  as  ];es 
autorites  of  holy  writt  and  seyntis  bifore  seide  schewen.  For 
5if  cursed  mennis  preiere  were  J?us  herd  of  God,  whi  telli]?  not 

^  corrected;  ofhis  and  bodily,  X. 
Q  2 


According  to 
modem  so- 
phistry, the 
prayers  of 
wicked  priests 
are  heard,  not 
for  their  own 
sakes,  but  in 
virtue  of  the 
merits  of  holy 
Church. 


But  this  doc- 
trine, though 
true  of  sacra- 
ments, is  not 
true  of  prayer. 


aa8 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


The  modern 
practice  of 
intoning  or 
chanting  the 


1  Cor.  xiv.  19. 


God  ]?is  poynt  in  his  lawe  ?  but  >e  contrarie  he  telli])  opynly.  Whi 
schulde  ]?an  popis  ponische  men,  and  suspende  hem  fro  masse 
whanne  Jjci  ben  opyn  lechoris  ?  whi  schulde  God  seie  J)at  sich 
a  synful  mannis  preiere  is  abhominable,  and  )?at  God  curse]?  to 
here  blissyngis  ?  pes  weiward  ypocritis  glosen  Jjus  expresly 
a^enst  Goddis  word,  ifor  \d  dreden  laste  J^e  peple  knewe  here 
cursed  lif,  and  ))at  curse]?  here  preieris,  and  J?erfore  sette  not  bi 
hem,  and  ]?anne  here  worschipe  and  wynnynge  cessi]?,  and  ])e 
peple  wole  bisien  hem  to  lyve  wel,  and  do  almes  to  pore  nedi 
men,  as  Crist  techij?,  and  not  fynde  siche  ypocritis  J>at  ])us 
blasphemen  God. 

Wonder  it  is  whi  men  preisen  so  moche  ])is  newe  preiynge, 
bi  gret  criynge  and  hey  song,  and'  leven  stille  manere  of 
preynge,  as  Crist  and  his  apostils  diden.  It  seme]?  ])at  we 
seken  oure  owene  likynge  and  pride  in  ])is  song  more  Jjan  \q 
devocion  and  understondynge  of  ]?at  ]?at  we  syngen,  and  J?is 
is  grete  synne.  For  Austyn  sei]>  in  his  confessions.  As  oft  as 
]?e  song  deliti})  me  more  })an  ]?at  is  songen,  so  oft  I  knowleche 
J)at  I  trespasse  grevously^  perfore  sei]?  Poul,  I  have  levere 
fyve  wordis  in  my  witt  ])an  ten  ]jousand  in  tonge.  Poulis  witt 
is  in  devocion  and  trewe  undirstondynge ;  })e  tonge  is  ]?at  a 
man  undirstondi]?  not,  and  ha]?  no  devocioun.  O  Pater  Noster 
seynge  wi]?  devocion  and  goode  understondynge,  is  beter  ]?an 
many  ])Ousand  wi]?outen  devocion  and  undirstondynge.  And 
]?is  newe  preiynge  occupie]?  men  so  moche  ]?at  J?ei  han  no 
space  to  studie  holy  writt  and  teche  it.  But  Austyn  axe]?,  Who 
may  ^  excuse  him  fro  prechynge  and  sekynge  and  savynge  of 
soulis,  for  love  of  contemplacion  ?  si]?  Jesus  Crist  cam  fro 
hevene  into  ])is  wrecched  world  to  seke  soulis  and  save  hem, 
bi  opyn  ensaumple  of  holy  lif  and  trewe  prechynge.  And 
Gregory  sei]?  in  his  Pastoralis,  ]?ei  ]?at  han'^  plente  of  virtues 
and  kunnynge  of  Goddis  lawe,  and  gone  into  desert  for  reste 
of  contemplacion,  ben  gilty  of  as  many  soulis,  as  ]?ei  my^ten 

^  The  scribe  at  first  wrote  schal ;  then  added  may  in  the  margin,  for- 
getting to  diaw  his  pen  through  the  schal.  ^  corrected ;  hat,  X. 


*  S.  Aug.  Conf.  Lib.  X.  cap.  33  : 
'  Cum  mihi  accidit  ut  me  amplius 
cantus  quam  res  quae  canitur  moveat, 


poenaliter  me  peccare  confiteor,  et 
tunc  mallem  non  audire  cantantem.' 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS.  %^9 

profiten  to  in  kmmynge  to  men  dwellynge  in  }je  world.  Where 
]>is  newe  song  schal  excuse  us  fro  lemynge  and  prechynge  of 
\Q  gospel  ]?at  Crist  tau3te  and  bad?  perefore,  ^e  prestis,  lyvej) 
wel,  preiej)  devoutly,  and  techij?  \e  gospel  trewely  and  freely, 
as  Crist  and  his  apostils  diden.    Amen. 


— ^<^-«#>^^)c.~ 


230 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


XIX. 


LINCOLNIENSIS. 


Irritation  of 
the  friars  at 
being  reproved 
for  their 
misdeeds. 


[This  curious  tract  was  overlooked  by  Dr.  Shirley ;  nor  is  it  mentioned 
by  Bale  or  Leland ;  nor  do  Lewis  or  Dr.  Vaughan  appear  to  have  seen  it. 
The  only  existing  copy,  so  far  as  appears,  is  found  in  the  MS.,  Bodl.  647, 
between  the  Vita  Sacerdotum  (Shirley,  No.  53)  and  Of  the  Eucharist  (Shirley, 
No.  54).  From  this  MS.  of  course  the  text  is  transcribed.  The  occasion 
of  writing  seems  to  have  been  the  imprisonment  of  some  of  the  poor  priests, 
which  may  not  improbably  have  taken  place  under  the  letters  patent  of 
Richard  II,  granted  to  the  Archbishop  after  the  Council  of  London  in  July, 
1382.  (See  Lewis'  Life  of  WycUffe,  App.  No.  22.)  The  date  of  the  tract 
therefore  I  should  be  inclined  to  fix  somewhere  about  the  end  of  1382.  Its 
position  in  the  MS.,  between  two  tracts,  the  authenticity  of  one  of  which  is 
beyond  dispute,  while  the  other  has  at  least  the  authority  of  Bale,  not  to 
speak  of  internal  evidence,  in  its  favour,  tends  to  make  it  probable  that 
Wyclif  was  the  author ;  at  the  same  time,  it  cannot  be  denied  that  it  con- 
tains nothing  which  might  not  equally  well  have  been  written  by  one  of  his 
followers,  as  Herford,  or  Repyndon,  or  Aston.] 

Lincolniensis  generaliter  describit  sic  claustralem  egressum  de 
claustro  et  sic  fratrem ;  talis,  inquit,  est  cadaver  mortuum 
de  sepulcro  egressum,  pannis  funebribus  involutum,  a 
diaboio  inter  homines  agitatum. 

pERE  is,  he  seis,  a  deed  caryone  cropun  of  his  sepulcre, 
wrapped  wij?  clothes  of  deul,  and  dryven  wij?  ]>o  devel  for  to 
drecche  men.  Do  we  gode  whil  }>at  we  have  tyme,  for  Judas 
slepes  not  nyght  ne  day,  bot  studyes  by  alle  his  cautels  hou  Jjat 
he  may  slee  Crist  in  his  lymes.  Bot  his  malice  and  his  faderes 
is  knowen  by  his  werkes ;  al]?of  Crist  lete  horn  noye  his  ser- 
vauntis.  Bot  sith  bothe  mede  and  synne  stondes  in  wille,  men 
may  witte  by  his  werkes  whos  clerke  he  is.     Sith  Crist  and 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


i^3i 


Anticrist  contrarien  togedir,  and  freris  pursuen  moste  men  })at 
tellen  hem  hor  sothes,  ]?ei  schewen  hom  Anticrist  clerkes,  con- 
trarie  to  Crist.  For  Crist  was  more  innocent  j^en  any  freris  ben, 
and  suifred  more  reproves  of  his  gode  dedes,  and  ^itte  he  suf- 
fred  most  mekely,  and  cast  hym  not  to  vengeaunce.  If  \o  freris 
do  J)0  reverse,  \€\  are  Anticrist  clerkes ;  and  for  drede  J)at  hor 
ypocrisye  schulde  be  knowen  to  j^e  puple, — and  ypocrisie  is 
noght  but  if  hit  be  hid, — \€\  are  wode  when  Jjei  are  reproved 
oght  of  hor  vices ;  as  a  horce  unnibbed,  J>at  haves  a  sore  back, 
.wynses  when  he  is  oght  touched  or  rubbed  on  his  rugge.  And  so 
shulde  men  fubbe  oute  ]?e  defautes  of  freris,  and  thriste  oute  \o 
quyter  of  hor  olde  synnes,  for  |)us  dide  Crist  wi)>  \o  Pharisees. 

And  one  ])ing  I  telle  hom,  })at  hor  neue  ordir  dos  hom  to 
soule  heele  more  harme  ])en  gode.  For  al  \o  holynesse  J>at  \€\ 
do  to  ])e  Chirche  her  moder  myght  \€\  do  wi]?oute  suche  wed- 
dynge  to  hor  sygnes ;  ffor  so  did  Crist  and  his  apostels,  lyv- 
ynge  wi]?  ])0  puple.  And  Jierfore  fie  ypocrisye,  and  be  scolere 
of  treuthe ;  and  ouj?er  seme  ]?at  ]?ou  art,  or  be  J)at  Jjou  semes. 
Owjjer  Gods  lawe  is  fals,  or  J^e  reume  of  Englonde  schal  scharply 
be  punyschid  for  prisonynge  of  pore  prestis.  And  when  \o 
grounde  is  sought  oute,  \o  cause  of  hor  punyschynge  stondes 
in  two  poyntes ;  ou])er  J>at  Anticrist  schulde  schame  of  hor  lif, 
and  hor  wordes  contraryen  to  hym,  or  for  ]?ei  grauntid  opunly 
\o  feythe  of  ])0  gospel,  as  \€\  grucched  in  jugement^,  ]?at  \o 
bred  of  \o  auter  is  verrey  Gods  body,  as  \q  gospel  seis  and 
comyne  feithe  holdes.  And  sothly  a  Sarasene  or  a  hethen 
prelate  wolden  not  ]?us  punysche  Cristis  prests  for  grauntyng  of 
\o  gospel.  And  one  J>ing  I  sey  boldely,  certen  of  \o  gospel ; 
)?at  alle  \o  freris  of  ]>is  lond,  or  o}?er  blasphemes,  connot  dis- 
prove J)is  faythe  ]>at  we  telle. 

And  )?of  alle  Cristen  men  schulden  be  on  Cristis  side,  and 
reverse  Anticrist  wi]?  alle  his  disciphs,  nerej^oles  knyghtes 
schulde  more  scharply  stonde  in  J?is  cause,  ffor  by  titel  of  J)is 
servise  ]?ei  holden  of  Crist,  and  kepen  \o  ordire  of  knyght,  in 
more  perfeccioun  Jjen  \o  ordire  of  freris  or  of  munkes.    perfore 


*  Namely,  in  the  judgment  passed 
by  the  Council  of  London  in  1382 


against  Wyclif;  which  related  chiefly 
to  his  opinions  on  the  Eucharist. 


They  have  got 
the  poor  priests 
imprisoned 
because  their 
pure  lives  and 
sounder  faith 
about  the 
Eucharist  put 
them  to  shame- 


Knights  and 
other  powerful 
laymen  ought 
to  see  that 
they  are 
released. 


33  i 


WrCLIF'S  WORKS. 


Jonah  L  2. 


)>o  gospel  approves  hit  by  Seynt  Jon  Baptist.  And  suche  a 
covent  of  freris,  or  of  munkes  oujjer,  was  never  in  Cristendome 
as  Mauris  *  and  his  felowes ;  and  hit  is  likely  ])at  al  )?is  private 
religioun  makes  not  suche  a  legioun  of  seyntis  in  heven.  On 
]?is  schulde  knyghtes  J>enke,  and  do  servise  to  Crist,  for  J?ere  are 
none  feller  fendes  ])en  are  wickkid  prestis,  as  schewes  Cay- 
phas  and  Scaryot,  and  mony  soche  o]?er.  AUe  Cristen  men 
schulden  ]?enke  on  J>is  faythe  of  ))e  gospel,  hou  Crist  schal  cum 
at  ]?e  day  of  dome,  and  reprove  dampned  men  for  hor  un^ 
kyndenesse,  and  when  he  was  in  prison  fei  visited  hym  not. 
Gedir  we  oure  wittes,  and  knowe  we  wisely  ]?at  hit  is  more  [to]  ^ 
assent  to  unskilful  prisonynge,  fen  for  to  absent  ns  fro  visitynge 
of  prisouns.  And  one  )?ing  is  knowun  in  Cristen  mennis  byleve, 
]?at  whoso  wi]?drawes  his  helpe  fro  cause  of  Crist,  he  consentis 
to  ]>o  synne  fat  he  schulde  destrye.  And  so  everiche  Englische 
mon  fat  helpes  not  soche  persouns  is  reproved  of  Crist  as  a  fals 
servaunt.  Somme  schulden  helpe  by  preyer,  and  somme  by 
gode  speche,  somme  by  worldly  pouste,  and  somme  by 
gode  lyve.  And  trowe  not  fat  wikkednesse  of  freris  or  igno- 
raunce  of  prestis  excuses  not  seculer  lordes  to  autorise  hor 
dedes.  As  knyghtes  and  alle  Cristen  men  schal  be  dampned 
of  God  bot  if  f ei  do  servise  fat  f ei  owe  to  hym,  so  prestes  are 
dampnable,  fat  God  schewes  periles  by  whom  he  wil  punysche 
f o  puple,  for  hydynge  of  hom,  as  f  o  prophete  seis.  And  f is 
worlde  neded  prophetis  to  speke  and  drede  no  mon.     Amen. 

^  supplied  conjecturally.' 


.  a  St.  Maur,  or  Maunis,  according 
to  the  account  given  of  him  by 
Gregory  the  Great  in  his  Dialogues, 
was  the  son  of  a  nobleman,  by  whom 
he  was  brought,  when  only  twelve 
years  old,  to  Subiaco,  and  placed 
under  the  care  of  St.  Benedict. 
Though  the  founder  of  a  flourishing 
branch  of  the  Benedictine  order,  he 
nev-er  was  more    than   a    deacon. 


Does  the  writer  mean  to  say  that 
St.  Maur  preserved,  after  he  joined 
St.  Benedict,  his  secular  rank  and 
status  as  a  nobleman?  or  merely 
that  he  and  his  fellows  as  they  were 
the  first  monks  in  the  West,  so  had 
never  been  equalled  since?  There 
is  another  reference  to  St.  Maurus 
in  the  tract  De  Scbismate. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


233 


XX. 


VITA   SACERDOTUM. 


[Bale  names  this  tract  under  tlie  title  *  De  Vita  Sacerdotum ; '  but  in  the 
only  MS.  known  to  exist  it  is  headed  *Vita  Sacerdotum.'  The  MS.  in 
question  is  Bodl.  647.  The  manner  in  which  the  Council  of  London  is 
referred  to  at  the  opening  of  the  tract  seems  to  show  that  it  was  written 
within  a  few  months  after  that  event;  that  is,  in  1382,  or  early  in  1383. 
.  Although  Wyclif  was  at  this  time  disabled  by  paralysis  from  active  par- 
ticipation in  the  movement  which  the  Council  was  designed  to  repress, 
there  is  no  reason  why  we  should  not  believe  him  to  have  sent,  as  in  this 
tract,  from  his  retirement  at  Lutterworth,  words  of  encouragement  and 
counsel  to  the  partisans  of  reform.  The  aim  of  the  treatise  is  to  advocate 
the  gradual  resumption  of  all  lands  and  temporal  dignities  held  by  the 
clergy,  and  their  restoration  to  the  state  of  poverty  taught  and  practised  by 
Christ  and  his  apostles.  It  is  in  fact  a  re-assertion,  more  or  less,  of  six  out 
of  the  fourteen  conclusions  condemned  as  erroneous  by  the  Council  of 
London.  ] 

Gap.  I. 

po  peril  of  freris  is  J)0  laste  of  eght,  \2X  falles  to  men  in  J?is 
waye,  as  Seynt  Poule  telles;  and  Austyne  nootis  ]?is  is  \o 
moste.  And,  for  dede  doynge  shewes  more  )jo  sothe,  telle  we 
how  freris  2-  desseyved  late  oure  rewme  at  Londen,  in  J?o 
counseile ;  Jjei  wolde  disseyve  oure  bischopis,  and  so  lordis  and 
comynes  J?at  dwellen  in  J;is  rewme.  pei  seide  as  byleve  )?at  })is 
-is  an  heresye  to  sey,  |)at  men  of  })0  Chirche  have  temporal  pos- 


»  A  sort  of  pious  pun  is  here 
essayed,  founded  on  the  identity  of 
meaning  existing  between  the  word 
*  freris,'  etymologically   taken,   and 


the  *  false  brethren*  named  by  St. 
Paul  as  the  last  of  the  eight  *  perils  * 
through  which  he  had  past. 


2  Cor.  XL  26. 
The  friars,  at 
the  late  Council 
of  London, 
defended  the 
temporal  en- 
dowment of 
the  Church ; 


334 


WrCLIF'S  WORKS. 


but  the  witness 
of  Scripture  is 
against  it. 


Deut.  xviii.  i. 
God  also  com- 
manded man 
to  work  even 
in  Paradise ; 
but  the  friars 
disobey  this 
command. 


sessiouns  is  ageyns  Holy  writte,  whosoever  afFermes  hit.  Sup- 
pose we  Jjese  sophistris  desseyven  not  \o  puple  by  hor  fals 
wordes,  bot  speke  we  to  Jjo  purpose.  Wil  we  woot  J^at  prestis 
in  j?o  olde  lawe  had  housyng  and  dwellynge  and  mony  o}>er 
godes,  bothe  mebles  and  unmebles,  as  Gods  lawe  lymytes ;  as 
freris  have  nowe  places  and  rentes  and  myche  worldly  gode 
geten  of  \o  puple.  Bot  if  J)ese  freris  schulden  speke  to  \o 
purpose  and  plesynge  of  bischops,  ]?ei  schulden  meene  ])us ; — 
]?at  ]?is  dowyng  of  ]?o  Chirche  in  temporale  lordschippe  stondis 
in  Gods  lawe  and  meryt  of  J)0  Chirche ;  for  if  hit  quenchid  or 
forbid  meryt,  hit  were  a  grett  harme,  and  reversid  Gods  lawe, 
in  which  is  al  treu]?e. 

Nowe  se  we  first  wittenesse  of  \o  olde  lawe,  when  prestis 
schulde  sonneste  ))us  have  worldes  godes.  po  first  boke  of 
holy  writte  spekes  even  ]?us : — God  seide  to  Aaron  and  prestes 
of  his  sorte.  In  \o  londe  J^at  5e  dwelle  inne  schal  ^e  no^t  have, 
ne  5e  schal  have  no  part  of  hor  heritage,  for  God  is  part  and 
heritage  of  alle  his  prestes.  Bot  Levy  childer  gaf  I  alle  \o 
tythes  ]?at  comen  of  Israel  to  her  owne  possessioun,  for  hor 
bisye  servise  J?at  ]?ei  served  me  in  \o  tabernacle,  as  I  ordeyned 
horn.  Lord!  if  prestis  by  a  worde  of  God  taken  gredily  hor 
tythes,  why  schulde  ]?ei  not,  by  anoj^er  worde  of  God,  kepe  horn 
fro  J)0  lordschippe  ? 

Also,  in  }?o  fyfFt  boke  ))at  is  of  Gods  lawe,  biddes  God  Jjus  to 
his  owne  prestes,— No wjjer  prestes,  ne  dekens,  ne*none  of  hor 
kyn,  schal  haf  part  ne  heritage  wi]>  o]?er  folke  of  Israel,  for 
sacrifices  and  offrynges  I  gif  horn  to  eete,  and  none  o]?er  )?ing 
schal  J)ese  prestes  take  of  possessiouns  of  hor  bre])ren,  as  I  my- 
self bidde ;  ffor  I  myself  haf  gyven  me  to  be  hor  heritage.  O  if 
God  so  scharply  biddes  J?ese  negatifes,  and  Crist  hymself  kept 
horn  straytely  in  his  persoun,  who  are  more  heretikes  ]?en  Jjese 
Jjat  done  hit  ageynes  hym  ? 

Also  \o  prophete  Ezechiel  biddes  Jjus  in  Gods  persoun, — 
pere  schal  be  none  heritage  gyven  unto  prestes,  for  I  am  hor 
heritage,  better  ]?en  al  erthe ;  and  no  possessioun  ^e  schal  ^if 
hom,  ffor  I  am  possessioun  to  alle  my  prestis.  Ffor  sacrifices 
for  synnes,  and  vowes  ]?at  men  byheten,  and  J)0  first  of  bestis, 
wij?  offrynges  of  oyle,  schal  falle  to  prestis,  as  God  hymself 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


^35 


biddes.  O  Lord !  if  prestis  of  }>o  Testament  were  so  straytely 
bounden  by  ]?o  biddynge  of  God  to  holde  horn  to  hor  scharpe 
part,  when  richesse  was  ])us  leveful,  how  myche  more  schulde 
we  kepe  ])is  nowe,  when  Crist,  God  and  mon,  lyved  so  porely ! 
Here  may  we  se  how  fese  fals  fireris  loken  ofer  Gods  lawe,  as 
scribes  and  Pharisees. 

Also  God  in  state  of  innocence  putte  [mon]  ^  in  Paradise 
for  to  werke  J?erinne,  and  also  for  to  kepe  hit ;  hou  schulde 
he  make  prestis  lordes  nowe,  ageyns  his  owne  brdynaunce? 
Bot  servise  ]>at  God  had  or  hafs  lymitid  to  prestes  wil  fynde 
hom  at  fo  fulle,  ]>of  ]?ei  ben  no  lordes.  Bot  hit  semes  to  mony 
men  j>at  freris  passen  J?is  state,  and  jjat  J)0  fadir  of  leesynges 
haves  putte  hom  in  rewmes  to  be  ydel,  and  to  begge,  and  to 
waste  rewmes.  O  Lord !  si}>  God  putte  mon  to  wirke  in  state 
of  innocense,  why  schulde  he  not  so  nowe  ?  Wil  I  wot  J?at  J)0 
Psalme  seis  of  fendis  childer.  In  mennis  travel  hen  pei  not ^  and 
herfore  are  peiproude.  Also  in  iche  lawe  is  ydelnesse  forfendid, 
and  no  state  of  monnis  lif,  ungroundid  in  resoun,  schulde  be 
taken  of  ony  mon,  for  drede  of  J?o  fende,  bot  if  hit  be  fully 
groundid  in  servise  of  God.  But  sith  bisynes  of  beggynge  may 
not  be  groundid  in  ]?o  lawe  of  God,  how  schulde  hit  j?en  grounfle 
freris  ?  And  so  fyve  barly  lofes  of  scharpe  barly  bred  schulde 
teche  ]?ese  freris  what  Jjei  schulden  trowe,  and  not  dampne  as 
heretikes  men  for  Gods  lawe. 

Cap.  IL 

For  Crist  made  two  festis,  and  fed  {»o  comyn  puple ;  and  at  \o 
seconde  feste  were  ]?o  seven  lofes ;  Jjerfore  by  seven  wittenesses 
of  J)0  newe  lawe  techen  we  Jjat  prestes  schulde  not  J)us  spoyle 
\o  puple.  Ffirst  Crist  seis  by  Seynt  Luke,  J)at  everiche  preste 
J>at  renounses  not  alle  j?inge  of  whiche  he  haves  possessioun, 
may  not  be  his  disciple,  ne  so  nyghe  sue  hym.  And  how  God 
undirstondes  ]?is  renunsynge,  teches  he  by  lif  of  Crist  and  of  his 
aposths.  Lord  1  sij?  Crist  seis  Jjat  men  of  \o  worlde  may  not 
be  his  disciplis,  whefer  J?is  be  nowe  fals  ?     Also,  Crist  teches 

^  supplied  conjecturally. 


Ps,  IxxUi.  5. 6. 


Christ  ordered 
his  disciples  to 
renounce  all 
property, 


n^ 


and  distinctly 
separated  his 
kingdom  from 
the  kingdoms 
of  the  -world. 


X  Pet,  V.  3. 


2  Cor.  viii.  9. 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 

])at  no  disciple  schulde  be  above  his  mayster,  bot  hit  suffices  to 
])0  disciple  to  be  suche  as  his  mayster.  Bot  Crist,  mayster  of 
alle,  was  so  pore  a  mon  J?at  he  had  not  by  monhede,  ne  titel  of 
mon,  so  myche  of  worldes  richesse  to  hil  his  hed  inne.  Lord ! 
whe]?er  clerkes  suen  Crist  in  his  large  lordschipps  I 

Also,  when  \o  apostils  stroffe  whiche  schulde  seme  more,^ 
Crist  of  his  grett  wisedome  declarid  })is  doute,  and  seide  )?ere 
ben  two  lordschippes,  worldly  and  gostily.  pe  first  falles  to 
kynges  and  lordes  of  ]jis  worlde,  and  no  wey  to  prestis,  ]?at  are 
on  Cristis  syde ;  bot  he  is  more  amonge  horn,  J)at  more  mekely 
serves.  Lord!  whe]?er  \o  emperoure  by  his  grett  wisedome 
haves  reversed  |?o  ordynaunce  of  Crist,  whiche  J?at  Crist  hymself 
made !  Also  ]?o  gospel  of  Seynt  Poule  apostil,  ]?at  was  ravisched 
to  ]?o  ]?ridde  heven,  and  sawe  Gods  privetees,  gifs  beste  prestes 
for  a  reule  for  to  Hf  fus.  Have  we,  he  seis,  norischment  to 
body,  and  hillynge  to  ]?o  same,  holde  we  us  ])erof  payed.  Lord ! 
whel?er  prestes  of  ]?is  world  passen  ])is  reule!  Also,  Seynt 
Petre,  prince  of  apostHs,  biddes  fat  we  be  not  lordes  amonge 
clerkes,  ne  myche  more  J)at  we  lif  as  lordes  of  Jjis  worlde;  bot 
we  schal  be  fourme  of  mekenesse  to  oure  flock.  Also,  Seynt 
Poule  seis,  ])at  Crist  was  for  oure  leef  bo]?e  pore  and  nedy  mon, 
to  make  us  gostily  riche.  Bot  everiche  mon  \2X  schal  be  saved 
most  sue  Crist  in  maners.  Lord  !  how  kepe  J)ese  freris  ]jis,  J?at 
study  en  to  be  riche.?  Si]?  evereiche  seculer  lord  schulde  be 
pore  in  soule,  who  ^ifs  j^ese  prestes  leve  to  be  ]?us  riche  in  wille  ? 
Also,  alle  ]?o  apostils  seide  togedir,  \2X  hit  was  not  leveful  to 
hem  to  leve  Gods  wordes,  and  serve  pore  men  at  fe  meete  by 
way  of  bodily  almes ;  myche  more  hit  were  unleveful  to  prestes 
to  wlappe  hem  bisily  in  nedes  of  J?is  worlde.  Bot  so  done  ]?ese 
hye  prestes,  and  ojjer  ]?at  have  )?is  state.  Lord!  what  nede 
were  j^ese  freris  to  dampne  men  as  heretikes,  Jjat  seyn  ]?at  Gods 
lawe  forbedes  prestis  J?us  to  be  lordes  ?  Somme  men  seyn  Jiat 
pouder  of  temporale  godes  makes  }?ese  freris  to  owverloke  l?o 
lawe  of  hor  God,  as  dogge  lokes  ofer  towarde  Lincolne,  and 
litel  sees  ]?eroff  ». 

^  A  Lincolnshire  proverb,  I  suppose. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS, 


^37 


Cap.  hi. 

pis  schulde  be  myn  obedyence;  counseile  l^ese  bischopes  ]>at 
\€\  trowed  not  to  J?es  fals  Anticrist  clerkes  a,  for  j?ei  desseyve 
homself,  and  oj^er  \2X  delen  wij>  horn.  Bot  as  hor  ordir  hafs  no 
grounde  to  be  of  Cristis  Chirche,  so  hor  wordes  haf  no  grounde 
stable  in  treuthe.  pat  may  men  see  by  heresye  of  freris  Jjat 
pei  sowen  in  \o  Chirche,  of  J>o  sacred  ooste. 

Bot  here  Jjei  reply  lewedly  ageyns  men  of  treuthe,  and  seyn, 
by  })is  resoun  devocioun  of  lordes  schulde  be  quenchid,  and  hor 
elders  wante  gostily  helpe.  Bot  jjese  freris  schulden  knowe, 
J)at  hit  is  non  almes  to  reverse  Cristis  ordynaunce,  and  to  harme 
his  Chirche;  bot  by  ])is  foule  dowynge  are  algatis  harmed 
clerkes  and  lordes  and  comynes  wi])aL  Clerkes  ben  apostatas, 
and  breken  Cristis  ordir;  lordis  be  poorid  or  made  pore,  and 
nedid  mony  gatis  to  werre,  and  to  begge,  and  spoyle  hor  owne 
pore  tenauntes;  and  so  comynes  be  charged  more  ])en  \€\ 
schulde.  And  so  synful  erroure  of  devocioun  of  lordes  schulde 
be  quenchid,  and  Jjo  lawe  of  Crist  schulde  be  reysid.  And  if 
anyjjing  schulde  helpe  lordes  elders,  Jjat  schulde  be  quenchynge 
of  erroures  f>at  hor  eldres  founde ;  as  no  mon  of  witte  wil  sey 
])at  contynuaunce  of  a  synful  dede  is  medeful  to  deede  men ; 
as  no  mon  wil  sey,  J)at  hit  were  medeful  to  breke  Cristis 
ordynaunce,  and  putte  j?erfore  an  yvel ;  as  no  mon  ^il  sey  \2X 
ignoraunce  of  lordes,  Jjat  wenen  ))at  ]?ei  done  wil,  schulde  in  ]?is 
excuse  horn ;  sij?  Poule  by  more  coloure  schulde  be  excused,  and 
neverjjeles  hymself  seis  J)at  he  synned  gretly  ageyns  Crist  and 
his  Chirche,  and  was  a  foule  blasfeme.  We  schal  trowe  in  J?is 
to  ]?o  ordynaunce  of  Crist ;  for  he  was  al  myghty,  al  witty,  and 
wilful ;  and  so  J?es  founed  lordes  are  like  to  a  leche  fat  gyves 
a  mon  in  fevers  wyne,  ageyns  his  heele.  And  so  reysinge  up  of 
ordynaunce  of  Crist  schulde  profite  generaly  to  queke  and  to 
dede. 


a  This  may  perhaps  refer,  amongst 
other  attacks  and  replies,  to  the 
public  '  determination '  made  at  Ox- 
ford by  Friar  Wodeford,  as  he  him- 
self informs  us  (Brown's  Fascicidns, 
p.  218),  against  Wyclif's  treatise 
De  Religione.     This  Wodeford  was 


afterwards  commissioned  by  Arch- 
bishop Arundel  to  prepare  a  con- 
futation of  eighteen  condemned  pro- 
positions of  Wyclif's ;  this  work  he 
executed  in  the  compass  of  a  rather 
bulky  treatise,  which  he  dedicated 
to  the  Archbishop. 


The  bishops 
should  be 
warned  not  to 
hearken  to  the 
emissaries  of 
Antichrist. 


Reply  to  the 
objection  that, 
but  for  endow- 
ment, departed 
souls  would 
often  be  de- 
prived of 
ghostly  help. 


238 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


Reply  to  the 
objection  that 
saints  have 
sanctioned  the 
use  of  endow- 
ments. 


A  new  objec- 
tion ;  that  alms 
left  to  the 
Church  are  put 
to  better  use 
than  if  the 
same  property 
had  remained 
in  the  hands  of 
its  owners. 


And  )?us  byhoves  iche  mon  sey  ]?at  he  holdes  wi})  Crist,  as 
freris  wil  confesse  ]>at  hit  were  non  almes  to  dowe  horn  as 
monkes,  and  charge  horn  wij>  mukke.  Lord  I  hou  were  hit 
almes  to  destrye  Cristis  ordynaunce,  better  ]>en  reule  of  freris, 
in  his  speciale  prestis?  And  so  ]?ese  blynde  bosardes  spekin 
ageynes  homself,  and  ageyns  bischopes  and  seculer  lordes,  and 
ageyns  comyns,  and  al  holy  Chirche.  Who  schulde  Jjonke  J)ese 
fendes  for  suche  procurynge?  And  if  ])0u  sey  ]>at  \o  fende 
lufs  lastynge  in  synne,  and  boostynge  of  erroures  ]?at  elders 
have  done,  ]?is  schulde  move  ])e  for  to  reverse  ]?o  fende,  and 
trowe  not  unto  freris,  bot  stonde  on  Cristis  ordynaunce. 

Cap.  IV. 

Bot  ^itte  Belial  brolles  blabur  for  his  syde,  and  seyn  J)at  mony 
seyntis  have  suffred  and  approved  suche  dowynge  of  ]?e 
Chirche  and  worschipful  dedes;  hou  comes  \o  witte  in  ]?at 
disproves  horn?  Here  we  answere  to  )?o  freris,  certeyne  of 
oure  faythe,  ]?at  no  custome  in  \o  Chirche,  confermed  of  popes, 
ne  done  bi  hor  seyntis,  is  for  to  preyse,  bot  in  als  myche  as 
Jesus  Crist  confermes  hit.  Bot  si]?  Crist  spake  nevere  ageyns 
hymself,  and  he  ordeyned  and  bad  his  prestes  to  lif  ]?us,  al 
speche  of  men  Jjat  seyn  jje  contrarye  is  schewid  opun  folye  by 
autorite  of  hym.  And  so  Jjese  seyntis  ]?at  \ti  alleggen  synned 
ful  feele  sijje ;  and  no  mon  schulde  in  ])is  sue  horn  in  lyvynge, 
bot  onely  in  als  myche  as  Jjei  sued  Crist.  Bot  teche  men  ))at 
}>ese  seyntis  in  })is  sued  [not]  ^  Crist,  bot  rather  diden  ageyns 
Crist,  and  synned  grevousely ;  but  ]?ou  may  suppose  forgy ve- 
nesse  of  ])is  synne  by  hor  gret  contricioun,  if  })at  ])e  like. 

Bot  ^itte  ]>ese  fals  freris  replyen  for  hor  partye,  and  seyn  Jjat 
clerkes  done  almes  better  J^en  hor  patrouns  wolde  evere  have 
done,  or  couthe,  or  myght ;  and  wi])  al  J)is  J)ei  may  lif  pore  lyve 
as  beggers.  Who  wolde  not  preyse  horn  for  hor  gret  charite, 
\2l  Jjei  discharge  ))us  lordes,  and  take  on  horn  suche  bisynes  ? 
And  suche  solempne  servise  as  comes  of  suche  dowynge  may 
do  myche  gode,  bot  harme  may  hit  none  do.  Bot  ypocrites 
speken  here  as  God  were  on  slepe ;  J)ei  )?enken  not  on  ])0  lawes 

^  supplied  conjecturally. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


^39 


Jjat  God  hymself  gaf.  Ffirst  ]?ei  take  fals,  and  J?erof  fei  grounde 
horn  a  ffor  almes  askes  ordir  J>at  Jesus  Crist  ordeyned.  He 
ordeyned  not  to  do  suche  almes,  but  to  do  gostily  almes,  and 
take  suche  of  ]>o  puple.  Bot  as  freris  wolde  tourne  lordschippe 
fro  seculer  lordes,  so  ]>ei  wolde  tourne  sustynaunce  fro  curatis 
]>at  Crist  ordeyned.  Ffor  as  horn  fayles  groimdynge  of  hor 
fals  sectis,  so  wolde  J)ei  reverse  Jjo  ordynaunce  of  Crist,  po 
apostlis  Jjat  weren  tau^t  by  Crist,  seide  hit  was  not  gode  to  leve 
hor  prechynge  and  hor  first  lyve,  for  servise  to  lordes;  and 
myche  more  schulden  pre.stes  sey  so  of  seculer  lordschippe. 

As  to  )?o  secounde  worde,  ])at  prestes  may  J)us  lyve,  ]?is  worde 
is  fer  fro  J>is  ]?at  prestis  lyven  as  fei  schulde.. .  Ffor  what  mon 
]>at  haves  J)us  godes  and  lordschippe  of  J)is  worlde,  ]?at  he  ne 
haves  his  hert  tourned  to  pride,  and  sumdele  fro  God  and 
occupynge  of  his  soule ;  and  schal  lette  him  fro  prestes  werkes  ? 
He  is  a  gret  fole  ])at  ])us  temptis  God,  and  puttis  hym  to  suche 
perel  ageyns  Cristis  biddynge.  And  so  God  dispreyses  horn  for 
]>is  gret  folye,  as  he  dispreyses  freris,  al  Jjof  ]?ei  helpen  J?o 
worlde  for  to  brynge  forth  childer  on  oj^er  mennis  wyfes,  to 
make  hor  owne  childer  aftirwarde  soche  freris.  And  so  Jjese 
freris  knytten  hor  tale  wi]>  an  opun  falsehed,  )>at  suche  worldly 
glory  may  do  no  harme  in  prestes.  Lord!  if  seculer  lordes 
wolden  J?enke  hou  God  haves  putte  hem  to  grete  worschipp  of 
J)is  worlde,  in  state  of  his  Chirche,  to  stande  for  his  ordynaunce 
ageyne  Anticrist  clerkes,  and  aske  of  )?ese  freris  grounde  of  hor 
ordires,— sij?  ]>ei  sey  ]?ei  connot  se  J>at  ne  prestes  schulde  be 
lordes,  and  myche  more  J?at  ne  ]?ei  schulden  feght  and  haf  sum- 
tyme  wyfes,  for  so  hadden  prestis  in  ]?o  Olde  Testament !  On 
J?is  wyse  J?ese  newe  ordiris  marren  ]>o  puple,  as  if  ]>ei  wolde 
tourne  upsodoune  al  Cristis  ordynaunce.  Bot  certis  ]>ei  ben 
bot  bastarde  braunches,  cropun  in  by  ]>o  fende ;  and  rekelesse- 
hed  of  lordes  and  folye  of  clerkes  schulden  be  cause,  if  ))ese 
freris  springen  on  heght. 


a  The  meaning  is, — they  intei*pret 
Scripture  falsely,  in  that  they  ground 
their  own  practices  concerning  the 


receiving  of  alms  on  the  command- 
ment of  Christ. 


240 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


Lords  and 
great  men 
should  not 
shrink  from 
the  duty  of 
reforming-  the 
Church. 


The  reforming 
party  should 
preach  three 
points : 


I.  the  sinfulness 
of  the  assump- 
tion by  the 
clergy  of 
temporal 
power. 


Cap.  V. 

Lord !  sil>  hit  is  Gods  lawe  ]?at  prestes  schulde  lif  ))us,  and 
jjei  schulde  be  meenes  bitwix  God  and  \o  puple,  what  wondir 
is  hit  of  werres  and  wikkednes  of  \o  worlde  ?  Ffor  alle  men 
])at  schulde  stonde  for  Gods  lawe,  and  lyven  as  tyrauntis  for  to 
mayntene  hit,  synnen  ugly  in  ]?is  ageyns  hor  God.  Ow !  sij)  in 
monnis  cause  men  travel  so  bisilye,  and  )?o  cause  of  God 
schulden  Cristen  men  luf  more,  what  blyndenesse  lettes  men  to 
helpe  Gods  cause?  Ffor  blynde  devocioun  schulde  noJ?ing 
lette,  as  hit  is  seid  bifore ;  si]?  Crist  teches  us  treu))e ;  ne  olde- 
nesse,  ne  drede  of  movynge  of  rewmes,  schulde  lette  }?es  lordes 
to  stonde  in  cause,  si]>  ])ei  dar  go  in  werres  J)at  ben  more 
perilouse,  and  Gods  helpe  wil  ferre,  and  hor  mede  is  lesse. 
And  so  fo  fende  and  his  childer  haf  cowarded  lordes.  Bot  sith 
men  schulde  counseil  to  pees,  as  Crist  did,  hit  semes  J)at  by  his 
weye  men  schulde  stable  pees.  And  her  fore  spekes  a  clerke 
l)us  in  J)is  matir ;  ])at  kynges  and  lordes  myght  esily  do  fis  wi)?- 
outen  gret  coste  or  travel  of  hor  body,  )?at  ]jei  conferme  not 
))ese  erroures  J?at  hor  elders  did ;  and  sone  ]?o  ordynaunce  of 
Crist  schulde  tourne  ageyne. 

Ow  I  whate  confessoures  have  lordes  ]jat  tellen  hom  not  ]?is 
perel ;  bot  seyn  hom  ]?at  devocioun  and  right  of  \o  lawe  schulde 
nede  hom  to  conferme  olde  done  errours !  Hit  is  no  drede, 
whoevere  teches  ]?is  lore  of  |?o  fend,  he  is  an  opun  heretike  and 
Anticrist  clerke.  O  sith  oure  bileve  teches  us,  kynge  of  Eng- 
londe  haves  ofte  in  his  honde,  and  oute  of  J^e  deede  honde,  jjo 
lordschippe  of  Anticrist,  what  moves  hym  so  folily  to  ^if  hit 
ageyne?  Freris  and  prestis  schulden  preche  ]?re  poyntes. 
Ffirst,  ]>at  j)es  prestes  schulde  not  be  soche  lordes;  nowj^er 
bischopes,  ne  religiouse,  ne  none  o]?er  prestes ;  and  ow)?er  Gods 
lawe  is  fals,  or  ))is  is  Gods  wille.  A^rwarde,  Jjei  schulde  teche 
])at  whosoevere  approves  )>is,  confermes  hit,  or  streynes  hit,  he 
synnes  ageyns  God;  for  he  mayntenes  erroures  ageyns  Gods 
ordynaunce.  And  so  at  \o  laste  schulde  men  sey  opunly,  hou 
lordes  schulde  gete  by  processe  of  tyme  hor  owne  lordschippe 
oute  of  J?o  fendes  hondes.  And  right  as  fendes  gate  hit  by  sotil 
ypocrisye,  not  sodeynly  bot  by  processe  of  tyme^  so  schulde 

WYCLIF. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


!Z4i 


men  sowcandely  wynne  hit  ageyne.  And  ]?en  were  ]>o  puple  on 
Gods  halve  discharged  of  noumbre  and  maners  of  prestis  and 
freris.  Ffor  a  fewe  prestes  ])at  helde  Gods  lawe  wolden  more 
profite  to  rewmes  })en  nowe  done  many.  And  ]?us  myght  lordes 
be  lordes  in  quyete,  and  ]?o  puple  taught  clene  Gods  lawe,  and 
not  be  J)us  taxed  for  defaute  of  godes,  j?at  are  nowe  occupyed  by 
]jese  newe  ordires.  In  ]?is  myght  men  se  trewe  clerkes  to  God, 
and  profitable  to  rewmes  by  iche  part  of  hom.  pen  schulden 
Caymes  castels  of  ]?o  newe  ordires  be  voydid  fro  fendes,  as  Crist 
taught  in  dede ;  and  Jjen  schulde  temporal  godes  multiplye  in 
rewmes  as  J^ei  first  did,  to  worschippe  of  God.    Amen. 


— «>:<->:<^>»»»~ 


2.  the  error  of 
those  who 
support  them 
in  so  doing. 


3,  the  duty  and 
expediency  of 
a  general  but 
gradual  re- 
sumption by 
the  laity  of 
lands  held  in 
mortmain. 


WOEKS.      VOL.    III. 


342 


WFCMF'S  WORKS. 


On  the  causes 
which  have  led 
to  the  present 
schism  in  the 
papacy. 


XXL 

DE   PONTIFICUM   ROMANORUM 
SCHISMATE. 


[Bale  enumerates  among  the  writings  of  the  reformer  De  Papa  Romano, 
inc.  '  pro  eo  quod  haec  insolita  dissensio,'  and  also  De  Fontificum  Roma- 
norum  scblsmate,  inc.  '  ob  inauditas  lites  inter  hos  duos.*  These  appear  to 
be  two  different  names  for  the  following  treatise.  The  De  Dissemione 
Paparum  of  the  Vienna  catalogues  seems  to  be  a  different  treatise,  being 
very  much  shorter  than  this;  (see  Shirley's  Catalogue,. pages  25  and  60.) 
The  date  of  composition  may  be  fixed  in  the  last  months  of  1382,  when  the 
southern  and  eastern  counties  were  resounding  with  the  din  of  preparation 
for  the  richly  indulgenced  expedition  to  Flanders,  under  the  leadership  of 
Bishop  Spencer;  (see  note  at  p.  246.)  The  only  MS.  known  to  exist  is 
that  in  Trinity  College,  Dublin,  C.  III.  12— AA  in  this  edition— from 
which  a  careful  transcript  has  been  made  for  the  Delegates  by  Mr.  T. 
French.] 


For  J?is  unkouj^e  discencioun  ]?at  is  bitwixe  ])es  popes  seme]> 
to  signyfie  Jje  perillous  tyme  ]?at  Poul  sei]?  schulde  come  in  ]?es 
laste  dayes,  herfore  schulde  true  men  declare  J?is  to  J>e  peple ; 
ffor  knowynge  of  perels  makij?  men  warlyer  to  flee  hem.  And 
firste  it  seme]?,  Jjat  discencioun  of  ]?is  popehede  is  for  covetise 
of  worschipe  and  wynnynge  of  ]?is  world,  ])at  bi  cautele  of  \q 
fende  is  knytted  to  )?is  office.  Ffor  ^if  j?e  pope  hold  clenly  \dX 
)?at  Crist  ^af  to  Petir,  he  schulde  have  goodis  of  vertues,  and 
traveylle  wi})  povert,  and  noon  of  Jjis  worldlyche  glorie,  sijje  ]>at 
Crist  forbeed  it.  But  who  woide  Jeanne  stryve  })us  ffor  ]>q  popis 
office  ?  And  so  it  were  a  medicyne,  )?at  men  J)at  han  power 
drow  awey  ]?es  bronndes  ])at  norische])  ]?is  fire.  And  so  em- 
perour  and  kyngis,  ])at  synneden  in  ]?is  dowynge,  schulde 
restore  to  seculer  men  ])at  Jjei  bi  foly  alyende ;  ne  ]?e  graunt 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


M3 


was  noii^t  leeful  on  nei])er  on  nor  ])e  ojjer  partye,  si{)))e  hem 
wanted  leeve  of  God  J?e  cheif  Lord,  and  bi  title  of  J?is  office  j?ei 
holden.  And  ^if  ])is  matier  of  stryfe  were  jjus  take  fro  clerkis, 
bo]?e  among  hem  and  seculeris  schulde  be  pees  and  charite. 
And  it  seme]?  J>at  ]?at  man,  be  he  pope  or  ojjere,  ])at  wolde  no3t 
assente  to  )>is  chaunge,  hatij)  Goddis  lawe ;  iFor  alle  worldly 
goodis  ben  nou^t  so  goode  as  charite.  And  God  himsilf  for- 
bedi]?  such  lordschipe  in  clerkis ;  and  so,  ^if  men  wolde  bygynne 
to  distroye  J?is  foul  strijfe,  ]?ei  schulde  mayntene  Goddis  ordey- 
naunce ;  and  Jeanne  were  it  doun.  And  so,  what  clerk  or 
seculer  wolde  no3t  fayn  do  ]?us,  he  is  nou^t  in  Goddis  half,  but 
servaunt  to  ]?e  devyl.  And  so  of  Jjis  it  semej>,  ]?at  what  per- 
soone  or  comunte  traveylle  to  restore  ]?e  pope  to  ]?is  worldly 
dignite,  traveylli]?  a^ens  Crist  in  cause  of  J?e  fende.  Ffor  Crist 
in  his  owne  lawe  forbedi]?  his  prestis  suche  lordschipe,  and 
fleede  it  in  his  owne  persoone,  and  ]?is  kepte  his  apostoHs. 
And  of  J}is  it  semej?  \2X  Crist  grauntide  never  assoylynge  of 
synne  and  peyne  for  to  do  J)is  dede,  sij?}>e  it  were  a^ens  his 
lawe,  his  wiUe,  and  his  ordeynaunce;  but  mede  ])at  God 
graunti]?  to  men  ]?at  travailen  j^erinne,  grauntej?  he  to  suche 
men  J)at  maynteyne]?  his  ordynaunce.  But  bileve  teche  us,  ]?at 
what  ]?ing  is  grauntide  her  is  a  false  feynynge,  but  ^  Crist  graunte 
it.  And  herfore  it  semej)  Jjat  men  ben  no^t  holden  to  trowe 
Jjat  it  is  trewe,  whatever  }?e  pope  grauntij?,  ffor  in  J)is  he  may 
erre,  and  varie  fro  Cristis  jugement.  But  Crist  graunti]?  never, 
ne  ordeynefe  no  ]?ing,  but  3if  it  soune  in  resoun,  in  pees,  and 
in  charite. 

And  her  J?enkiJ)  many  men,  })at  in  caas  of  ]?is  discencioun 
may  men  se  whiche  ben  servantis  to  God,  and  whiche  loven 
])e  fendis  cause  and  bisily  serven  to  him.  Ffor  alle  J)es  })at 
traveyllen  to  lette  Cristis  ordeynaunce  in  staat  of  his  firste 
prestis,  reversen  his  lawe,  and  in  j?at  }>ei  haten  God  and  serven 
J?e  fend.  And  herby  may  trewe  men  se ;  ^if  frerys  or  ony  o))er 
men  lyen  in  ]?is  to  f  e  peple,  and  spoylen  hem  of  here  goodis 
in  colour  of  her  lesyngis,  \€\  ben  traytouris  to  God,  and  tray- 
tours  to  \t  Chirche  })at  \t\  dwellen  inne,  and  ben  holden  to 
restoren  ]?ing  ]?at  ]?ei  have  spoylid.  And  herfore  schulden  trewe 
a  meaning,  except. 
R  2 


True  men  may 
easily  see  that, 
as  the  whole 
system  of  the 
temporal 
wealth  and 
power  of  the 
Church,  so  the 
pretensions 
of  the  popes 
to  grant  mdul- 
gences  to  those 
who  fight  their 
battles  are 
radically 
untenable. 


244 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


In  all  these 
proceedings 
the  active  in- 
ten'ention  of 


men  trowe  lasse  J)is  court,  or  ])es  freris,  and  axe  goode  ground 
of  newe  J>ingis  ])at  ]?ei  telle  men.  And  hereinne  semij)  )?e 
peple,  al  ^if  we  seen  it  no^t,  ]?at  men  fallen  inne  to  helle,  and 
drawen  oJ?er  wi]?  hem ;  and  J?is  is  mor  perel  J?anne  ony  bodily 
deejj.  And  of  ))is  may  trewe  men  se,  ])at  ri^t  as  Jje  fend  bi  o 
castynge  in  of  a  venemed  boon,  ]?at  is,  dowinge  of  clerkis  a^enes 
Cristis  ordynaunce,  ha]?  venymed  Cristene  men,  bo]?e  seculeris 
and  clerkis,  and  meve]?  men  of  armes  to  batayls  and  stryves, 
so  by  on  openynge  of  tresour  of  his  lesyngis,  }?at  he  may  asoylle 
men  boJ)e  of  peyne  and  synne  ^if  ]?ei  wele  holde  on  his  side 
arenas  Cristis  ordynaunce,  he  haj>  hight  his  clerkis  alle  rewmes 
of  Jje  world.  Ffor  by  spiritual  power,  ))at  men  may  no^t  se, 
ne  grounde  it\in  bileeve,  ne  prove  it  bi  resoun,  |)e  fend  may 
ly^teste  bigyle  ]?e  peple,  and  make  hem  trowe  falce  bi  his  sotel 
lesyngis ;  as  he  may  meve  his  vikir  to  seie,  ]?at  he  ha]?  power  to 
assoyle  men  fully  ]?at  helpen  in  his  cause,  and  to  curse  all  hem 
]?at  a^en-stondi]?  it ;  and  ])us  may  he  ly^tly  gete  lordschipe  of 
alle  ]?e  world.  But  as  ]?e  fend  byhi3te  to  Crist  falsly  al  rewmes, 
so  my^te  falsehede  walken  in  purchas  of  })is  lordschipe.  But 
by  J?is  blynde  falsehede  schal  Cristis  cause  slepe.  And  so  it 
seme]?  to  many  men  J^at  Sathanas  hadde  envye  to  ]?e  ordynaunce 
of  Crist,  ]>at  his  clerkis  schulde  be  pore  men.  Ffor  bi  vertu 
of  ]?is  povert,  Petir  and  o}?ere  apostilis  conquered  of  the  fendis 
hond  many  of  his  servauntis,  and  herfore  he  meved  hem  for 
to  trowe  ]?e  Chirche.  And  ofte  he  tau^te  his  clerkis  to  feynen 
hem  a  power  ]?at  ]?ei  may  assoylle  men,  howevere  ])ei  haue 
synned,  and  ^eve  hem  hevenly  3iftis,  howevere  God  ordeyne]) 
of  hem.  And  J^e  fend  haj?  many  clerkis  to  meve  ])e  peple  to 
trowe  ]?is ;  and  so  he  wole  cursen  alle  men  ])at  meven  to 
Cristis  ordynaunce.  And  ^if  ony  kyng  lette  his  peple  or  his 
tresour  to  goo  out  of  his  rewme  in  Antecristis  cause,  he  wele 
curse  bo])e  J)at  kyng  in  his  rewme,  and  aftir,  whanne  his  children 
ben  my3ty  and  willful,  take  to  him  ]?is  rewme  for  his  former 
cursynge. 

Cap.  II. 

Si]?  \e  fend  is  kyng  of  children  of  pruyde,  he  coveyti]?  in 
bateylle  to  have  J?e  victorye,  and  herfore  he  tempti]?  hardest 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


^45 


fes  men  in  our  of  her  dee{>,  in  hope  to  overcome  hem  at  \q 
laste  ende.  And  herfore,  sij?  he  knowij?  bi  wordis  of  holy  wryt 
{)at  })e  day  of  doom  is  nere  J)is  tyme,  al  3if  he  know  no^t  evenly 
how  longe  ha]?  God  ordeynede  byfore  ]?is  day  schal  come,  her- 
fore more  bisylyche  he  tempti]?  Cristis  Chirche.  And  as  Seynt 
Poul  sei]?,  ]?e  tyme  is  more  perillous,  and  herfore  schulde  ech 
man  make  him  silf  stronge,  and  kepe  ]?at  J?e  fend  cast  him  no^t 
domi;  for  him  ]?at  he  overecomej),  and  hoidij)  him  bynefen, 
he  haj}  a  grete  hope  to  vencusche  hym  for  evere,  and  so  aftir 
his  dee]?  evere  to  dwell  wi]?  him.  And  herfore,  si})e  man  is 
procm-atour  to  ]?e  fend  ffor  to  tempte  his  brojjer,  as  we  may  se 
by  Eve,  ]?erfore  he  casti]?  to  have  many  sectis  ]?at  bisyen  hem 
faste  aboute  newe  ]?ingis,  bo]?e  in  newe  lawis  and  sensible 
sygnes,  ffor  bi  boJ?e  ]?es  schal  Cristis  ordre  be  best  [shent  ^]  ; 
si]?  mannes  ocupacioun  aboute  ony  ]?ing  mot  nedilyche  be  best 
for  contrarie  werk.  And  herfore  clepij?  Crist  men  of  newe 
sectis  kynrede  of  hordom,  ]?at  sechi]?  suche  signes.  And  as 
Crist  sei]?,  wij?  Poule  his  apostle,  Jjc  synne  of  ypocrisie  schulde 
regne  wij?  suche  men,  si]?  ]?ei  feyne  holynesse  by  sensible 
sygnes,  and  coveytise  wi]?  o]?ere  synnes  be]?  huge  in  her  soulis. 
And  ]?is  mevede  Jje  fende,  aftir  ])e  dowynge  of  ]?e  Chirche, 
to  use  ]?e  monk  Sergyus  ^,  and  turne  men  of  ]?e  Chirche  to  all 
Jje  secte  of  Saresenes,  ]?at  is  now  ful  large.  And  so  it  seme]? 
to  sum  men,  ]?at  monkis  or  false  cardinals  may  bygile  })e  litil 
flook  now  lefte  of  Cristen  men,  ifor  so  J?ei  dide  whanne  Cristen- 
dome  was  more  and  more  of  my^te.  And  Antecristis  sect  is 
more  bi  many  ordris,  so  J?at,  aftir  Cristis  speche,  Goddis  chosen 
schal  be  disceyved  her  ^if  it  may  be,  in  reversynge  of  false 
Cristis.  And  so,  as  many  men  ]?enken,  ]?e  best  remedy  in  ]?is 
wer  to  lyve  holy  lijf,  and'  trowe  holly  )?e  gospel,  for  bojje  in 
noumbre  and  speche  schal  Antecristis  clerkis  passe  trewe  men 

^  supplied  conjecturally. 


the  evil  one 
is  manifest. 


a  The  story  is  well  known  of  the 
Nestorian  monk  of  Bassorah,  called 
Bahira  by  the  orientals,  and  Sergius 
by  the  western  writers,  who  is  said 
to  have  predicted  the  great  career 
of  Mahomet   to  his  guardian   Abu 


Taleb,  and  to  have  instructed  him 
in  ecclesiastical  affairs  and  the 
tenets  of  Christianity.  See  p.  99 
of  this  volume  for  another  mention 
of  Sergius. 


I  Cor.  viL  29. 


246 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS, 


On  the  late 
bull  of  Urban, 
granting^  indul- 
gences for  the 
crusade  against 
the  anti-pope. 


in  God,  fFor  ))ei  bej?  J^icker  i-sowe.  But  grope  we  wel  her 
ground,  whej^er  it  be  Goddis,  or  ellis  provid  bi  resoun,  and  lefe 
we  alle  ojjer. 

And  now  in  cure  dayes,  out  of  Jje  nest  of  Antecrist  is  come 
an  hard  maundement,  and  sei]?  to  men  in  sentence,  )?at  hoso 
confermej?  ^  Antecristis  ordeynaunce  in  dowynge  of  }?e  Chirche, 
and  lettij)  Cristis  ordynaunce,  he  is  fully  soylled,  and  wendij> 
strict  to  hevene  wijjouten  ony  peyne  her  or  in  purgatorie. 
And  ho-evere  lettij)  j?is  decre,  and  holdi]?  on  Cristis  side,  he  is 
deplyche  cursid  and  pursued  wi]?  Antecristis  clerkis.  Ffor  ])ei 
seie,  hoso  lettij?  decre  of  J^e  pope  to  pursue  his  adversarie, 
he  is  J?us  cursid  ^ ;  and  hoso  pursue]?  him  and  dowi]>  \q  tofer 
pope,  a^ens  ]?e  ordeynaunce  of  Crist,  he  is  ]?us  blessid.  And 
si]?l)e  Crist  was  maad  man  I  herde  nevere  more  blasfemye. 
Leve,  wer  he  no^t  traytour  to  God  and  to  man,  ]?at  in  absense 
of  God  reversid  his  ordynaunce,  ]?at  God  him  silf  ha]?  maad  for 
savynge  and  ten]?ernesse,  ffor  love  of  his  spouse,  and  gabbed 
her  on  God,  ]?at  God  ha]?  ^eve  him  leve  to  graunte  her  in  er]?e 
bo]?e  pardoun  and  blysse  to  breke  Goddis  firste  ordynaunce, 
and  conferme  J)e  ordynaunce  ]?at  }?e  fend  tau^te  ]?e  emperrour  ? 
And  he  were  traytour  to  rewmes  ^if  he  spoylede  here  peple  and 
tresore  of  ]?es  rewmes  bi  suche  feynede  lesyngis ;  for  temporal 
goodis  and  spirytual  rebbed  he  fro  ]?es  rewmes.  Certis,  sij?  ]?e 
world  was  maad  ]?e  fend  feyned  nevere  more  lesyngis  to  spoyle 
rewmes  of  tresore  and  peple  )?at  maki]?  hem  stronge,  ]?anne  to 
seie  ]?at  ho-so  lettij?  to  take  folke  or  tresore  at  wil  of  j?e  pope, 
to  distrye  his  mennye,  he  is  cursid  of  God  and  schulde  be  deed 
by  man ;  and  aftir  sendij?  freris  and  oJ)er  falce  clerkis,  to  make 
J?e  peple  to  trowe,  and  mevej?  hem  to  J?is  sentence.  O  ^if  Ante- 
crist and  his  clerkis  in  her  grene  growyng  overleyn  J?us  rewmes, 

^  corrected;  confermerme\^  AA. 


»  This  seems  clearly  to  refer  to 
the  bull  of  privileges  granted  by 
Urban  VI,  in  the  year  1382,  to  the 
Bishop  of  Norwich,  one  of  which 
runs  as  follows:  'Item,  habet  po- 
testatem  exconnnu?iicandi,  suspen- 
dendi,  inlerdice?idi,  quascimque  per- 
sonas  rebelles,  seu  impedientes  ipsum 


exercere  potestatem  sibi  commissam, 
cujuscunque  status,  gradus,  praeemi- 
nentiae,  ordinis,  loci,  conditionis, 
extiterint,  etiamsi  regali,  aut  regi- 
nali,  vel  imperiali,  seu  quavis  alia 
ecclesiastica  vel  mundana,  praeful- 
geant  dignitate.*  Walsingham  (Rolls 
edition),  II.  77. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS, 


M7 


and  bigyli])  trewe  men,  what  welej?  \€\  do  whanne  \€\  be]>  fully 
stablid  ?  And  J)is  is  ]?e  falseste  conquest  ]?at  evere  fe  devyl  haj? 
castj  flfor  )>us  my^te  he  li^tly  ^eve  rewmes  to  his  servauntis,  and 
make  hem  of  nowun  power  to  a^enstonde  his  cautels.  And 
J>us  is  heresye  of  }?e  fend  pupplischid  in  londis,  ]?at  he  ha]? 
maystrye  overe  Crist,  and  his  servants  overe  trewe  men.  And 
more  falsenesse  of  Jje  fend  here  we  never  feyned.  Stonde  we 
stablyche  in  fei]?  ]?at  Cristis  lawe  techej?,  ffor  it  was  nevere  more 
nede  for  cautels  of  )?e  fend.  He  feyne]?  false  dremes  ^  of  power 
of  Cristis  vikir,  ]?at  Crist  my^te  nevere  graunte  to  such  a  false 
cause.  And  truste  we  in  ]?e  helpe  of  Crist  in  ))is  poynt ;  ffor 
he  ha]?  bigunne  to  helpe  us  graciously,  in  ]?at  }?at  he  haj?  clofe 
J)e  heved  of  Antecrist,  and  maad  ]?e  ton  part  fi3te  a5en  ])e  tojjer. 
Ffor  it  is  no  drede  |>at  synne  of  J>e  popes  ]>at  ha]?  be  longe  con- 
tynued,  ha]>  brou^t  to  fis  dyuisioun.  And  so,  ^if  bojje  Jjes 
hevedis  lasti]?,  or  J)e  ton  bi  him  silf,  J?anne  schal  \%  laste  errour 
be  worse  ]?an  ])e  firste.  And  so  emperrour  and  kyngis  schulde 
helpe  in  ]?is  cause,  to  maynteyne  Goddis.  lawe,  and  conquere 
her  heritage,  and  distroye  ]?is  foul  synne,  savynge  J>e  persones. 
And  ]?anne  were  pees  founde,  and  symonye  distroyed;  for 
while  ]5is  rote  lasti}),  duri]?  bataylle  and  symonye.  And  ^if  j?es 
lordis  love]?  God,  J?ei  love]?  Goddis  lawe;  and  helpe  him  in 
]?is  cause,  ffor  to  hem  it  longi}?;  and  more  glorious  conquest 
dude  nevere  Cristene  kyng. 

Cap.  IIL 

But  feynynge  of  ypocritis  wole  stonde  faste  a^en,  and  criej? 
to  alle  men  ]?at  a^enstondi]?  ])is,  [^e  ^]  be]?  heritikis  and  wickid 
men,  and  fewe  a^enst  o]?ere.  But  counfort  it  is  ]?at  ]?es  ])re 
resouns  mevej?  no^t.  pe  firste  meve]?  no^t,  si]?  Crist  him  silf  was 
clepid  blasfeme,  ]?at  is  heretik  most  of  alle  o]?er ;  and  in  a  fend, 
Belzabub,  \ti  seide  he  dide  his  dedis,  ffor  servyce  ]?at  he  dude 
to  ]?is  prince  of  fendis.     So  whanne  many  wickid  men  defame]? 

^  supplied  conjecturally. 


a  See  Vol.  n,  p.  1 66,  where  this 
matter  of  the  dexterous  use  of 
dreams  by  the  friars,  in  furtherance 


of  the  ends  of  the  papal  court,  is 
mentioned  more  in  detail. 


The  slanders 
of  the  papal 
agents  re- 
pelled. 


248 


WrCLIF'S  WORKS. 


The  proceed- 
ings of  both 
popes  cen- 
sured, as  irra- 
tional, uncha- 
ritable, and 
unchristian. 


Josh,  vii  12. 


a  good  man,  and  havej?  noon  evydence  of  his  schrewid  dedis, 
hit  is  a  greet  evydence  ]?at,  for  he  schame]?  her  synnes,  jjat  j?ei 
accuse  him  falsely,  al  ^if  he  be  clene.  And  bi  J)is  same  answere 
we  may  avoyde  jje  secoiide  word;  si})])e  ]?e  Jewis  seide  ]>at 
Crist  was  no^t  on  Goddis  halfe,  fFor  he  dide  myracles  and 
helpid  men  on  holy  day ;  and  J?erfore  ]?ei  seide  }jat  none  men 
]?at  koude  good  trowid  to  ]?is  wickid  man,  but  cursid  and 
founed  peple.  Ffor,  as  ])ei  seide,  no  Pharise  ne  prince  of  \q 
prestis  trowid  to  ])is  false  man,  but  )>ei  fat  knewe  no^t  ]?e  lawe. 
And  so  han  J>ei  seid  of  Cristis  trewe  servantis.  And  to  J>is 
fridde  evydence, — it  is  knowen  )?ing,  }>at  whanne  ]?e  world  is 
peyred,  and  Antecrist  ha]?  maystrie,  })ere  be|)  many  fendis 
sones  ^  a^ens  any  trewe  man ;  as  in  tyme  of  Hely  was  he  ny^e 
left  aloone,  a^ens  sevene  hundrid  prestis  \2X  serveden  to  Baal. 

But  take  we  more  evydence  of  schrewidnesse  of  l?e  to]?er 
side.  Ffor  Jjei  grounde  no^t  her  speche  in  resoun  ne  in  Goddis 
lawe,  and  feynen  ])at  Jesselyn^  seij)  so,  and  nei]?er  Jerom  ne 
Austyn.  And  certis  Jesselyn  knewe  litil  •  of  remyssioun  of 
synne,  or  ellis  of  spiritual  suffragies,  ]?at  God  him  ony  graunti]?. 
How  schulde  men  trowe  Jesselyn  in  glosynge  of  fe  popis  lawe, 
sij?]?e  ]?e  toon  pope  falli]?  ]?e  tojjurs  bullis  ?  Also  men  schulde 
have  suspect  boJ>e  Jje  popes  dedis,  si]?  \e\  be]?  no^t  grounded 
in  ])e  lawe  of  God ;  but,  as  J?ei  knewe  no  sovereyne,  as  Lucyfer 
here  mayster,  J^ei  sechen  veniaunce  to  him  silf,  and  lesij? 
pacience  and  charite.  And  certis  it  is  no  love  of  God  to 
maynteyne  such  prelatis,  ffor  wantynge  of  her  charite  sei]?  }?at 
)3ei  be]?  fendis,  si))j?e  for  lasse  avarice  Crist  clepid  Judas  a  fend ; 
and  it  seeme]?  no  wisdom  to  be  ladde  bi  many  Scario])S.  And 
take  heed  to  ])e  mynystris  of  ])es  prelatis;  ]?ei  ^eve  leve  to 
prestiS;,  to  monkis,  and  to  freris,  to  traveylle  in  her  cause,  al  ^if 
]?ei  slee  men,  and  suche  }>at  have  be  comynly  most  viscious 
men  of  o]?ere.  Lord  1  si]?J)e  in  })e  oolde  lawe,  whanne  it  was 
lefe  to  fi^te,  Goddis  folke  was  vencuschid  for  synne  of  oon 

^  corrected ;  synnes,  A  A. 


a  This  is  Zenzelinus  (or  Gen- 
zelinus)  de  Cassanis,  a  doctor  of 
laws,  and,  according  to  Pancirolo 
{De  Claris  Leg.  Inter  pp.),  a  French- 


man, author  of  the  received  com- 
mentary on  the  '  Extravagantes  '  of 
Pope  John  XXIL 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


249 


man,  how  schulde  Jjei  no^t  be  vencuschid  in  {?e  newe  lawe,  for 
more  synne  of  many  men?  Certis  ])ere  is  no  cause  but  ^if 
God  have  forsake  hem,  and  letij>  hem  serve  deplyer  her  damp- 
nynge  in  helle ;  as  beestis  ]>at  bej;  dispeired,  men  bisyej?  no3t 
to  reule  hem.  A !  sij?]?e  kyng  DaviJ?,  J)at  was  so  just  a  man, 
was  lettid  to  make  a  temple,  but  Salamon  )?at  lovede  pees  was 
ordeyned  of  God  to  make  })e  temple  of  stoon,  myche  more 
schulde  popis,  and  prestis  her  servauntis,  schede  no^t  Cristen 
mennes  blood  in  her  owne  cause.  And  certis,  sijjjje  }?ei  han 
forsake  pacience  and  charite,  it  seme]?  ]?at  God  forsakij)  hem 
as  for  his  owne  children,  ffor  whos  werkis  men  worchen,  his 
children  ]?ei  be|). 

And  take  noon  heed  to  ]?e  persones  ]?at  telle]?  ]?es  wordis,  but 
take  heed  to  }>e  sentence  and  cause  ]?at  \€\  speke]?  inne ;  and  lok 
wel  in  holy  wryt  whe])er  it  seie  no^t  so.  Lord!  where  it  be 
Goddis  wille  to  lette  to  preche  ]?e  gospel,  and  ^ev  leve  and 
counseil  to  prestis  to  slee  men  ?  Hit  seme]?  J?at  suche  dedis 
schewij?  whos  be]?  Jjes  prelatis;  ffor  every  man  her  meree^, 
and  specially  prelatis,  schewen  bi  her  werkis  whos  children  J?ei . 
be]?.  Ffor  ))es  }?at  traveyllen  wel  for.  pees  be]?  children  on 
Goddis  half,  and  ]?ei  J?at  traveille  by  werris  to  have  richesse  and 
worldly  glorie  be]?  children  of  ])e  fend  and  enemyes  to  Crist. 
And  herfore  is  Crist  clepid  peysible  kyng,  and  ])e  fend  kyng  of 
alle  ]?e  children  of  pride.  A  !  ^if  a  man  my^te  chese  to  holde 
Cristis  biddinge,  and  forsake  wel]?e  of  }>e  world  and  al  world- 
lyche  glorie,  ffor  to  make  pees  bytwixe  him  and  oJ>ere  men, — 
^if  he  lefte  ]?is  Cristis  biddynge,  and  taki]?  lore  of  ]?e  fend,  who 
wolde  no^t  seye  J)at  ne  he  wer  J)e  fendis  child  ?  But  ])es  popis 
my^te  leve  hi^enesse  of  ])e  world,  and  ]?is  worldly  richesse,  as 
God  him  silf  ha]?  beden  hem,  and  }>anne  J?is  strif  schulde  cesse 
bitwixe  hem  and  o]?ere  men.  And  ^if  ])e  fend  lette  hem  by 
love  of  w^orldlyche  ]?ingis,  ho  dredi]?  ]?at  ne  }>anne  \€\  be]?  \t 
fendis  owne  children?  But  lordis  schulde  compelle  hem  to 
leve  ]?is  fendis  lesynge,  ffor  God  biddi]?  his  servauntis  compelle 
men  to  entre  his  weye.  And  ^if  ]?u  seie  ]?at  no  man  schulde 
■speke  a^ens  ]?e  pope,  comim  dedis  techij?  us  ]?at  he  may  li^tly 
synne ;  and  for  he  is  capteyn  over  alle  his  children,  }?erfore  his 
^  The  text  at  this  place  appears  to  be  corrupt. 


250 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


The  promises  | 
of  Christ  to       f 
Peter,  though 
applicable  also 

his  suc- 
cessors, are 
of  no  avail  to 
those  -who  live 
not  the  life  of 
Peter. 


synne  is  more,  and  more  harmynge  to  Jje  Chirche.  And  her- 
fore  seyntis  bifore,  wittynge  }>at  he  is  no^t  God,  ne  confermyd 
in  vertues,  as  aungels  bej>  in  hevene,  weren  ful  bisy  bi  Goddis 
lore  to  reprove  ]?e  pope.  As  Poul  repreved  Petir  for  a  li3t 
trespasse,  Bernard  repreved  Eugenye  for  he  was  to  worldly, 
and  left  Jje  office  of  apostil,  and  took  office  of  Antecrist^. 
Why  schulde  no^t  men  now  reprove  popes,  ^if  ])ei  don  now 
wersse  ?  si]>  alle  men  schal  sue  Crist,  and  stonde  for  ]?e  trujje ; 
but  Crist  reprev)^d  Petir,  and  reprevej?  ech  yvel  pope.  And 
at  ])e  leste  Cristis  children  schulle  flee  an  yvel  pope,  and  sue 
him  no3t  but  in  as  myche  as  he  sewi]?  Crist,  ne  trowe  him  no^t 
but  in  as  myche  as  he  spekij?  Cristis  lawe  ;  and  ^if  he  do  con- 
trarie,  flee  we  hym  as  Antecrist.  Ffor  no  resoun  ne  no  lawe 
nedij)  us  to  sue  \q  fend,  ne  forsake  oure  God,  ne  \q  lawe  Jjat  he 
ha]?  ^even  us.  Wei  we  w)^ten  by  Goddis  lawe,  ]5at  ]?e  hey^este 
in  J)is  Chirche  schulde  nexte  sue  Crist,  and  moost  flee  \q 
world ;  ffor  so  techi]?  Crist,  ]?at  ]?e  moost  in  his  Chirche  schulde 
be  mooste  meke,  most  pore,  and  moost  servysable. 

Cap.  IV. 

But  here  Antecristis  clerkis  wole  preve  bi  manye  weyes,  )>at 
]je  pope,  }>at  is  vikir  of  Crist  and  of  Petir,  ha]?  power  in  ]?is 
Chirche  to  do  what  he  wole,  si]?)?e  Crist  bihei5te  to  Petir  ]?at 
what  he  byndij)  in  er]?e  schal  be  bounde  in  hevene,  and  so  what 
he  unbyndi]?.  Ho  may  denye  ]?is  bileve  but  ^if  he  be  an 
heretik  ?  But  here  schulde  ]?e  fendis  children  lerne  here  logyk 
and  her  phylosophie,  J>at  J^ei  ben  no^t  heretikis  in  falce  undir- 
stondinge  of  ])e  lawe  of  Crist.  So]?  it  is  J^at  Crist  hi^te  to 
Petir  })is  power,  and  to  ojjire  apostlis,  by  suche  manere  of 
wordis,  and  to  alle  here  successouris  in  persone  of  hem.  But 
suppose  ]>at  a  prest  forsake  }>e  Hif  of  Petir,  and  bidynge  of  his 
maystir  our  Lord  Jesus  Crist,  and  goo  anno])ir  weye  as  ]?e 
world  axi}?,   what  is  Cristis  word  sibbe  to  suche,  a  prest  of 


a  St.  Bernard  (Ep.  CCLXVIII) 
reproved  Pope  Eugenius  III,  his 
former  fiiend  and  follower,  for 
having  promoted  an  unworthy  per- 
son to  some  ecclesiastical  dignity. 


The  language,  however,  is  carefully 
restrained,  nor  can  I  find  in  any  of 
St.  Bernard's  letters  to  this  pope 
what  would  justify  the  strong  asser- 
tion in  the  text. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS, 


251 


Antecrist?  Certis  eche  bettre  prest,  in  whiche  be]?  ]?es  con- 
diciouns,  my^te  bi  more  colour  seye  he  is  Petris  successour ; 
ffor  as  Crist  chargi])  more  memies  dedis  Jeanne  her  wordis,  so 
he  chargi]?  more  vertues  j?anne  worldlyche  fame.  Ne  noon 
eleccioun  of  man  is  wor]?i  bifore  God,  but  whanne  it  accordij? 
to  chesynge  of  Crist.  And  herfore  ]>e  apostlis,  whanne  Jjei 
were  ful  of  God,  chesen  Mathy  by  sort,  and  no^t  bi  falce  car- 
dynarls.  And  as  sort  may  faille  ^if  Crist  reule  it  no^t,  so  may 
chesynge  of  false  men,  aftir  j>at  }»e  Chirche  is  dowid,  and  as 
myche  more  perilouslyche,  as  man  ])at  is  perverted  is  a  quik 
fend,  worse  ]3anne  o})ere  sortis.  And  so  men  schulde  putte  in 
]>e  ordeynaunce  of  God  suche  eleccioun  of  prestis,  and  wedde 
hem  no^t  wij>  ]?is  staat,  and  trowe  more  to  her  werkis  ]>an  to 
chesynge  of  men;  ffor  fus  Crist  biddi]?  men  trowe  to  his 
werkis,  and  Jjus  took  Clement  J>e  office  of  Petir,  and  as  soone 
forsook  it,  whanne  he  my5te  more  profyte  in  an  nojjere  office  a. 
And  so  schulde  Cristis  prestis  do,  or  ellis  ]>ei  leven  Goddis 
reule,  J)at  biddij?  of  two  J)ingis  ]>qX  men  schulde  chese  ])e  better, 
and  more  for  Cristis  Chirche ;  for  ellis  ])ei  ly ven  a^ens  God, 
])at  ordeyned  men  ]?e  bettir,  and  biddi})  men  to  chese  it.  And 
5if  mennes  lawis  reversi]?  J)is  lawe  of  God,  woo  be  to  ]3es  lawis, 
and  to  men  ]?at  usen  hem.  Ffor  J>us  sei]?  J?e  profete  in  text  of 
oure  bileve.  And  so,  ^if  mennes  lawe  or  custom  of  ]>e  Chirche 
letti]?  resoun  and  lawe  of  God,  woo  be  to  it.  And  more  harm 
in  ]>is  mater  ])at  falli]?  to  prestis  is,  }>at  ]>ei  maki})  hem  a  lawe 
aftir  lawis  of  J?e  world,  and  ]?at  ]>ei  kepe  more  bisyli  ])an  lawe 
of  ]?e  gospel.  And  ^if  her  dowyng  or  her  staat  nedi]?  hem  to 
do  |)us,  woo  be  to  |>is  dowyng  and  such  staat  of  Ipe  world, 
si])]?e  it  nedijj  to  forsake  God  and  his  lawe. 

Here  may  we  se  ]?at  prelatis,  feynynge  for  staates  whe]?ir  ]jei 
be])  Petris  successouris  or  suers  of  Crist,  han  more  ]>mg  for 
to  preven  J;an  Jjei  cunne  come  aweye  wi]).  Ffirste,  ])ei  schulde 
teche  ]>aX  ]?ei  suen  wel  ]>es  heedis ;  and  ^if  ]>ei  teche  ]?is  wel,  ]}ei 
schulde  no^t  stryve  for  dygnitees,  ne  telle  so  mychel  by  hem 


a  This  seems  to  be  the  author's 
mode  of  reconciling  the  opinion  of 
St.  Jerome,  confirmed  by  the  Epistle 
of  Clement  himself  (supposing  it  to 
be  genuine)  to  the  Church  of  Jeru- 


salem, that  Clement  immediately 
succeeded  St.  Peter  as  Bishop  of 
Rome,  with  the  statement  of  Ire- 
naeus  that  Linus  and  Anacletus 
both  held  the  see  before  him. 


To  be  a  true 
successor  of 
the  apostles 
one  must  imi- 
tate their  life. 


^5^ 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS, 


Conditions  of 
valid  abso- 
lution. 


Consequences 
which  flow 
from  tliis 
doctrine. 


as  bi  werkis  of  ]?e  gospel ;  fFor  ^if  }>ei  do,  \ti  schewe  in  dede 
])at  )jei  sue  no^t  \es  heedis ;  and  so  of  privylege  ]?at  Crist  haf 
grauntid  unto  Petir  be]?  J?ei  no^t  worj^i  to  have  part  by  such 
a  falce  title.  But  suppose  ]?at  j^ei  wer  vikers  of  Petir,  ^it  fer 
is  anojjer  J)ing  j?at  ]?ei  schulde  fulfille,  })at  in  byndynge  and 
losynge  Jiei  bej?  conformed  to  Crist,  ffor  ellis  ]?ei  maki]?  a  false 
knotte,  and  falselyche  seme]?  to  loose.  And  herfore  is  nede 
to  hem  to  have  J)e  keye  of  science,  J^at  Jjei  kunne  bynde  and 
lose  aftir  Jje  Chirche  above ;  ffor  ellis  ]?ei  gabbe  on  hem  silf, 
and  doij?  no^t  as  Jjei  seyen.  Her  mayst  ]?ou  se,  how  popes  and 
o])ere  prelatis  mut  argue  in  ]?is  wise ;  what  evere  Petir  byndij? 
or  losi]?,  or  ellis  his  verrey  viker,  is  ])us  bounde  or  losid  of  God 
in  )?e  Chirche  of  hevene ;  but  ])is  pope  or  J)is  prelat  is  verrey 
Petris  viker,  and  byndi}>  or  losiJ>  by  ]5e  keye  of  Goddis  kun- 
nynge ;  ])erfore  it  is  bounde  in  hevene  or  losed,  as  he  sei]?. 
And  ^if  ]?ou  seie  ]?at  by  J?is  lawe  none  schulde  trowe  Cristis 
viker,  but  5if  he  schulde  trowe  him  in  byndinge  and  losynge, 
and  so  we  schulde  trowe  what  evere  ]?e  pope  sei}>,  ffor  al  ]?e 
boot  of  Petir  flocced  in  uncerteyn,; — here  we  schal  wite  how 
trewfe  and  hope  and  charite  be})  divers,  and  how  J^ere  be]? 
diverse  })ingis  to  trowe  and  to  hope  and  leve;  and  so  we 
schulde  sorwe  for  synne,  and  hope  to  be  assoyllid  of  God  and 
of  his  vikir,  ^if  it  be  as  we  hope.  And  ^if  we  faille  in  Jjis 
sorwe,  or  bigge  no5t  oure  synne  of  God,  we  bygile  oure  silf  in 
speche  of  byndynge  or  losynge.  And  so  ]?i  confessour  can 
nou^t  wyte  whejjer  J?ou  be  bound  or  soyled,  but  bi  supposynge 
fat  he  haj?  of  ]?i  trewe  speche,  ffor  ])ere  is  no  more  heresie  J?an 
man  to  bileve  j^at  he  is  assoyled  ^if  he  ^eve  hym  moneye,  or 
^if  he  leye  his  bond  on  ])in  heed,  and  seie  J?at  he  assoyllij?  J)ee. 
Ffor  ]?ou  moste  by  sorowe  of  herte  make  asee]?  to  God,  and 
ellis  God  assoyli}>  ])ee  no^t,  and  Jeanne  assoyli)?  no^t  J)i  viker. 

How  evere  ])e  pope  speke,  J)is  is  Jje  lawe  of  God,  and  alle 
J)ingis  ]?at  wole  sue  herof  schulde  Cristen  men  graunte.  And 
by  J>is  schulde  prelatis  ceese  to  boste  of  her  power,  ffor  so]?e 
it  is  \2X  assoyllynge  is  propred  unto  God,  and  his  viker  in  er]?e 
telli]?  his  lord  wille ;  and  ^if  hym  fayle  kunnynge,  he  lye)?  on 
his  lord.  And  so  many  men  mysosi)?  her  power,  }>at  is  J>e 
secunde  keye  in  assoylynge  of  prestis.     And  here  may  we  se. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


253 


]>at  it  is  no^t  bileue,  ])at  ^if  a  man  seme])  to  be  assoyled  of  jje 
pope,  Jjanne  he  is  assoylled  so  ffor  J?e  popes  affermynge,  ffor  Jje 
pope  may  erre  ofte  in  presumpcioun  of  his  keyes.  And  God 
forbeede  J^at  it  wer  bileve  to  trowe  of  eche  man,  J)at  J)is  man 
is  assoylled  or  cursid  as  }?e  pope  sei]?;  ffor  })anne  bileve,  ]?at 
schulde  be  oon,  were  falce  and  diverse  in  many  men ;  for  ]?e 
confessed  and  ]?e  confessour  were  cause  of  oure  bileve.  But 
God  forbede  \2X  hit  were  so,  for  Jeanne  fei]?  were  uncerteyn. 
A  man  may  make  his  owne  hope,  and  confessour  helpe  to, 
but  hope  and  bileve  be]?  ful  divers. 

Cap.  V. 

Here  grucchij?  Antecrist,  and  sei]?  }>at  by  ])is  skyle  j^e  pope 
hadde  no  power  to  certifie  men  confessid  of  him,  ])at  ]>ei  be}) 
assoylled  of  Crist,  for  he  kan  nou3t  teche  J)is,  and  so  schulde 
perriche  Petris  keyes,  groundid  in  Cristis  graunte.  And  her- 
fore  men  seyen  comunly,  }?at  whom  so  ony  prest  assoylij),  he  is 
assoyled  of  God  by  vertu  of  ])e  keyes.  Ne  men  schulle  suffre 
no  more  penaunce  J)an  J)e  prest  enjoynej)  hem,  ffor  God  ha]) 
^eve  ])e  prest  power  to  deme  aftir  his  owne  wille,  ffor  ellis  it 
were  a  nee  deles  ])ing  to  schryve  men  J)us  to  prestis.  As  anentis 
])is,  me  J)inki])  J)at  men  schulde  trowe  ])at  ])ei  bej)  nou^t  assoyllid 
ne  bounde  of  her  synne,  but  in  as  myche  'as  God  him  silf 
doi])  it.  For  si])  God  is  lord  of  alle,  agens  whom  is  synne  i-do, 
^if  ony  man  synne])  a^ens  ony  creature,  ])is  lord  mut  ffirst  for- 
^eve  his  wre])e;  and  hit  wer  as  unsemelyche  man  to  for^eve 
J)e  wre])e  of  God,  as  ^if  ])e  werst  boy  in  ])is  rewme  for^af  ])e 
kyngis  wre])e,  and  specially  si])  God  is  more  overe  })e  pope  and 
eche  prelat  her,  ])anne  \t  kynge  of  Ingelond  is  more  ])anne  a 
boy ;  and  God  is  nei3e  to  ech  soule  more  ])anne  ony  man  may 
be.  And  graunte  in  presence  of  J)is  lord,  wi])OUten  his  autorite, 
[of  ^]  trespace  don  unto  him,  were  a  foul  presumpcioun.  And 
so  prestis  be  but  servauntis  to  telle  })e  wille  of  God,  })at  God 
for^eve])  ])e  synne,  ^if  ])at  men  be])  wor])i.  And  ])is  knowynge 
schulde  prestis  have,  and  knowe  Goddis  mercy,  })at  ^if  men 
make  asee})  to  God,  God  wole  J)anne  assoyle  hem.     And  errour 

^  supplied  conjecturally. 


Answer  to  an 
objection  made 
by  the  de- 
fenders of  the 
ordinary  view 
of  absolution. 


254 


The  true 
doctrine  is  not 
a  lucrative  one, 
but  must  not 
therefore  be 
abandoned. 


WYCLIF'S  WORKS, 

in  )?is  bileve  disceyve])  many  men.  And  herby  may  we  se, — 
as  power  ^eve  to  servauntis,  is  no^t  wittily  ^eve,  but  ^if  ]jei 
kunne  here  ofiQce,  so  God  geve]?  no^t  to  men  power  for  to 
assoyle,  but  ^if  he  ^eve  hem  kunnynge  ])at  falli])  to  her  office. 
And  so  it  may  be  ofte  tymes,  J?at  prelates  feynej>  hem  power, 
al  5if  \€\  have  no  such  power,  ffor  ]?ei  be]?  unable.  And  si}> 
God  mute  graunte  J)is  power  as  propre  to  him  silf,  and  he  may 
no^t  erre  in  knowynge  of  unable  prestis,  herfore  men  may  be 
disceyved  in  hope  of  suche  power;  and  herfore  men  schulde 
telle  {)e  peple  of  ])is  power  of  God,  and  teche  men  to  aifye  in 
]?is,  and  no^t  in  mennes  power. 

But  wel  I  woot  ]>at  ]?is  bileve  wynne})  no^t  us  ])e  peny,  ne 
makijj  us  no^t  to  be  worschipid,  ne  pe  peple  soget  to  us ;  but 
pupplischinge  of  Goddis  lawe  schulde  no^t  be  lefte  herfore.  Bi 
])is  may  men  se  answere  to  J?is  resoun, — ]?at  no  pope  here  in 
erj?e,  but  ^if  he  have  revelacioun,  can  telle  men  J?at  \€\  be])  as- 
soylled  of  synne  ]?at  ]?ei  be]?  schryven  of,  si])e  he  can  no3t  telle 
J)at  men  have])  contricioun.  And  as  ]?e  popis  lawe  sei]?,  in 
grauntynge  of  his  pryvylegie  he  graunti})  no3t  suche  indulgence 
but  to  contrit  and  confessid,  3®>  5^^^  l'^  Pope  seie  contrarie,  or 
freris,  or  seyntis  in  hevene,  men  schulde  no^t  trowe  to  hem  in 
}>is,  si]?e  j?ei  seie  byside  \q  feij>.  And  sij)  no  confessour  in 
er])e  kan  wyte  where  men  be  contrit,  but  suppose  bi  her  owne 
wordis  \2X  ])ei  seye  so]?e  in  J)is,  hit  is  open  J)at  ])es  confessours 
wyttij)  ne  bilevej?  J^at  her  confessid  be]?  contrit,  but  li^tly  sup- 
pose ]?at  \€\  seie  so])e  of  hem  silf,  and  bi  ])is  \€\  suppose  \2X 
God  him  silf  assoylij)  hem,  and  ])anne  be]?  \€\  wel  assoyled. 
And  jjei  be]?  Goddis  bedels  to  telle  tnily  his  sentence,  and  oj)ir 
wise  may  ]>ei  no^t  assoyle  men  of  here  synne.  And  si]>  ])e  pope 
seij?  ]jat  he  assoyle])  ech  confessid  and  contrit,  in  ])at  ])at  he  sei]> 
\2X  men  be]?  confessid  and  contrit,  hit  semej?  ]?at  J^e  pope  pre- 
sume]? to  seie  ])at  J?es  men  have}?  contrycioun.  And  certis  ))es 
popis  or  cardinals  can  no^t  wyte  of  hem  silf,  whe]?er  \€\  have 
contiycioun,  but  by  a  li^t  hope,  sij?e  ]?ei  knowe  no^t  diference 
byt^vixe  attricioun  and  sufficiant  contricioun  %  ]?at  God  accept!]? 


a  The  reader  of  Pascal  and  of 
Boileau  will  here  be  reminded  of 
the  famous  controversy  concerning 


attrition  and  contrition  which  shook 
the  Church  of  France  in  the  seven- 
teenth century,  the  Jesuits  contend- 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


^55 


for  syime.  And  so  it  semej?  fat  J?es  wordis  smachen  presump- 
cioun,  and  be]?  no^t  groundid  in  Ipe  lawe  of  God.  And  so  sum 
men  [jenki]?,  Jjat  al  J)is  sacrament  is  no^t  fully  groundid  in  al 
holy  wryt  but  in  general  wordis,  and  special  be]?  unknowen; 
and  herfore  men  schulde  no^t  graunte  special  ]?at  ]>d  knowe 
no^t.  And  her  may  men  se  ]?at  Petris  keyes  schulde  no^t 
perriche,  but  be  furbusched  and  clensid  of  )?e  rust  of  heresie, 
and  blasphemye  of  confessouris  schulde  be  leyd  adoun,  and 
}?is  were  profyt  to  our  Chirche  and  hatynge  of  blasfeme  con- 
fessours.  For  in  her  absoluciouns  fayli]?  comunly  Petris  keyes, 
and  ])ei  feyne  ofte  to  assoylle,  and  J?ei  assoyle  no^t. 

And  herfore  many  prestis  Jjat  dredij?  hem  ffor  to  lye  seiej)  ^ 
no^t,  I  assoylle  Jjee,  but,  God  of  hevene  assoille  ]>ee;  and  ^if 
]>ei  seie  ]?at  ]>ei  assoyle,  Ipei  speke  by  reputacioun,  and  nou^t  bi 
wytynge  ne  bi  trowynge,  ffor  God  chargij?  hem  no^t  herto.  And 
so  ))is  confessioun  ])at  is  maad  to  man,  ha]?  ofte  tyme  be  varied 
in  varyinge  of  ]>e  Chirche.  For  first  men  confessid  to  God  and 
to  ])e  comun  peple,  and  })is  confessioun  was  used  in  tyme  of 
apostlis.  SiJ?  men  were  confessid  more  specially  to  prestis,  and 
maad  hem  juges  and  counseilers  of  here  synful  lijf  But  at  ]?e 
J>ridde  tyme,  sij)  ]>e  fend  was  losed,  ordeyned  pope  Innocent 
a  lawe  of  confessioun  ^  ])at  ech  man  of  discrecioun  schulde  ones 
in  ]>e  5eere  pryvyly  be  confessid  of  his  propre  prest,  and  addede 
myche  to  ])is  lawe  Jjat  he  kowde  no^t  grounde.  And  al  ^if  ]>is 
popis  ordeynaunce  do  myche  good  to  many  men,  ne]?eles  many 
men  Jjenken  J?at  it  harme]?  ]>e  Chirche.  Hit  doi]>  many  men 
good,  for  schame  and  drede  of  here  schrifte  drawij)  hem  fro 
many  synnes,  and  maki}>  hem  drede  so  aftir.     And  so^  Jjis 


^  corrected ;  si]>]>e,  AA. 

ing  that  attrition,  that  is,  sorrow 
for  sin  out  of  a  motive  of  fear,  to- 
gether with  the  sacranient  of  pe- 
nance, was  sufficient  to  cleanse 
men's  souls  and  make  them  fit  for 
heaven,  while  the  other  side  urged 
that  contrition,  or  sorrow  for  sin  out 


^  corrected ;  iti  A  A. 

of  a  motive  of  the  love  of  God,  was 
indispensable.  He  will  remember 
that  terrible  sarcasm  of  Boileau,  who 
makes  the  Almighty  invite  the  de- 
fender of  the  sufficiency  of  attrition 
into  Paradise,  with  the  words — 


'Entrez  au  ciel;  vcnez,  comble  de  mes  louanges, 
Du  besoin  d'aimer  Dieu  disabiiser  Us  atiges.' 


The  practice 
of  conscien- 
tious con- 
fessors. 


/ 


^  The  law  enforcing  private  con- 
fession, which  was  established  at  the 


fourth  Council   of  the  Lateran  in 
1213. 


0.^6 


WrCLIF'S  WORKS. 


Futility  of  the 
plenary  in- 
dulgences 
granted  by  the 
rival  popes  to 
those  who  fight 
in  their  cause. 


sacrament  is  nedftil  to  synful  men,  but  not  so  nedful  as  is  con- 
fessioun  maad  to  God,  for  Jjat  is  evere  nedeful  ^if  God  schal 
assoylle  men.  pe  harme  ]?at  comej?  of  j?is  schrifte  is  ful  gret  in 
]?e  Chirche ;  flfor  many  prestis,  bo]?e  more  and  lasse,  blasfeme]? 
in  here  power,  and  failli}?  in  ])e  keye  of  kunnynge  in  ]?is  feyned 
absolucioun,  and  falli])  in  heresie,  prestis  and  her  sogettis,  but 
5if  prestis  purge  ]je  keye  of  here  kunnynge,  and  stondi})  in 
boundis  of  bileve.  But  ]?is  [is]  ^  open  heresie  ]?at  men  taken  of 
J)is  sacrament,  ])at  men  ]?at  bej)  confessid  schal  suffre  evene  }>at 
peyne  Jjat  her  prest  enjoyne]?  hem,  howevere  }>ei  have]?  synned. 
pe  prest  haj)  no  wite  to  taxe  evene  ])e  peyne  aftir  J?e  synne  J?at 
J)e  men  ha]?  do  a5ens  God,  for  no  man  in  er])e,  ne  aungel  in 
hevene,  but  ^if  God  telle  him  specially,  can  taxe  such  a  pen- 
aunce.  And  herfore  bookis  seyen  ]?at  penaunce  is  arbitrarie', 
now  more  and  now  lasse,  after  ]?at  prestis  lykyn.  So  ofte  tyme 
sum  prestis  for  ]?e  lasse  synne  enjoyne]?  more  penaunce,  and 
sum  for  ])e  more  synne  lasse  penaunce ;  but  how  evere  J?ei  en- 
joyne]?,  God  ]?e  hi^e  juge,  agenst  whom  men  synne]?,  taxe]?  evene 
]?e  penaunce,  ]?at  prestis  knowi]?  nou^t,  as  ]?ei  knowi]?  no^t 
grevousnes  of  synne.  But  it  seme]?  generally,  ]?at  men  ]?at 
schal  be  saved  have]?  penaunce  ordeyned  of  God,  in  ]?is  liif  and 
in  purgatorie,  ]?at  ]?e  prest  ha]?  no  wytt  ne  power  to  enjoy  ne 
men.  And  so  men  ]?at  schal  be  dampned  beJ?  no^t  fullyche 
assoylled  of  synnes  ]?at  J?ei  han  be  schryfen  of,  ffor  ]?ei  schal 
come  a^en.  And  ]?ei  faille  in  alle  her  dedis  ])at  }?ei  do  to  God, 
and  so  J?ei  have]?  no^t  contritcioun  as  men  ordeyned  to  blisse, 
ffor  ]?es  men  bi  her  grace  seme]?  no^t  ]?us  dedelyche.  But  what 
pope  or  confessour  wot  ho  ha]?  suche  synnes?  And  herfore 
[]?ei]  ^  blasfemen,  assoillynge  of  peyne  and  gilt ;  and  so  many 
men  schryve]?  hem  ofte  in  veyn  to  her  confessours ;  and  cause 
of  }>is  vanytee  be]?  prestis  or  confessid.  But  schryve  ]?ee  to 
God  and  laste  in  contrycioun,  and  God  may  no^t  faille  ne  he 
wole  assoylle  j?ee. 

Cap.  VI. 

Off  ]?is  may  men  se  how  perlously  men  speki]?,  and  wi]?oute 
fundement,  ]?at  grauntij?  pleyn  absolucioun  of  synne  and  of 
^  supplied  conjecturally.  ^  i^^ 

WYCLIF. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


257 


peyne  to  alle  men,  confessid  and  verreylyche  contrit  of  synne 
\2X  ])ei  have])  don,  whiche  travayllij)  faste  in  cause  J^at  jjei 
coveytej),  be  hit  nevere  so  seculere  and  fer  fro  Goddis  wUle. 
Ffor  ]?ere  is  no  cause  more  seculere  in  ))is  world,  ])an  is  to  dowe 
]?e  Chirche  and  maynteyne  j^e  dowynge ;  and  herfore  ]?e  popes 
grauntij)  ])is  pleyn  absolucioun.  But  }»ei  schulde  ])enke  how  in 
])is  graunt  J?ei  schulde  charge  })es  J)re  ))ingis, — matere,  and 
forme,  and  ende  of  her  gratmt.  Her  matere  schulde  be  trujje 
and  fullynge  of  Goddis  lawe,  her  forme  schulde  be  trewe  wordis 
groundid  in  Goddis  lawe,  and  her  ende  schulde  be  profyt  of  her 
modir  holy  Chirche,  for  to  come  to  hevene  bi  menes  ])at  Crist 
haj»  ordeyned.  Lord  1  si]?  Crist  is  trew}>e,  as  he  himsilf  sei]?,  as 
tru]?e  in  ]?is  world  or  bigynnynge  ])ereof,  and  he  himsilf  teche]?, 
bo})e  in  hif  and  word,  ]?at  ^  his  prestis  schulde  be  pore  and  have 
non  suche  lordschip,  as  it  is  schewed  bi  twelf  lawis  of  God, 
Lord!  wher  he  ]?at  is  God,  J^at  may  no^t  be  chaunged,  haj? 
hereinne  chaungid  his  purpos,  and  love]?  more  prestis  lord- 
schipen  ]?anne  he  love]?  ony]?ing  \2X  he  himsilf  comaundid? 
Ffor  wel  I  woot  }>at  }>is  assoillynge  is  falce  and  ful  of  venym, 
but  5if  Crist  himsilf  be  autour  ]?erof.  And  wel  I  woot,  si]?  God 
appreved  never  bifore  so  large  absoluciouns  for  nou^t  \2X  he 
comaundid,  ^if  he  approve  ]?is  assoyllinge,  ]?e  ]>ing  for  whiche 
he  assoylli]?  plesi]?  more  to  him  ])anne  ony  o])ir  comaundement. 
And  trowe  }>is  ho  evere  wole,  ffor  I  may  not  trowe  it ;  si]?  Crist 
bo]?e  in  dede  and  word  contraried  ])us  ]?is  dowynge,  and  wel 
I  woot  ])at  he  is  God,  ])at  may  no^t  reverse  himsilf.  And  ^if  he 
hadde  purposid  so  myche  to  dowe  his  prestis,  bo])e  ]3ere  were 
resoun  fereto,  and  he  wolde  have  told  it.  Resoun  may  J^ere  non 
be,  but  5if  a  blaspheme  seie,  J^at  now  in  ende  of  ]?e  world, 
whanne  avarice  is  more,  and  Cristis  Chirche  ha]?  more  nede  of 
prestis  ])at  flee]?  more  coveytise,  Crist  ha]>  ordeyned  }?e  contrarie 
to  his  Chirch  in  his  prestis.  But  it  wer  oone  to  seye  ])US  and 
to  seie  }>at  Crist  hymsilf  is  turned  into  Antecrist ;  but  wher  were 
more  blasfemye  ? 

But  leve  take  heed  to  Cristis  wordis,  how  he  telli]?  of  J)is 
mater.     In  ])e  oolde  lawe  he  biddi]?  ]?at  prestis  schulde  have 


WORKS.      VOL.  III. 


^  corrected ;  and^  A  A. 

s 


Such  grants 
are  defective, 
I.  in  matter, 


2.  in  form. 


258 


WrCLIF'S  WORKS. 


3.  in  regard  to 
their  end  and 


no  part  of  heritage  of  J?e  peple,  for  God  schulde  be  here  part ; 
])at  is  to  seie,  fat  oiFryngis  and  dymes  ]>at  be]?  Goddis  rentis 
schulde  be  ^eve  unto  prestis  for  servyse  fat  J>ei  serve]?  God. 
Lord !  ho  wot  no^t  J?at  ne  suche  wordis,  wij?  so  scharpe  nega- 
tyves,  byndij?  evere  and  for  evere,  as  we  wytij)  in  fe  maunde- 
mentis?  And  in  fe  Newe  Testament  Crist  seif,  fat  suche 
prestis  may  no^t  be  his  disciplis;  and  fanne  fei  bef  fendis 
clerkis.  And  sif  God  by  suche  lawis  ordeyned  fruyt  of  fe 
erf e  to  men,  for  to  serve  him  by  forme  of  his  ordynaunces, 
what  wondir  is  ^if  God  wif drawe  his  bond  fro  erf elyche  fruytis  ? 
And  fis  semef  a  greet  cause  of  barynnesse  of  erf  e,  ffor  sof  it 
is  fat  no  venjaunce  sendif  God  to  men,  but  ^if  fat  venjaunce 
be  ordeyned  to  synne  fat  is  cause  f ereof.  And  her  may  we  se 
how  we  faile  in  forme  of  f  e  wordis  of  Goddis  lawe,  as  we  faille 
in  mater.  And  herfore  in  oure  dayes  seif  Antecristis  clerkis, 
fat  among  alle  lawes  fat  evere  God  suflfride,  bef  bofe  his 
testamentis  falseste  of  alle  of  ere;  and  herfore  men  schulde 
glose  hem  aftir  her  owne  wiile,  and  f  e  wordis  of  f  es  glosatouris 
passif  Goddis  lawe. 

As  anentis  fe  fridde  poynt,  fat  is,  ende  of  Cristis  clerkis, 
bileve  techef  us  fat  Crist  wolde  drawe  his  children  to  hevene- 
ward,  by  holy  lyvynge  of  his  prestis  aftir  fe  staat  of  innocence; 
so  fat  men  fat  bef  sett  in  worldlyche  liif  and  werkis,  schulde  be 
ravychid  herfro  by  word  and  liif  of  Cristis  prestis.  Lord !  where 
f  es  f  re  f ingis  stere  ^  prestis  for  to  fi^te,  or  to  be  seculer  lordis, 
or  to  implye  hem  wif  worldly  nedis .?  Wei  I  woot,  by  f  e  cours 
of  f  e  Oolde  Testament,  whanne  prestis  wer  rewleris  of  f  e  peple 
and  leders  of  batayls,  f anne  f ei  were  werst  ladde,  and  slowen 
oure  Lord  Jesus  Crist.  So  many  men  f  enkif ,  ^if  prestis  levef 
Cristis  ordynaunce,  and  lyvef  as  seculer  lordis,  and  fi^te  as 
tyrauntis  of  f  e  world,  f  ei  schal  slee  Crist  in  his  membris  and 
make  an  ende  of  fis  liif,  ffor  fis  passif  wickidnesse  of  prestis  of 
f  e  oolde  lawe.  Ffor  f  anne  f  ei  my^te  have  wyfes,  and  fi^te  undir 
kyngis,  but  now  oure  mayster  Crist  forbed  fis  to  his  prestis. 
And  so  f es  prestis  of  Antecrist,  fat  feynef  fat  Crist  assoyllif 
men,  more  f anne  evere  he  dide  bifore  for  servyce  fat  f ei  servede 

■■•  corrected ;  strere^  AA. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


259 


him,  ffor  maynten}Tige  of  ]?es  prestis  dedis,  and  sei]>  j^at  it  is 
Cristis  bateylle  and  no^t  mennes  cause,  puttij?  heresie  on  Crist ; 
and  so  ]?is  is  an  opyn  blasfemye,  ])at  men  schulde  honour  for 
to  here. 

But  her  ]3es  false  freris  florischen  }>is  falsehede,  and  seyen  j?at 
Crist  baad  his  aposths  celle  here  cootis  and  bie  hem  swerdis, 
and  so  it  is  leeful,  in  defense  of  Cristis  ri3t,  to  Cristene  men  for 
to  fi^te,  bojje  prestis  and  o]?ir  men.  But  her  schulde  J^es  freris 
teche  to  whom  Crist  spak  {jcs  wordis,  and  whe]?er  he  spak  of 
cote  and  swerd  bodily  or  goostly.  Hit  seme]?,  sij>  none  of 
Cristis  apostlis  dide  Jjus  of  bodily  swerdis,  but  Crist  forbede  ]?at 
pei  schulde  fi3te,  or  have  swerdis  mo  ]?an  two,  ])at  he  mened 
no^t  of  bodily  swerd,  but  of  swerd  of  ]?e  spirit  ^,  pat  is  Goddis 
word ;  and  J>is  accordij?  wi]?  Cristis  dedis,  and  lore  ]?at  he  tau^te 
bifore.  And  as  Crist  fau^te  wi]>  suche  swerd,  so  schulde  alle 
his  prestis,  and  plese  men  wi]?  meke  speche,  ^e,  ^if  jjei  leese  her 
cotis  and  al  her  temporal  goodis,  and  specially  her  iordschipe. 
A 1  si}?  freris,  as  ]?ei  seyen,  sue]?  most  ]?e  lore  of  Crist,  whi  wole 
jjei  no^t  bigge  bodily  swerdis,  and  fi3te  ]?us  in  Cristis  cause  ^  ? 
But  certis  her  wordis  and  her  dedis  teche]?  ]?at  }?e  fend  is  her 
fadir ;  ffor  Crist  wolde  by  pees  and  pacience  j?at  his  cause  wer 
endid,  and  herfore  he  repreved  Petir  for  smytynge  wi]?  a  swerd. 
Here  may  we  se  how  ]?is  cause  is  fully  forged  wi]?  falsehede. 
And  so  })is  mede  J?at  is  feyned  is  founde  of  ]?e  fend  her  fadir, 
and  is  no^t  groundid  on  charite  ne  profyt  of  Cristis  Chirche. 
And  so  freris  schewi]?  hem  prooctours  of  ]?e  fendis  cause,  and 
traytours  to  God  and  his  Chirche  bi  her  bisynesse  in  ]?is  cause. 

Cap.  VII. 

But  ^it  Antecrist  grucchej?,  and  sei)?  ]?at  }?is  is  blasfemye,  for 
it  revej?  fro  prelatis  power  J?at  Crist  ^af  hem,  and  bi  ])is  heresie 
oure  Chirche  schulde  perische  for  defau^te  of  helpe.  Ffor  no 
prelat  may  assoylle,  ne  graunte  hevenely  suffragies ;  but  doc- 
touris  seien  ]?at  ])e  pope  ha]?  power  grauntid  of  God  of  alle 
meritis  in  hevene,  more  ]?anne  nede  was ;  and  so,  by  Jje  pas- 
sioun  of  Crist  and  o]?ere  seyntis  meritis,  may  )?e  pope  dele  to 


^  corrected ;  sprit,  AA. 


corrected ;  catist^  AA. 


The  argfument 
of  the  friars 
from  Luke  xxii. 
36  considered. 


The  theory  of 
papal  in- 
dulgences. 


26o  ,  WYCLIF'S  WORKS. 

men  as  myche  as  he  wole.     Ho  schulde  be  brent  of  ])e  pope 

but  suche  heretikis?     Her  me  ]?enki]?  \2X  Antecrist  presume]? 

2  Thess.  ii.  4.      above  Crist  and  al  fe  holy  Trynite,  as  Seynt  Poul  sei]?.     Ffor 

he  sei]?  no^t  oonly  of  trujje  J)at  it  is  heresye,  as  bischopis  putte 

on  Crist  )?e  Friday  ]?at  he  diede  on,  but  he  seij?  ])at  he  for^eve]? 

J?e  offence  of  God,  God  unconseilid  bifor,  to  whom  evere  he 

wole.     And  certis  ])us  may  no  man  do  of  an  erj^ely  lord,  for 

eche  man  haj)  so  gret  maystrie  overe  his  owne  wille,  }>at  no  man 

may  constrayne  him  to  ^eve  if  but  hym  like ;  and  myche  more 

j?e  wile  of  God,  ]?at  evere  more  mote  be,  may  not  be  grauntid  but 

^if  God  graunte  it  firste.     As,  ^if  ]^e  pope  graunte  ]?e  good  wille 

of  Crist,  J)at  is  good  wil  bifore  j?e  pope  graunte  it,  and  ^if  good 

will  by  Crist  ha]?  graunted  it.     And  so  nefere  God  ne  man  may 

graunte  anojjers  good  wil,  but  5if  J^e  Lord  of  J)is  good  will 

graunte  it  himsilf.     And  certis  no  synne  is  for^eve  but  bi  good 

will  of  God ;  and  so  prestis  may  telle  ])e  peple,  as  servauntis  or 

bedels,  J>at  men  han  J?e  good  wille  of  God  ^if  J^ei  don  on  J)is 

wise.     And  ])is  office  ha]?  God  ^eve  prestis  ffor  ]?ei  schulde  be 

more  wise,  and  no^t  to  boste  ne  to  lye  on  \t  will  of  God ;  but 

ri^t  as  prestis  of  }>e  oolde  lawe  hadde   power  and  kunnynge 

to  telle  ho  wer  leprous  and  ho  were  clene  of  lepre,  bi  sygnes 

]?at  God  tau^te  hem,  so  in  })e  newe  lawe  ha]?  God  tau^te  his 

prestis  by  what    spiritual  sygnes   ]?ei  schulde  knowe   goostly 

lepre,  and  bi  what  sygne  \€\  schulde  seie  ]?is  lepre  is  for3eve,  ^if 

}?e  man  confessid  to  prestis  seie  soj?  of  himsilf.     And  ])is  is 

Jeroms  sentence  upon  Cristis  word  seid  to  Petir  ^ ;   and  certis 

])is  holy  doctour  koude  more  of  holy  wryt  ]?anne  alle  J^es  popis, 

or  freris,  or  ony  Antecristis  clerkis.     And  so  ]?es  prestis  have 

power,  but  no^t  evene  wi]?  God,  ne  \€\  graunte  no^t  for^evenesse 

of  Goddis  offence  but  as  trewe  mennis  ^  bytwixe  God  and  ]?e 

peple. 

^  should  be  wewes  ? 

»  St.  Jerome  on  St.  Matthew, 
ch.  xvi.  19  :  *  Istum  locum  Episcopi 
et  Presbyteri  non  intelligentes^  ali- 
quid  sibi  de  Pharisaeorum  assumunt 
siipercilio;  ut  vel  damnent  imio- 
centes,  vel  solvere  se  noxios  arbi- 
trentur  ;  qmim  apud  Deum  non 
sententia  sacerdotum,  sed  reonim 
vita  quaeratur.'  He  then  refers  to 
the  lepers  under  the  old  law,  and 


the  declaratory  ofSce  of  the  priest 
respecting  them;  and  adds,  'Quo- 
modo  ergo  ibi  leprosum  sacerdos 
mundum  vel  immundum  facit,  sic  et 
hie  alligat  vel  solvit  Episcopus  vel 
Presbyterus,  non  eos  qui  insontes 
sunt  vel  noxii,  sed  pro  officio  suo, 
cum  peccatorum  audierit  varietatem, 
scit  qui  ligandus  sit,  quive  solven- 
dus.' 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS, 


261 


And  certis  ]?e  boost  of  Antecrist  schulde  be  ceessid  herby, 
}^at  he  wot  no^t  of  himsilf,  ne  of  his  broker  fat  l}^ej?  bi  him, 
whe]?er  God  ha]>  ordeyned  him  to  helle  or  ellis  unto  blisse,  for 
)?e  manere  of  jjis  laste  ende  J?at  he  schal  make  to  God.  And 
certis,  ^if  he  schal  be  dampned,  })e  pope  assoilliJ>  him  no^t  of 
alle  deedely  s}Tmes  J?at  he  ha]>  don  a^enst  God,  ffor  one  stykij> 
wi])  him  fat  no  man  may  assoylle,  si}>  Crist  seif  fat  mikyndnesse 
do  a^ens  fe  Holy  Goost,  schal  neifer  be  for^eve  her  ne  in  fe 
tofer  world.  On  fis  bileve  schulde  men  fenke,  whanne  fei 
blowe  her  boost  fat  f ei  assoille  men  of  alle  synnes  fat  f ei  have 
do.  And  5if  fis  feif  were  toold  to  popis  and  to  cardynals,  and 
prelatis  undir  hem,  by  f  e  grace  of  God  her  bargeyn  of  assoyll- 
inge,  and  eke  of  cursynge,  schulde  bygile  fewer  folk,  fat  schulde 
hoolly  trist  in  Crist. 

And  herby  may  men  se,  fat  in  f e  resoun  fat  is  mad  is  false- 
nesse  take  of  trewe  men,  fat  f ei  bynemif  prestis  her  power. 
But  evene  f e  power  fat  Crist  ^af  to  prestis,  fat  is  toold  to  hem ; 
and  how  fei  schulde  no^t  to  myche  gabbe  on  Goddis  power, 
and  take  upon  hem  falslyche  more  power  fan  God  haf  graunted 
hem.  And  fus  may  men  se  fat  holy  Chirche  schulde  stonde 
stable  3if  men  affiede  hem  in  Crist,  and  stode  mekely  in  her 
degree,  and  no^t  coveyted  more  power  fan  Cristis  lawe  lymytef 
hem.  Ffor  nofing  displesif  God  more  f anne  suche  blasfeme 
coveytise.  Ffor  among  alle  propretees  fat  fallif  to  oure  God, 
fis  is  oon  principal,  fat  he  for3evef  offence  in  him,  sif  every 
erfelyche  lord  haf  suche  a  pryvilege.  And  fus  assoyllif  God 
bifore,  and  his  viker  aftir,  ^if  he  acorde  to  Goddis  will  and  telle 
truly  Goddis  sentence.  And  ^if  he  coveyte  for  to  graunte  prin- 
cipally fe  will  of  God,  he  coveytef  to  be  God,  and  is  werse 
f  anne  Lucifer ;  sif  f  e  manhede  of  Crist  coveyted  neuere  suche 
hi^enesse,  but  mekid  him  evere  to  his  God,  and  herfore  is  he 
hi3ed  fus.  Ne  absolucioun  maad  to  men  is  no^t  betered  by 
suche  pride,  sif  evene  as  God  wole  assoylle  men,  and  no  more 
bi  fis  presumpcioun,  be  fei  clensid  of  her  synne ;  and  proude 
prestis  bef  myche  fe  worse.  And  so  schal  we  graunte,  fat 
3if  men  makif  aseef  to  God,  by  contritcioun  of  here  herte, 
her  synne  is  for^eve  hem,  ^if  fei  speke  wif  non  ofere  prest. 
iFor  Cristis  lawe  is  fre  and  schort.     Trowe  we,  whanne  Crist 


Answer  to  the 
objection  that 
the  Wycliffite 
doctrine  takes 
away  their 
power  from 
priests. 


0^6% 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


On  the  power 
claimed  for  the 
pope  of  dis- 
pensing the 
treasure  of  the 
accumulated 
merits  of  the 
saints. 


for^af  synne  oJ)er  to  men  or  wommen,  as  Petir  or  Poul,  or 
Mawdeleyn  or  Baptist,  or  opere  seyntis,  J)at  he  sente  hem  to 
oJ?ere  prestis  to  be  assoyllid,  as  we  usen  now  ?  And  we  schulde 
trowe,  ])at  ^if  Cristis  lawe  axed  evere  suche  absolucioun,  Grist 
wolde  no^t  for^ete  it,  but  fulfilide  it,  as  he  dide  Moises  lawe ; 
and  herfore  badde  he  leprous  men  go  and  schewe  hem  to 
prestis.  And  so  is  nedful  in  pe  Chirche  to  have  prestis  of 
Goddis  lawe,  to  telle  J?e  peple  by  what  signe  fei  schulde  hope 
her  synne  is  for^eve  hem,  and  what  privylege  ]?ei  schulde  have 
of  God,  for  servyse  J;at  Jjei  serve de  him.  But  hope  schulde 
stonde  in  such  J^ingis,  and  no^t  bileve,  fat  schal  be  comun. 

And  so  ])is  founed  fantasye  of  spiritual  tresour  in  hevene,  J?at 
eche  pope  is  maad  dispensour  of  ]?is  tresour  at  his  owne  will, 
J}is  is  a  li^t  word,  dremed  wi}>outen  ground.  Ffor  J?anne  ech 
pope  schulde  be  lord  of  ]?is  hevenly  tresour,  and  so  he  schulde 
be  ix^-xd  of  Crist  and  ojjere  seyntis  in  hevene,  ^e,  ^if  he  were 
a  fend,  as  was  Judas  Schariot.  Lord!  whi  schulde  God  of 
hevene  make  J?is  fend  suche  a  lord  ?  si]?  it  is  propre  unto  God  to 
dele  suche  merit! s,  and  alle  meritis  Jjat  be]?  in  hevene  be]?  fully 
rewarded,  so  ]?at  none  is  ydil,  but  nedlyche  mut  be  do.  And  so 
is  ^  applicacoun  or  delynge  of  merit,  presumed  of  }?es  popis,  is 
proprid  unto  God,  and  so  ]?is  founed  blasfemye  [is]^  blabred  wi]i- 
outen  grounde,  [to]^  suppose  ]?at  eche  pope  be  God,  more  mayster 
in  his  liif  }?anne  he  is  in  his  dee]?,  whanne  o]3ir  men  be]?  bettre. 
A!  si}?  ]?es  merites  be  wi]?outen  ende,  so  ]?at,  ^if^  ech  man  were 
maad  bi  him  a  seynt,  ]?e  meritis  ]?at  leve}?  schulde  suffice  for  alle 
seyntis,  what  charite  is  in  ]?e  pope  ^if  he  dele  hem  no3t  largely, 
and  make  bo]?e  him  and  his  passynge  seyntis  in  hevene  ?  Certis 
5if  ony  of  ]?es  men  be  dampned  in  his  tyme,  hit  seme]?  him  failij? 
charite,  and  ]?anne  he  is  a  fend.  3  if  he  hadde  a  lumpe  of  fei}?, 
and  witt  of  Goddis  lawe,  he  schulde  schune  suche  feynyngis  as 
open  heresy e.  Witte  and  charite  lasti}?  in  hevene  wi]?  o]?ir 
glorious  ^iftis,  but  meritis  be]?  passid  *  in  her  kynde,  but  fruyt 
of  hem  lefe}?.  And  so  it  were  lasse  heresye  to  seie,  ]?e  pope  is 
lord  of  blisse  and  witt  and  of  charite,  and  ]?us  J?is  may  he  dis- 
pense, and  take  ]?erof  to  him  at  his  owne  will,  and  a^enst  selle 


dele  i 


should  be  passynge  ? 


supplied  conjecturally. 


3  corrected ;  ^if  Ipat,  AA. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


263 


to  o]?ere  men,  for  noJ>ing  may  lette  him.  And  so  it  seme])  }>at 
})is  tresore  is  better  wij)0uten  mesm*  }>anne  alle  ]?e  worldly  lord- 
schipe  ]?at  jje  pope  ha]?  of  J?e  emperrour.  Ffor  ^if  he  solde 
bere  ^  penewor]?  of  J?is  goostly  tresour,  hit  wolde  come  to  more 
moneye  ]>anne  al  \e  world  is  wor]?e.  Lord !  how  riche  is  j^is 
man  for  havynge  of  ])is  tresour !  And  ^if  ]?ou  seie  he  may  no^t 
selle  ne  parte  but  as  God  lymytej),  for  ellis  my^te  he  putte  in 
blisse  enemye  to  his  God,  certis  J?anne  is  ])is  tresour  veynlyche 
in  ])is  office,  si]>,  magry  his,  God  mote  dele  as  resoun  and  good 
liif  axijj.  So  ^if  ]?e  pope  be  deed,  or  falle  in  synne,  he  ha]? 
no])ing  hereof.  Lord!  how  helpe})  he  his  God  to  parte  ]?is 
goostly  dole  ? 

Cap.  VIIL 

Off  J)is  may  men  se,  how  falsely  freris  feynej?  ^ifte  of  ]?is 
tresore  to  ech  pope  of  Rome.  Ffor  certis  God  may  no3t  be 
acceptour  of  persoones,  but  evere  ]?e  betre  man  rewardij?  he 
more.  Ffor  J?e  pope  is  no^t  betre  for  he  forsaki]?  Goddis  hestis  ; 
how  schulde  he  be  tresorer  to  God  wij)0uten  resoun  ?  Also,  si]?e 
in  ])e  Chirche  above  is  no  meryt  in  his  kynde,  si]?e  seyntis  be]? 
passid  ])e  state  of  merrit  and  come  to  staat  of  blisse,  J)e  tresour 
J)at  Jje  pope  dispensi]?  schulde  be  lisse  in  his  kynde,  and  he  is 
yvel  tresourer,  but  ^if  he  take  him  sum  j?erof,  and  yvel  myn- 
ystrei]>  to  his  God,  si]?  God  taki]?  fro  him  all,  ^ee,  every  part  of 
J?is  blisse  J)at  he  my3te  kepe  in  his  soule  a.  Also,  si]?e  ]?e  pope 
my3te  take  ]?is  blisse  into  his  soule,  and  be  most  blisful  fadir,  as 
he  assentej?  }?at  he  be  clepid,  no  pope  schal  be  dampned,  si]?e 
blisse  may  nevere  be  lost ;  and  so  he  is  confermed  in  J>is  liif 
more  J?an  Petir  or  Poul,  ffor  certis  Jjei  hadde  her  a  staat  ]?at 
stood  no^t  wi}?  her  blisse.  Lord !  whe]?er  blisse  be  suche  a  ])ing 
Jjat  may  be  take  fro  seyntes  in  heuene,  and  putt  in  soulis  of 
erj?ely  men,  as  ]?e  pope  lykij)  ?  pis  is  ]?e  lewedeste  heresie  ]?at 
evere  was  founde  of  freris. 

But,  for  J)e  secunde  heresie,  of  byinge  of  swerdis,  seme]?  to 
have  more  colour  by  wordis  of  J)e  gospel,  Jjerof  it  were  good 
for  to  speke  more.     And  sij)  Jerom  witnessi]?,  he  is  an  open 

^  this  is  the  reading  of  A  A ;  query  bi  ]>e  ? 

a  The  meaning  of  the  latter  part  of  this  sentence  is  to  me  inscrutable. 


Absurdities 
that  seem  to 
flow  from  this 
doctrine. 


The  question 
as  to  Christ's 
command  to 
buy  swords 
further  dis- 
cussed. 


264 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


heretik  ]?at  expoune])  Goddis  lawe  to  o])ere  witt  J?an  God  mene]?, 
freris  schulde  avise  hem  wel  byfore  Jjei  seid  J^at  Crist  baad  to  his 
apostlis  to  bie  hem  swerdis,  ^ee,  ^if  j?ei  selle  here  cotis  ]?erfore. 
For  it  is  certeyn,  ^if  Crist  baad  it,  he  dide  it  for  greet  resoun, 
and  for  cause  J)at  J^es  apostlis  schulde  use  ])es  swerdis  aftirward ; 
for  it  were  no  wisdom  to  bie  ])us  ]>ingis  J)at  men  schulde  no^t 
use,  but  be  combred  Jjerwi]? ;  and  it  is  no^t  semely  to  feyne  ]?is 
use  of  swerdis  but  for  to  fi^te  wi)?  hem,  as  Petir  dide  aftir.  And 
so  it  seme]?  ]?at  Crist  baad  his  apostlis  ])us  to  fi^te ;  for  kervynge 
of  mete,  or  scredynge  of  trees,  schulde  not  be  J)e  ende  J?at  ]?ei 
schulde  now  bigge  hem  swerdis.  But  ^if  Crist  wolde  ])at  ]?ei 
schulde  fi^te  wi]?  swerdis,  J?at  J?ei  schulde  Jjus  bigge,  hit  were 
wondir  whi  he  blamed 'Petir,  ffor  he  fau3t  wi]?  Malcus.  For  it 
is  no^t  likly  Jjat  Crist  blamed  him  for  cowardise,  ffor  si])  Crist 
helid  Malcus  ere,  he  wolde  not  J)at  he  hadde  hurte  him  werse, 
ne  his  will  ne  his  biddinge  chaunged  no^t  so  soone  to  J)e  con- 
trarie.  Also  doinge  of  Crist  is  beste  and  li^tteste  \2X  men  can 
divyse ;  but  Crist  my^te  li^tly  have  vencushid  his  enemyes  by 
word  or  bi  aungels,  al5if  he  hadde  no^t  woundid  hem;  ffor 
Crist  hadde  many  lygiouns  of  aungels  at  his  biddinge,  and 
whanne  Crist  seide  ])is  schort  word,  his  enemyes  wenten  aback 
and  fell  to  J>e  er])e.  Lord !  what  nedide  \q  apostlis  to  ])us  have 
bore  swerdis?  Also,  whanne  Crist  comaundi])  ou^t,  he  wole 
\2X  it  be  don ;  and  men  J)at  reversen  it  synnen  in  ]?e  levynge. 
But  J)e  apostlis  synnede  no^t  in  levynge  of  yren  swerdis  ;  ]?anne 
Crist  spak  no^t  in  veyn  to  bidde  hem  bie  such  swerdis.  Ne  ])e 
pris  was  no^t  covenable,  apostel  to  ^eve  his  kirtil  ffor  suche 
a  bodilyche  wepene  to  bete  wi])  ])e  er})e ;  ffor,  as  Seynt  Poul 
seij),  suche  fi^tynge  is  in  veyn.  Also,  Crist  was  no^t  in  lore 
contrarie  to  himsilf ;  but  he  tau^te  his  apostlis  to  vencushe  bi 
pacience,  and  in  suche  pacience  ])ei  schulde  have  peysible  her 
liif ;  and  ^if  a  man  wolde  smyte  on  ])e  ton  cheke,  jjei  schulde 
5eve  him  ]?e  to]?ere;  and  ho  bynyme]?  hem  her  cootis,  ]?ei 
schulde  5eve  hem  here  mantil.  Lord !  whe])er  ]5ei  schulde  ii^te 
for  bynemynge  of  suche  swerdis !  pis  falce  lore  lernede  nevere 
])es  martirs  as  Antecrist  ha])  now  brou^t  in ;  si])e  glorious 
kny5tis,  as  Seynt  Maurus  ^  and  his  felawis,  wolde  no^t  fi^te  for 
a  See  note  on  page  232. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


265 


her  liif,  but  mekely  suffrid  dee]?.  Lord!  where  ]?is  heresye 
schulde  meve  kny^tis  for  to  fi^te  for  lordschipe  of  Antecrist,  J>at 
Crist  himsilf  ha})  forbeden  ?  Also,  Jjes  apostlis  hadde  no3t  synned 
^if  ])ei  hadden  bou^te  suche  iren  swerdis,  5if  Crist  hadde  bede 
hem  bie  suche,  for  J^ei  hadde  do  his  biddynge.  But  he  seide, 
two  is  inow,  ]?at  he  wist  wel  fat  Jjei  hadde.  But  it  is  open  ])at 
]?ei  hadde  synned  to  bigge  more  wepene  Jjan  inow.  But  si]?e 
]?ei  hadde  suche  swerdis  inowe,  byfore  J?at  Crist  hadde  seid  fes 
wordis,  hit  seme]>  J^at  \€\  hadde  no3t  medfuUy  do,  bigginge  suche 
swerdis  mo  })an  inowe.  And  ]?us  blasfemye  of  })es  freris  mene]? 
]>at  Crist  was  a  fool,  and  scomefullyche  wijjouten  cause  he 
spaak  ])es  wordis  to  mennes  lore.  But  certis  of^  Crist  may 
no^t  be  fool,  ne  speke  wordis  wij^outen  greet  witt,  si]?e  he  may 
no^t  be  fool  suffering  freris  be  in  his  Chirche,  aljjou^  jjei  meve 
bischopis  to  fi3te  and  ]?erto  spoyle  }?e  pore  peple  wi)?  beggynge 
of  blasfeme  lesynge,  openly  prechide  a3enst  J)e  gospel. 

And  so  it  seme]>  J?at  J?es  wordis  of  Crist  menej?  two  juridic- 
ciouns,  as  spiritual  and  seculer ;  si]?  Crist  wolde  no3t  ]?at  seculer 
fel  to  his  apostlis,  si]?e  ]?ei  clene  use  prechinge ;  but,  as  Seynt 
Poul  techi]?,  \2X  Crist  mened  swerd  of  J)e  tunge,  ]?at  is,  spiritual 
swerdis  and  lyflyche  word  of  oure  God.  A I  quyk  is  Cristis 
word,  as  Seynt  Poul  sei]?,  and  scharper  ]?an  ony  two-eged 
swerd.  SiJ)e  it  picche]?  to  ]je  soule,  ])is  swerd  of  Goddis  word 
is  nedeful  apostlis  for  to  have,  whanne  \€\  be]?  pursued  to  ])e 
dee]),  as  Crist  ensaumplid  in  his  wordis.  But  si]?e  Crist  my3te 
no3t  fi3te  wij?  swerd  of  yren,  and  he  tau3te  no3t  lore  to  his 
apostlis  j?at  he  tau3te  no3t  do  in  dede,  sij?  he  bigan  to  do  and 
teche,  it  is  open  \2X  he  baad  no3t  bie  swerd  of  yren  for  to  fi3te, 
ne  to  booste  here  enemyes,  bojje  for  \t  tyme  was  derk,  and 
Crist  lyvede  no3t  by  biggynge  \2X  my3te  be  cause  of  fi3tynge 
to  make  pees  amonge  men,  but  mekenes  and  pacience  was  mene 
to  Crist  to  make  pees.  And  two  swerdis  be]?  inowe,  to  fi3te 
herwi]?  fendis  children, — one  to  teche  hem  scharplyche  and 
boldlyche  ]?e  word  of  God,  anno})ir  to  telle  hem  mekelyche  ]?e 
mede  J?at  sue]?  of  Goddis  lawe.  pe  bookeler  to  ]?is  goostly  fi3t 
is  a  man  to  holde  his  pees  in  tyme :  and  ]?us  fau3t  Crist  wij? 
boJ?e  his  hondis  whanne  he  was  pursued  to  }?e  dee]?;    and  ]>is 

^  dele  of. 


The  true  and 
spiritual  inter- 
pretation of 
the  command. 


Eph.  vi.  17. 


266 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


It  is  to  be 
wished  that  the 
land  may  be 
utterly  de- 
livered of 
friars. 


lore  is  comyn  to  alle  J>at  ben  Cristis  disciplis,  and  profytable 
and  sotil  whanne  we  be]?  pursued  of  men. 

And  God  ^efe  we  cowde  use  J)is  lore  whanne  we  speke  wij? 
wra]?ful  men !  Jeanne  schulde  Goddis  lawe  walke,  and  irous  men 
be  vencushed.  But  God  ^eve  \dX  })es  bolde  freris  use  no^t 
swerdis  to  %te  wi]?  men,  whanne  }?ei  telle  hem  Goddis  lawe, 
and  freris  defautis  a^ens  it ;  ffor  ))e  compenye  of  freris  my^te 
Jjanne  conquer  many  londis,  and  seie  ]>at  jjei  have  ri5t  of  God 
to  alle  }?e  goodis  jjat  bej)  ferinne,  but  God  ^efe  ]?at  j^ei  dide  no 
worse,  in  false  consence  and  falce  counseil.  0]?ir  freris  dremej) 
lasse  yvel,  ]?at  ]?es  two  swerdis  were  two  fleisch  knyves,  wi]) 
whiche  ]?ei  slowe  j?e  Paskcal  lombe,  and  aftir  Petir  fau^t  wi])  ]?e 
ton.  But  trowe  no^t  ])is  feynynge  of  freris,  sij^e  it  wantej? 
groundinge;  ne  it  is  not  liklyche  J)at  Crist,  pat  dide  alle  his 
dedis  bi  resoun,  schulde  carie  a  swerd  in  a  scaberge  for  to  slee 
a  sely  lombe.  And  here  many  men  supposen,  as  reule  ])at 
failli]?  no^t,  ]?at  word  groundide  first  in  freris  is  an  open  lesynge. 
But  ho  is  more  perilous  folke  to  rewmes  })at  Jjei  dwelli})  inne, 
])an  be])  suche  ypocritis  ?  ])at  seien  ]?at  ])ei  be]>  mediatours  by- 
twixe  God  and  man,  and  telle  alle  men  Goddis  wille,  and 
gabben  on  |)e  wille  of  God,  and  make  men  to  serve  ]?e  fend. 
pei  spoyle  no^t  oonly  of  rewmes  tresour  and  mennes  bodies, 
but  ])ei.sendi])  soulis  to  helle,  and  doi])  hemsilf  aftir. 


-*-=^<g:<|>c=>^ 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


267 


XXII. 

THE  CRETE  SENTENCE  OF 
CURS  EXPOUNED. 


[The  following  pamphlet,  of  which  a  complete  analysis  is  given  by 
Dr.  Vaughan  in  his  Tracts  and  Treatises  of  Wycliffe,  and  of  which  Lewis 
also,  in  his  Life  of  the  reformer,  made  considerable  use,  is  known  to  exist 
in  one  MS.  only,  the  Corpus  volume  at  Cambridge,  so  often  referred  to. 
The  text  of  this  volume  is  not  in  a  good  state,  having  been  evidently  writ- 
ten by  a  careless  scribe ;  of  this  the  frequent  conjectural  emendations  at 
foot  of  the  page  will  supply  evidence.  The  text  as  here  given  to  the  reader 
is  founded  on  a  transcript  made  at  Cambridge,  which  my  fiiend  Mr.  W.  A. 
Wright  has  been  good  enough  to  examine  vidth  the  MS.  before  sending  it 
to  me.  This  transcript  I  have  again  compared  with  a  transcript  made  for 
Lewis  about  a  centuiy  and  a  half  ago,  and  now  among  the  Rawlinsonian 
MSS.  in  the  Bodleian  Library. 

With  regard  to  authenticity,  it  seems  to  me  impossible  to  come  to  any 
certain  conclusion.  The  treatise  does  not  occur  in  Bale's  Catalogue,  nor  is 
it  ascribed  to  Wyclif  by  any  early  writer ;  in  fact,  there  is  no  external  evi- 
dence whatever  in  support  of  its  having  been  wiitten  by  Wyclif  beyond  the 
circumstance  of  its  being  found  in  the  Corpus  volume.  The  internal 
evidence,  so  far  as  date  goes,  is  satisfactory  enough.  The  Council  of 
London  is  referred  to  in  ch.  xix,  as  having  recently  taken  place,  and  in 
oh.  XXV  Bishop  Spencer's  war  in  Flanders  seems  to  be  spoken  of  as  actually 
going  on;  this  would  fix  the  date  of  composition  to  1383,  about  a  year 
before  Wyclif 's  death.  With  regard  to  the  style,  opinions  may  differ ;  but 
it  does  not  seem  to  me  to  be  precisely  that  of  Wyclif,  but  more  appropriate 
to  some  fiery  follower  of  his,  who  had  reached  a  point  of  intense  exaspera- 
tion not  exhibited  in  the  tmdoubted  works  of  Wyclif. 

The  author's  choice  of  subject,  and  the  title  of  the  work,  have  great  light 
thrown  upon  them  by  a  document  printed  by  Mr.  Maskell  {Monutn.  Ritual. 
Eccl.  Angl.,  vol.  ii.  p.  286)  from  an  early  printed  copy  of  the  Sarum  Manual 
in  the  Bodleian  Library.  The  heading  of  this  document  is — '  Isti  sunt 
generales  articuli  majoris  excommwiicationis  in  lingua  materna,  et  dicantur 


^68 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


hoc  modo.'    I  shall  extract  from  what  follows  such  portions  as  directly 
illustrate  our  text : — 

'  Godemen  and  wymmen,  it  is  ordeyned  by  the  counseil  of  alJ  holi  Chirche  : 
First  of  our  holy  fader  the  pope  of  Rome,  and  his  cardinaiis,  and  all  his  coun- 
seil, sithen  of  alle  archebisshopes  and  all  the  clergie,  that  every  man  of  holy 
Chirche  that  hath  soule  for  to  kepe,  sholde  shewe  among  them  foure  sithe  bi 
yere,  the  articles  that  ben  writen  in  the  general  sentence,  that  is  for  to  seyn,  the 
pointes  that  longen  to  the  great  curs ;  that  on  is  the  fyrst  Sonday  of  Advent, 
that  other  is  the  first  Sonday  of  Lenten,  and  the  nexte  Sonday  after  Witsonday, 
and  the  first  Sonday  after  the  Assumpcyon  of  our  Lady.' 

The  document  proceeds  to  explain  for  the  information  of  the  laity 
the  terrible  effects,  here  and  hereafter,  of  church  cursing,  especially  of  the 
'  great  curse,*  which  is  now  in  question.  The  next  clause  which  our  pam- 
phlet refers  to  runs  as  follows : — 

*  So  that  first  and  formest,  we  denounce  acurse,  all  tho  that  holy  Chirche  folsH 
depriven  of  any  right  or  profyt,  either  by  law  writen,  or  elles  by  good  custom 
which  hath  ben  holden  and  used  of  old  tyme :  and  in  this  poynt  falleth  iii 
manner  of  folk :  first  all  tho  that  steleth  holy  Chirche  goodes  in  what  place  so 
they  ben  don  for  to  kepe :  or  elles  that  stele  unhalowed  thynges  out  of  holy 
place,  or  thinges  that  ben  halowed  out  of  place  unhalowed,  and  all  tho  that 
wytyngly  breke  and  destroye  any  poynt  of  fredom  that  longeth  to  holy  Chirche  : 
and  this  is  nought  all  onely  understand  of  the  fredomes  that  longen  generaly  to 
all  holy  Chirche,  but  also  of  other  special  fredomes,  which  that  some  chirche 
hath  more  one  than  another.* — Capp.  ii,  xxiv,  '  Grete  sentence,  &c.* 

Two  clauses  follow  (relating  to  church  courts  and  assault  on  persons, 
belonging  to  the  clerical  order),  which  are  not  specially  referred  to ;  then 
comes : — 

'Also  we  denounce  all  tho  acursed,  that  maliciousli  stele  or  destroye  the 
goodes,  that  longeth  to  manere,  or  to  graunges  of  any  men  or  women  of  reli- 
gion, or  of  archebisshop,  of  bisshop,  other  of  any  other  place  of  mennes  of  holy 
Chirche,  wythout  special  leve  of  them  that  have  the  goodes  to  kepe.* — Cap.  xix. 

Several  clauses  follow,  designed  for  the  protection  of  the  persons  and 
property  of  the  clergy,  which  the  pamphleteer  does  not  notice;  then 
comes : — 

'  Also  all  tho  ben  acursed  by  al  holy  Chirche  that  breke  or  destorb  the  unite 
and  the  pes :  first  of  our  lorde  the  kyng,  and  sythen  of  his  kynne,  by  power,  or  by 
counseil,  by  word  or  by  werk :  or  elles  by  any  way  to  herte  or  to  compace  hys 
deth,  or  any  point  of  traytourie  of  hym  or  of  his  lond :  and  all  tho  that  falsly 
withholde  Ms  heretayge  or  any  other  ryght,  that  hym  ought  lawfully  to  have  ; 
and  all  tho  ben  acursed,  that  geve  mede,  or  elles  take  any  manere  geftes  for  to 
lette  pes,  and  for  to  procure  strif  in  any  degre,  other  more  or  lasse,  among 
Cristene  folk.' — Cap.  x. 

*  Also  they  ben  acursed  in  hevun  and  in  erthe,  that  falsli  forswere  them  upon 
the  holydam :  and  knowe  wel  that  it  is  fals  whenne  they  begynne  to  swere, 
in  questes,  or  in  acises,  or  in  any  other  fals  cause :  and  all  tho  that  hyre  suche 
men,  or  make  them  to  be  hyred,  or  mayntene  them,  or  teche  them,  eyther  by 
word  or  werk,  for  to  lette  trewe  matrymonye,  or  lawful  herytage,  or  testament, 
or  ought  elles  that  is  trewly  ordeyned :  and  also  all  tho  advokatis  of  lawe  of  holy 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


^69 


Chirche,  that  in  plee  of  matrimonye,  or  any  other  trewe  cause  make  wytingly, 
and  with  any  semed  false  exceptions  for  to  destroye,  or  lette,  or  tarie  a  trewe 
canse,  that  it  may  nought  spedly  be  discussed,  and  ended  after  the  cours  of 
lawe/ — Cap.  xii. 

*  Also  all  tho  ben  acursed,  that  for  hate  or  for  mede,  or  any  other  encheson, 
sclaundre  falsli,  or  defame  any  man  or  woman,  so  that  they  be  brought  fro 
good  fame  unto  wykked,  wherefor  that  thei  have  nede  to  porge  them  bi  the 
lawe  and  ben  therfore  gretly  greved,  and  anoyed  in  body  and  in  soule/-^Cap.  ix. 

Of  the  numerous  clauses  relating  to  the  important  subject  of  tithe,  the 
following  is  the  only  one  which  the  pamphleteer  directly  notices : — 

'  And  that  Crystene  men  and  women  be  hard  bounden  on  peyne  of  dedly 
synne  nought  alle  onely  be  the  ordenaunce  of  man,  but  first  and  formest  be  the 
ordenaunce  and  the  commaundament  of  all  myghty  God  them  selfe,  but  in  the 
olde  lawe  and  also  in  the  newe,  for  to  paye  trewly  to  God  and  holy  Chirche, 
the  tenthe  part  of  all  maner  of  thinges  that  them  have  by  yere ;  also  wel  the 
tenthe  part  of  all  maner  encrese,  that  they  winne  trewly  by  the  grace  of  God, 
both  with  here  travaille  and  also  with  here  craftes ;  also  the  tenthe  part  of  al 
maner  of  fysshes  and  foules  and  bestes  bothe  wild  and  tame,  and  of  al  manere 
frutes  that  growe  out  of  the  erthe,  wytnessed  wel  Seynt  Austyn  in  hys  decret, 
as  it  is  wryten  in  the  lawe  of  holy  Chirche.  And  what  veniaunce  that  our 
Lorde  God  taket  upon  thys  world,  by  encheson  of  them  that  with  nought  paye 
ther  tythes,  and  also  for  them  that  falsly  tythe,  and  in  what  manere  that  our 
Lorde  God  hath  graunted  iiii  thinges  to  all  them  that  trewly  tithe,  telleth 
openly  Seynt  Jerome,  in  the  same  cause  and  question  I  seide  ere,  and  also  Seynt 
Austin  in  the  same  chapit.  Also  men  of  holy  Chirche  have  leve  by  Goddis 
lawe,  for  to  acurse  al  tho  by  name  that  wyl  nought  paye  ther  tythes,  as  it  is 
writen  in  many  places  in  the  lawe  of  holy  Chirche.' — Cap.  xvii. 

Sanchmry. 

*  And  also  ye  shal  knowe  wel  that  all  tho  ben  acursed,  that  in  vyolence 
drawe  out  any  man  or  woman,  that  fleth  for  help  and  secure  unto  holy  Chirche : 
or  elles  out  of  any  other  place  that  is  halowed,  but  in  certein  poyntes  that  the 
lawe  geveth  leve.  Or  lette  them  to  have  sustenaunce  ther  while  thei  ben  there, 
and  all  tho  that  geve  therto  help  or  counseil.' — Cap.  xxiii. 

Wills. 

*  Also  all  tho  ben  acursed  that  lette  or  procure  to  lette  the  testament,  and  the 
laste  wil  of  folk  whan  they  deye,  of  thynges  that  ben  ther  owne,  and  that  they 
maye  skilfully  bequethe  bothe  by  lawe  of  holy  Chirche  and  by  custome :  whether 
it  be  testament  of  wyves,  or  of  widedowes,  or  of  any  other  wymmen  :  but  al 
onely  of  theym  that  ben  bounden,  wher  that  it  is  ordeyned  so  by  olde  custome 
of  the  contre,  and  of  them  that  ben  bounden  men  to  religion,  the  whiche 
shulde  by  lawe  of  holy  Chyrch  have  notyng  of  ther  owne,  and  also  that  be 
sworne  and  charged  with  executoriis,  and  fulfille  nought  the  dedes  wil  as  ther 
charge  axeth,' — Cap.  xiv. 

Taxation  of  the  clergy. 

*  Also  all  tho  seculer  men  whych  that  be  reweleres  and  leaders  of  cytees,  and 
of  townes,  yf  they  make  any  unlefful  taxes,  or  talages,  or  any  exaccyones  on 
prestes  and  clerkes,  and  men  of  holy  Chirche,  and  constreyne  them  by  there 
lewed  power,  or  elles  by  any  way  for  to  do,  or  destroye,  the  jurisdiccion  of 
prelates  of  holy  Chirche,  but  yf  thei  leve  such  do}mge  for  evere,  whych  tyme 
that  they  be  amonested  lawfully  therto,  elles  they  ben  acursed  in  thys  gret  curs. 


27° 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 

and  may  nought  be  assoyled  or  thei  have  mad  ful  amendes,  both  to  them  that 
they  have  so  greved,  and  also  to  holy  Chirche.' — Cap.  ii. 


Magna  Carta, 

*  Also  tho  that  breke  any  point  of  the  kinges  great  chartre  or  chartre  of  the 
forest,  in  wiche  chartre  is  writen  the  fredoms  of  this  lond,  that  divers  kynges 
have  graunted  to  everi  man  :  in  the  grete  chartre  ben  xxxv  pointes  and  the  chartre 
of  the  forest  comprehendith  xv  pointes ;  and  all  archebishops  and  bishops  that 
longen  to  Engelond  have  acnrset  all  tho  that  breke  wytingli  any  of  all  these 
pointes,  the  wych  sentence  of  cursynge  hath  ben  often  confermed  by  the  court 
of  Rome/ — Cap.  xxiv. 

Forgery,  &c. 

*  And  all  tho  ben  acursed,  that  false  the  popes  letters  or  is  seel,  or  any  other 
letters  or  seel  that  ben  autentik,  and  all  tho  that  them  purchase,  and  all  tho  that 
use  wytingly  suche  false  purchased  letters.' — Cap.  xvi. 

'  And  also  all  tho  ben  acursed  that  stele,  or  destroye,  or  falsli  with  holde  chartre, 
or  testamentes,  or  any  other  maner  letters,  that  longen  til  other  men ;  wher 
for  thei  lese  their  heritage,  or  any  right  that  thei  shulde  have  by  lawe.  And 
all  tho  that  use  false  weghtes,  or  false  yerdes,  or  any  other  false  measures  for 
to  deceive  the  people  with,  and  all  tho  that  false  the  kinges  moneye,  or  clippeth 
or  maketh  lasse  hi  cause  of  their  profit.' — Capp.  xiii,  xxi. 


Heresy  and  Simony. 

*  And  all  heretikes  ben  acursed,  and  all  tho  that  mayntene  heresie :  and  all 
tho  that  use  symonye  :  and  all  usurers :  and  all  tho  that  make,  whanne  usure 
ys  taken,  that  yt  be  nought  restored  agen,  and  all  tho  that  Hve  on  such  craft : 
and  all  tho  that  be  cursed  bi  name :  and  all  tho  that  wilfully  slee  them  selve.' — 
Capp.  i,  iv. 


Thefi. 

*  Also  we  denounce  acursed  all  open  theves  and  robberes,  and  all  that  them 
receyve  wytyngly,  or  gyve  them  help  or  counseil/ — Cap.  xx. 

Parricide. 

'  And  them  that  in  violence  drawe  blod  on  her  fader  or  moder,  and  this  is 
understonde  bothe  of  bodili  fader  and  n;ioder,  and  goostly.' — Cap.  xxii. 


But  the  version  of  the  Great  Curse  from  which  these  extracts  are  taken 
is  confessedly  an  incomplete  one ;  for  at  the  end  of  the  next  clause  occur 
the  words — *  and  many  other  poyntes  also  longe  unto  this  greate  sentence.' 
This  explains  the  fact  that  the  offences  anathematized  in  the  last  five 
chapters  of  the  pamphlet  are  nowhere  particularly  described  in  the  docu- 
ment now  under  consideration.  Careful  search  would  probably  lead  to 
the  discovery  of  a  fuller  version  than  that  here  cited  from.] 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS, 


271 


Heee  bigynne]?  J>e  geete  sentence  of  cues  expouned. 


Cap.  I. 


FiEST  ^,  alle  heretikis  a^enst  j?e  fei}?  of  holy  ^vritt  ben  cursed 
solempnely  foure  tymes  in  Jje  ^er,  and  also  meyntenouris  and 
consentoris  to  heresie  or  heretikis  in  here  errour.  Sij>  Jjen 
heresie  is  errour  meyntened  a^enst  holy  writt,  as  Seynt  Austyn 
and  o})ere  clerkis  seyn,  who  evere  meyntene]?  ony  errour  a^enst 
Goddis  lawe  is  an  heretik,  be  he  prest,  be  he  lord,  be  he  pore, 
be  he  riche,  or  of  what  evere  degre.  panne  ^if  oure  clerkis  fat 
lyven  worldly,  in  pride,  pompe  and  covetise,  and  ydelnesse  fro 
gostly  traveile,  understonden  ]?at  ]?is  is  Goddis  wille  and  his 
lawe,  ]?ei  ben  in  open  errour  a^enst  holy  writt ;  and  ^if  j?ei  witen 
J;at  ]jis  lif  is  a^enst  Goddis  techynge  and  his  ensaumple,  and  ^it 
holden  it  for]?  for  lust  and  ese  of  body,  and  meyntene  it  in 
word  or  dede,  J?ei  ben  expresse  heretikis  and  cursed  Anticristis, 
whom  no  man  schulde  resceyve  in  to  his  hous,  ne  grete  hsm  in 
\q  weie. 

Also,  who  evere  understondij?  holy  writt  ofer  wise  Jjan  ]?e 
Holy  Gost  axi]>  is  an  heretik,  as  Seynt  Jerom^-  and  oj^ere 
seyntis  witnessen.  But  oure  worldly  prelatis  understonden 
wrongfully  holy  writt  in  mater  of  prechynge  of  Cristis  gospel ; 
Jjerfore  J»ei  ben  cursed  heretikis.  For  whanne  Seynt  Poul  axij), 
hou  men  schulden  preche  but  ^if  fei  ben  sent,  ]?ei  understonden, 
but  ^if  men  ben  sent  of  ]?e  pope,  or  ojjere  worldly  prelatis, 
where  Seynt  Poul  understondi]?  sendynge  of  God;  so  J?at  ^if 
worldly  prelatis  wolen  ])at  [J>ei^]  prechen  not  ]?e  gospel  wi]?- 
outen  here  licence,  ]?ei  schullen  not  speke  Jjc  treu}?e  of  })e  gospel 
to  save  Cristene  soulis,  j/ou^  God  stire  hem  nevere  so  moche 
)?erto,  bi  wynnyng  of  hevenely  blisse  ^if  ]?ei  don  it  wel,  and  bi 
everelastynge  peyne  ^if  }?ei  don  it  not  treuely  and  wilfully  and 


^  corrected ;  frist  in  MS. 

»  S.  Hieron.  in  Epist.  ad  Gal. 
cap.  V :  *  Quicimque  igitur  aliter 
vScripturam  intelligit,  quam  sensus 
Spiritus    Sancti    flagitat    quo  con- 


2  supplied  conjecturally. 

scripta  est,  licet  de  Ecclesia  non 
recesserit,  tamen  haereticus  appel- 
lari  potest.' 


Those  of  the 
clergy  who  in- 
dulge in  world- 
ly pomp  are 
either  in  error 
or  in  heresy. 


Aga!n  the  per- 
version by  the 
higher  clergy 
of  the  scri|3- 
tural  meaning 
of  mission  is 
heretical. 


^"Jl 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS, 


A  third  syrap- 
torn,  and  also 
evidence,  of 
their  evil  life, 
is  their  per- 
secution of  the 
poor  priests. 


frely,  as  Crist  bad  his  disciplis.  For  if  here  understondynge 
sue]?  ]?is  open  errour,  fat  an  angel  of  God  schal  not  do  Goddis 
massagis  to  save  Cristene  soulis,  for  a  worldly  prest,  Anticrist 
and  cursed  heretik,  and  in  cas  a  dampnyd  fend,  as  Judas  was, 
lettij)  Goddis  biddyng  mercy  and  charite,  ])erfor  ])ei  j^at  under- 
stonden  ]3us  ])is  sendyng  ben  in  open  heresie.  For  \q  Holy 
Gost  understondi])  not  )?us  }?is  part  of  holy  writt  as  )?es  worldly 
prelatis  don,  but  evene  ]?e  contrarie.  For  certis  a  prest  may 
be  sent  of  J?is  worldly  prelatis  wi]?  here  lettris  and  selis,  and  ^it 
be  an  heretik,  bi  symonye,  bi  lesyngis  put  on  God  to  meyntene 
his  ypocrisie,  and  robbyng  of  ]?e  comyns,  bi  flateryng  and  beg- 
gynge  and  oJ)ere  disceitis,  and  not  sent  of  God  but  bi  Jje  fend, 
whois  werkis  he  prechij?  and  do]?,  and  J>erfore  cursed  of  God 
and  alle  his  trewe  servauntis.  perfore  sendyng  of  ]?es  worldly 
prelatis  is  not  ynow^,  wi)?outen  sendynge  of  God,  as  Seynt  Poul 
mene]?.  And  God  axi]?  trewe  ^  lif  aftir  his  lawe,  and  trewe 
prechynge  of  J^e  gospel,  wi]?  clene  entent,  not  for  worldly  name, 
ne  coveitise  of  worldly  muk,  ne  bacbytynge  of  pore  prestis  and 
hyndryng  of  Cristis  ordynaunce,  and  meyntenyng  of  worldly 
lif  of  clerkis,  as  false  prophetis  prechen  now,  but  trewly  to  dis- 
pise  synne  and  teche  vertues,  for  honour  of  God  and  helpynge 
of  Cristene  soulis  to  heveneward. 

Also,  oure  worldly  clerkis  lyven  not  only  ajenst  holy  writt 
in  word  and  dede,  but  also  meyntenen  ]?er  worldly  lif  bi  ypo- 
crisie, bi  fals  excusacions  and  false  expounyng  of  holy  writt, 
and  hard  persecucion  of  pore  prestis  ]?at  prechen  Cristis  meke- 
nesse,  his  wilful  poveit,  and  gostly  bysynesse,  and  witnyssen 
\2X  prelatis  schulden  sue  Crist  in  J?es  }?re  specialy.  For  })es 
pore  prestis  ben  sclaundrid  for  heretikis,  cursed  and  prisoned 
wi]?outen  answere,  for  as  moche  as  ])ei  stonden  for  Cristis  lif 
and  techynge,  and  meyntenaunce  of  ]?e  kingis  regale  and  power 
of  seculer  lordis,  and  savyng  of  Cristene  mennus  souHs,  a^enst 
Anticristis  tirauntrie,  and  ypocrisie  of  his  weiward  disciplis,  ]?at 
envenymyn  and  distroien  holy  Chirche.  And  of  ]?e  discrivyng 
of  heresie  may  men  se,  how  eche  man  }>at  meyntene]?  [Godjdis 
comandemetis  is  a  cursed  heretyk,  for  in  J^at  he  meyntene]? 


^  corrected ;  irew]>e^  X. 


WYCLIF. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


^73 


errour  a^enst  holy  writt.  And  blynd  entent,  or  blynd  devo- 
cion,  excusi)>  not  Jjes  worldly  clerkis,  wi)?  here  fautouris,  no 
more  }>an  Petir  was  excused  fro  Sathanas,  and  PonI  of  blas- 
phemye  notwi|>stondynge  here  blynd  entent,  a^enst  Goddis 
wille,  for  goodnesse  and  ri^twisnesse,  as  hem  J)0U5te.  Moche 
more  worldly  clerkis  and  here  fautours  schullen  not  be  excused 
a^enst  ]>e  opyn  meke  and  pore  and  traveilouse  lif  of  Crist  and 
his  apostlis,  for  no  sotel  ypocrisie  of  Anticrist,  and  blynde 
devocion  of  glotenouse  manquelleris,  for  pride  and  covetise. 

Cap."^!!. 

Alle  \o  ben  cursed  solempnely,  jjat  spoilen  and  taken  awey 
ony  ri3t  of  holy  Chirche,  or  defrauden^  holy  Chirche  of  ony 
dewte^.  Here  Cristene  men,  tau^t  inn  Goddis  lawe,  clepen 
holy  Chirche  ]?e  congregacion  of  juste  men  for  whom  Jesus 
Crist  schedde  his  blood,  not  for  stones  and  tymber  and  er]?ely 
muk,  \2X  Anticristis  clerkis  magnyfien  more  }>an  Goddis  ri^t- 
wisnesse  and  Cristen  soulis.  pan  }?o  prelatis  and  curatis  J^at 
wijjdrawen  })e  ri^tful  prechynge  of  Cristis  gospel  fro  Cristene 
men,  \2X  ben  holy  Chirche,  ben  acursed  of  God  and  alle  his 
seyntis  :  for  }>is  trewe  techyng  is  most  dewe  to  holy  Chirche,  and 
is  most  chargid  of  God,  and  most  profitij?  to  Cristene  men, 
5if  it  be  wel  don.  perfore,  as  moche  as  Goddis  word  and  blisse 
of  hevene  and  Cristene  soulis  ben  betre  fan  erj?ely  goodis,  so 
moche  ben  ]?es  worldly  prelatis,  []>at^]  wij^drawyn  ])is  grete 
dette  of  holy  techynge,  worse  )?eves  and  curse  den  sacrelegires 
]?an  bodily  feves  fat  breken  chirchis  and  stelen  chalicis,  veste- 
mentis,  or  nevere  so  moche  gold  out  of  hem.  First,  J?ei  ben 
grevously  acursed  of  God  for  ])is  roberie  of  Cristene  men, 
whanne  fei  wifdrawen  Cristes  gospel  fro  fe  eris  of  Cristene 
peple.  pe  secunde  tyme  fei  ben  more  grevously  acursed, 
whanne  fei  letten  and  forbarren  ofere  prestis  to  teche  trewely 
and  frely  Cristis  gospel,  whanne  fei  hemself  kunnen  not  or 
wolen  not  for  here  bodily  ese,  or  may  not  for  worldly  occu- 
pation. As  whoso  were,  up  peyne  of  hangyng  and  drawyng, 
to  fede  many  lege  men  of  oure  kynge,  and  toke  ferfore  wagis 


^  corrected ;  defaudren,  X. 
conjecturally. 

WORKS.      VOL.   III. 


2  corrected;  dwte,  X. 


supplied 


The  rulers  of 
the  Church  are 
justly  liable  to 
anathema, — 


I.  because  they 
will  not  preach 
the  gospel 
themselves ; 


2.  because  they 
prevent  true 
ministers  from 
preaching  it ; 


274 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


3.  because  they 
authorize  false 
teachers  to 
preach  cor- 
ruptions of  it. 


Our  worldly 
prelates  also 
sin  by  with- 
holding- the 
example  of  per- 
sonal holiness, 


ynowe,  and  wastide  hem,  and  snffride  ]?e  kyngis  lege  men  die 
for  hunger,  or  ^elde  J^e  castel  and  hemself  to  ]?e  kyngis 
enemys, — he  were  a  cruel  traitour  and  sleere  of  all  fes  men ; 
and  5it  more  traitour,  ^if  he  lettide  o]?ere  kny^ttis  ^  of  oure  kyng 
to  viteie  jjes  men  asegid,  and  rescowe  hem  of  here  enemyes. 
So  it  is  of  )?is  worldly  prelatis  and  curatis,  l>at  taken  cure  of 
soulis  and  tifes  and  offryngis  to  teche  hem  Goddis  lawe,  and 
purge  hem  of  synnes  \ox\^  preier  and  prechyng  and  good 
ensaumple,  last  Jje  devel  }>at  evere  ensegi^  mannus  soule  cumbre 
hem  in  synne  and  bringe  hem  to  helle.  pe  Jjridde  tyme  Jjes 
weiward  prelatis  ben  most  grevously  cursed  of  God ;  for 
whanne  ])ei  kunnen  not  preche  ]?e  gospel,  or  may  not,  or  wolen 
not,  or  letten  o])ere  pore  prestis  to  helpe  Cristene  soulis  bi 
techyng  of  Goddis  word,  J^ei  graunten  leve  to  false  prechouris 
Jjat  sowen  lesyngis,  and  bi'flateryng  and  ol?ere  veyn  preieris 
norischen  men  in  synne,  and  robben  Jje  peple  bi  fals  beggynge 
J)at  J)ei  putten  on  Crist,  seiyng  J)at  he  beggede  as  Jjei  don. 
For  ]jus  Jjei  wi})drawen  trewe  prechynge  of  ])e  gospel  fro 
Cristene  men,  and  neden  hem  to  ete  and  drynke  venym  of 
Anticristis  lesingis  and  flateryng,  and  to  be  robbid  of  here 
catel  bi  ypocrisie  of  stronge  beggeris.  As  kny^t,  chargid  of  \q 
kyng  to  kepe  his  castel  and  his  men,  and  hereto  hadde  wagis 
ynowe,  and  wolde  not  do  |)is  office,  but  lette  o]3ere  j^at  wolden 
save  }?es  men  for  pite,  but  over  }>is  he  nedide  hym^  to  be 
governed  bi  here  enemys,  and  \ti  schulden  have  here  goodis 
for  to  slee  J)es  men  in  })e  castel,  in  f>is  poynt  were  ^  most  opyn 
traitour  to  his  kyng,  so  it  fallij?  bi  oure  weiward  prelatis,  })at 
prechen  not  Cristis  gospel,  but  letten  o]>ere  pore  prestis  to 
teche  trewely  and  frely  Goddis  word,  and  senden  freris  ]?at 
colouren  here  open  synne,  and  prechen  fablis  and  lesyngis, 
and  robben  ))e  pore  peple  bi  stronge  beggynge  and  nedles. 

Also  om"e  worldly  prestis  lesse  and  more  drawen  fro  holy 
Chirche,  ])at  is,  Jje  congregacion  of  just  men,  ])e  grete  dewete 
of  good  ensaumple  of  here  owene  lif,  ])at  schulde  be  a  bok  and 
mirrour  of  here  sugetis,  to  kepe  Goddis  hestis,  and  seyntis  and 
reson  witnessen.     perfore  Crist  dide  first  in  dede  })at  J^ing  he 

-   ^  corrected ;  hyji^ids  in  MS.  ^  should  be  hem.  ^  corrected  ; 

he  were  in  MS. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


^15 


tau^te  aftir  bi  word,  and  whanne  Crist  hadde  waschyn  his  dis- 
ciplis  feet  for  mekenesse,  he  seide  J>us,  1  ^eve  to  50U  ensaumple, 
}?at  5e  do  as  I  have  don.  But  now  instide  of  ensaumple  of 
mekenesse  and  charite  and  holy  devocion  in  Goddis  servyce, 
}?ei  5yven  ensaumple  of  pride,  wra}>J)e,  vengeaunce,  coveitise, 
ydelnesse,  glotonye,  leccherie,  and  o|)ere  vices,  to  wij^drawe  fro 
holynesse  and  devocion.  And  si]?  techyng  in  dede,  doying  and 
meyntenyng  of  open  errour  in  lif,  is  as  evyl  techyng  or  worse 
]?an  techynge  bi  nakid  word,  certis  ]?ei  ben  opeyn  heretikis, 
strongely  meyntenynge  here  errour  a^enst  Goddis  lawe,  as  he 
is  worse  ]?at  beti]?  me  wrongfully,  ]?an  he  ]?at  manassi]>  me  or 
dispisi]?  me  only  in  word. 

Also  oure  worldly  prelatis  and  prestis  robben  holy  Chirche 
of  ]>e  tresour  of  wilful  povert  and  mekenesse,  and  maken 
Cristene  men  blynd  wi]?  pouder  of  worldly  goodis,  bi  pride 
and  coveitise,  and  robben  seculer  lordis  of  here  heritage  and 
temperal  power,  |?at  God  5af  hem  to  meyntene  his  lawe  and 
his  ordynaunce  in  clerkis.  And  J)is  is  don  bi  blynd  devocion 
of  seculeris,  ]?at  knowen  not  Goddis  lawe,  and  by  ypocrisie 
of  worldly  clerkis  and  sillyng  of  here  preiere.  And  where  Crist 
maad  his  spouse,  and  namely  of  clergie,  fair  bi  bri^t  cloj^es 
of  wilful  povert,  schynyng  to  God  betre  l^an  do})  ony  gold 
to  men,  ])es  werldly  clerkis  han  alle  to-bleckid  Cristis  spouse 
wij?  drit  of  er]?ely^  goodis,  coveitise  and  pride  and  worldly 
bysynesse,  and  robbed  here  pore  of  here  clojjis  and  goldyng 
of  wilful  povert,  mekenesse  and  gostly  bisynesses  of  studyyng 
and  techyng  of  holy  writt,  and  preiynge,  and  ojjere  werkis  of 
penaunce.  And  whanne  Jje  kyng  and  seculer  lordis  perseyven 
wel  ])at  clerkis  wasten  here  auncetris  almes  in  pompe  and  pride, 
glotonye  and  o]?ere  vanytees,  and  jjei  wolden  take  a^enst  J^e 
superfluyte  of  temperal  goodis,  and  helpe  J?e  lond  and  hemself 
and  here  tenauntes,^ — Jjes  worldly  clerkis  crien  faste  ]?at  })ei  ben 
cursed  for  entermetynge  of  holy  Chirche  goodis.  As  ^if 
seculer  lordis  and  ]?e  comyns  weren  no  part  of  holy  Chirche, 
but  only  proude  prestis,  ful  of  coveitise  symonye  and  extor- 
sions  and  alle  ojjere  synnys.     And  ))us  Anticristis  clerkis  feren 

^  coiTected ;  here\>ely,  X. 
T  2 


and  the  edify- 
ing spectacle 
of  voluntary 
poverty. 


i']6 


WrCLIF'S  WORKS. 


All  approaches 
to  which  they 
clamorously 
resist. 


Gross  and  hab- 
itual misappro- 
priation by  the 
worldly  clergy 
of  ecclesiastical 
and  charitable 
revenues. 


fe  kyng  lordis  and  comyns,  \2X  \ti  dar  not  mende  fe  open 
J^efte  of  cursed  clerkis,  myspendynge  }?e  almes  of  lordis  and 
temperaltees  in  symonye  glotonye  and  wrong  purchas  of 
seculer  lordischipes,  a^enus  Goddis  lawe,  not\vi}>stondynge  ]?at 
f>e  kyng  is  Goddis  viker,  to  venge  synne  and  wrongis  don  in 
}»is  rewme  generaly  of  mysdoeris.  But  summe  of  Anticristis 
clerkis  seyn  apertly,  J^at  jje  lond  shal  be  enterdited,  and  alle 
men  ])erinne  cursed,  raf>ere  J?an  ]?ei  wolen  be  brou^t  to  ])e  meke 
staat  })at  Crist  putte  hem  inne.  And  rajjer  \ei  wolen  rere  baner 
a^enst  ]>e  kyng  and  his  lordis  and  comyns,  fan  temperal 
lordischipis  schulden  turne  to  J)e  kyng  and  lordis,  and  ])ei  on 
spiritualte,  as  God  ordeyned.  And  schortly  to  seie,  rafiere  Jjan 
J?e  king  and  his  lordis  and  comyns  schulden  meyntene  Cristis 
ordynaunce  in  his  clergie,  and  distroie  opyn  symonye  heresie 
and  extorsions  and  robberie  ])at  Anticristis  clerkis  done  in  oure 
lond,  ]5es  worldly  prestis  wolen  curse  and  enterdite  men  and 
rewmes,  and  reren  open  warre  a^enus  oure  kyng  lordis  and 
comyns  in  oure  owene  lond.  And  loke  eche  wise  man  where 
))is  be  traiterie  and  open  heresie,  and  tirantrie  of  Antecrist  and 
his  cursed  prelatis  and  veyn  religious. 

Cap.  hi. 

5it  worldly  clerkis  and  veyn  religious  wij)drawen  ]?e  ri^ttis  of 
holy  Chirche  many  maneris.  For  where  \ei  han  many  rentis 
and  lordischipis  for  to  fynde  certeyn  noumbre  of  prestis  and 
bedrede  men  in  hospitalite,  J?ei  han  unnejje  half,  or  )?e  J^ridde 
part,  ))e  noumbre  of  prestis,  and  lyven  lustful  lif  in  costi  metis 
and  wyn ;  and  in  glotonye,  drounkenesse,  lecherie,  and  grete 
festis  wasten  J^er  goodis,  where  J>ei  schulden  lyve  in  abstynence 
and  penaunce,  and  devoute  preieris  for  here  goode  doeris  and 
comynte  of  Cristene  men.  And  where  }3ei  schulden  fynde  many 
pore  men  in  mete  and  drynk  and  herbore,  and  sumtyme  cloJ?is, 
]?ei  wasten  pore  mennus  liflode  in  grete  festis  of  riche  men,  and 
robis  and  fees  of  men  of  lawe,  and  herboryng  of  riche  lordis, 
not  for  charite,  but  in  hope  of  more  wynnynge  of  worldly  goodis 
at  \t  laste  in  here  dej?,  and  graunte  of  aproprynge  of  parische 
chirchis,    and   amortisyng  of  temperal  lordischipe  more  J?an 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


^77 


nedij).  And  alle  j)is  is  sotel  marchaundise  wi|)  pore  mennus 
liflode  and  holy  Chirche  goodis;  and  where  in  many  abbeies 
schulden  be,  and  sumtyme  weren,  grete  houses  to  herbore  pore 
men  ]?erinne,  now  j?ei  ben  fallen  doun,  or  maad  swyn-kotis, 
stablis,  or  bark-houses.  And  })us,  as  Judas  staal  Jje  money 
50ven  to  Crist  and  his  disciplis  to  lyve  J?erby,  so  })es  worldly 
clerkis  and  religiouse  taken  huge  noumbre  of  temperal  goodis 
undir  colour  of  almesdede  and  hospitalite,  and  stelen  ]?es  goodis 
of  pore  men,  and  wasten  hem  nedles  in  gret  array  of  Jje  world, 
in  gaie  houses,  and  festis  of  lordis  and  riche  men,  and  oj^ere 
vanytees. 

Also  many  bischopis  and  religiouse  and  seculer  lordis  wi]?- 
drawen  ri^tful  reulyng  of  Cristene  soulis,  bi  makyng  and  pre- 
senting of  unable  curatis.  For  where  J)ei  my^tten  ly^tly  fynde 
many,  able  bojje  of  kunnyng  and  good  lyvyrige  to  teche  Cristene 
men  Goddis  lawe,  J?ei  presenten  and  maken,  for  love  of  here 
kyn  or  servyce  or  worldly  love,  and  sumtyme  bi  money  takynge 
prively,  many  unable  curatis,  ]?at  kunnen  not  J?e  ten  comaunde- 
mentis,  ne  rede  her  saute r.  And  3it  ])ei  holden  hem  in  here 
worldly  office,  and  taken  to  hem  moche  of  })e  chirche  goodis ; 
and  suffren  hem  not  to  goo  to  Jje  scole  and  lerne  ]?e  gospel,  to 
governe  here  parischenis,  but  halden  hem  in  balies  office,  or 
stiwardis,  or  kechene  clerkis,  and  suffren  wolves  of  helle  to 
strangule  here  parischenis  soulis,  bi  dyverse  synnes  and  harde 
customes,  of  veyn  sweryng,  lecherie,  and  alle  ojjere  vices.  Also 
^if  eche  man  ))at  wij^drawi]?  ony  ri3t  of  holy  Chirche  is  J)us 
acursed,  ]?anne  eche  man  )?at  wij?drawi]?  fro  ^  ony  good  Jjou^t  or 
dede  or  counfort  fro  his  bre})eren,  is  acursed.  For  eche  goode 
Jjou^t,  speche,  and  dede,  and  counfort  of  careful  men,  is  dwe  to 
God  and  holy  Chirche,  for  ]?e  prophete  sei]),  I  schal  blisse  God 
in  eche  tyme;  his  heryng  schal  everemore  be  in  my  mou]?. 
But  what  holy  man  in  J)is  Kf  scapi}?  uncursed  ?  sij?  no  man  lyve]? 
but  ^if  he  faile  sumtyme  in  ]?ou3t,  word,  and  dede,  or  in  coun- 
fort of  men  in  disese.  perfore  it  seme]?,  ]?at  covetise  of  worldly 
goodis  ha]?  mad  worldly  cursed  clerkis  to  heie  a3enst  Goddis 
dom.     Certis  sum  men  understonden,  ]?at  )?e  cruel  manquellere 

^  dele /ro. 


General  abuse 
of  their  patron- 
age, by 
episcopal, 
monastic,  and 
lay  patrons, 


and  most  of  all, 
by  the  Pope, 


278 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


Simony  is  also 
accursed;  of 
which  there  are 
three  kinds  : 
,  that  relating- 
to  ordinations ; 


of  Rome,  not  Petris  successour  but  Cristis  enemye,  and  ]?e 
emperours  maistir,  and  poison  under  colour  of  holynesse, 
maki|?  most  unable  curatis,  and  so  wi))drawij?  most  J)e  ri^ttis  of 
holy  Chirche.  For  he  avaunsi}?  many  lewid  men,  sumtyme 
techereris  and  disciplis  of  his  owene  lawe,  not  of  ]?e  gospel, 
sumtyme  fenne  clerkis,  ]>at  kunnen  not  good  in  regard  of  curatis, 
and  taki)>  of  men  moche  gold  for  leed  and  Jje  friste  fruytis,  and 
forbarren  clerkis  of  Goddis  lawe,  kunnynge  and  wel-lyvynge 
men,  lest  ]?ei  aspie  his  heresie  and  ypocrisie,  and  warnen  Cristene 
men  Jjerof  And  ])e  weyward  clerkis  of  Sathanas  maken  }>is 
cruel  manquellere,  prisoner  and  brenner  of  Cristis  servauntis,  to 
be  well  ground  and  roote  of  alle  ]?e  mysgovernynge  of  fe 
Chirche.  And  ^it  J)ei  maken  blynde  men  bileve,  ])at  he  is  hed 
of  holy  Chirche,  and  ]?e  most  holy  fader,  })at  may  not  synne  ; 
and  he  distroie]?  ]?e  fei]?  of  holy  Chirche,  mekenesse,  pacience, 
and  charite,  and  desire  of  hevenely  blisse.  perfore,  as  )?e  trewe 
clerk  Robert  Grosted  wroot  to  hym,  he  is  cause  well  and 
grounde  of  distraction  of  Cristene  feij)  and  good  religion,  bi 
makynge  of  evyl  schepherdis,  and  privylegies,  suffryng  of 
synne,  si]?  he  may  best  distroie  it,  and  most  is  holden  ]?erto. 

Cap.  IV. 

Also,  alle  symonyentis  ]>at  bien  or  sillen  spiritual  ]>ingis  for 
temperal  ]>ingis  unlefful,  ben  cursed  solempneli,  boj^e  bi  Goddis 
lawe  and  mannis.  But  }>re  degres  ben  in  symonyentis :  summe 
ben  symonyentis  in  ordre,  summe  symonyentis  in  beneficis,  and 
summe  symonyentis  in  sacramentis.  Of  symonyentis  in  holy 
ordre  ben  J?re  degres.  Summe  come  to  ordre  of  presthod, 
dekenhede,  or  oj^ere  ordris  hiere  or  lowere,  by  ^evynge  of 
money;  and  }?es  ben  no  prestis  ne  dekenes,  but  han  only  J)e 
name,  and  ben  ordrid  to  J)is  ende  for  to  be  heretikis,  whos 
blissing  turnef»  into  cursyng,  and  her  preier  into  synne,  as  Seynt 
Gregory  teche);  and  J?e  lawe  canoun  a.  perfore  seij?  J?e  Chirche 
lawe  in  decretalis,  ]?at  every  synful  prest  may  seie  a  masse,  out 
taken  a  symonyent,  whom  eche  synful  man  may  lefuUy  acuse. 


a-    S.    Greg.   Epist.    ad   Sycigrinm 
(Benedictine  ed.,  vol.  ii.  p.  1006); 


and    Decretum    Gratiani,    Pars.   I, 
Causa  I.  Quaest.  I. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


279 


56,  an  hore  may  acuse  him,  j?at  he  be  remevyd  from  ]?e  ordre 
J)at  he  mystakij).  For,  as  Seynt  Ambrose  sei]?,  in  ]?is  caas  curs 
is  to  J)e  ^evere  and  to  Jje  takere^;  for  })at  ]?at  sich  on  ^eve]?  is  is 
gold  or  money,  and  ]?at  ]?ing  )?at  he  resceyvej?  is  lepre  of  syfme, 
and  curs  to  ]?e  takere  and  to  ]je  ^evere.  Summe  by  symonye 
comen  to  siche  ordris  for  preiere  of  lordis,  or  o]?ere  worldly 
frendis,  not  bi  clene  entent  and  wor]>inesse  of  kunnynge  and 
lyvynge,  but  only  bi  favour  of  men,  and  J?es  in  \e  cursed  heresie 
of  symonye.  And  bo)?e  ]?e  Revere  and  recesceyvere  of  ordris  in 
j)is  caas  schulden  be  degradid,  for  J)ei  make  marchaundise  bi 
^iftis  of  ]je  Holy  Gost,  and  maken  \t  Holy  Gost  servaunt  of 
synful  men,  and,  in  caas,  of  fendis,  as  moche  as  is  in  hem. 
perfore  ]?ei  ben  worse  heretikis  ])an  o]?ere  J?at  maden  ))e  Holy 
Gost  lesse  {)an  }>e  Fadir  and  J?e  Sone,  as  the  lawe  of  canoun 
witnesij?.  pe  J?ridde  tyme,  summe  comen  to  ordris  bi  symonye, 
bi  servyce  to  lordis  or  prelatis  or  oj^er  officeris,  servynge  long 
tyme  to  men  for  ]?is  ende,  })at  f)ei  may  be  ordrid,  or  bihetyng  to 
serve  after  J^at  ))ei  ben  ordred  longe  tyme,  where  ]?ei  ben  not 
wor|>])i  to  J?es  holy  ordris  bi  kunnyng  and  goode  lif.  And  J?es 
fallen  in  jje  same  dampnacion  wi]?  jje  firste,  for  it  is  al  on  to 
5yve  money  and  to  serve  ])us  for  holy  ordris,  bifore  or  after. 
pe  four]?e  tyme  summe  comen  to  holy  ordris,  not  for  devocion 
and  love  of  God,  but  for  to  lyve  in  worldly  lordischip,  and  have 
welfare  of  mete  and  drynk,  and  gay  clofis,  and  ese,  and  re- 
joischen  hem  ]?erinne,  and  bisien  hem  not  aboute  Goddis  lawe 
ne  holy  lif,  but  in  lecherie  and  vanyte  and  ydelnesse  and  worldly 
myr]?e.  And  in  \q  ri^tful  dom  of  God  J^ei  ben  symonyentis,  as 
was  Symon  Magus.  For  J?ei  sillen  to  fendis  of  helle  here  soule, 
here  body,  and  tyme,  and  catel,  for  to  have  and  use  unwor)>ily 
})e  holy  ordre  of  presthod.  And  J?erfore  Seynt  Jon  Crisostom 
seij),  ]>at  })0  prestis  J?at  don  not  justly  here  office  after  Goddis 
lawe  semen  ordeyned  of  men  and  not  of  God,  and  anenctis  God 
.J?ei  ben  non  prestis.  And  J?is  undirstonding  he  hadde  of  ))e 
canoun  of  Cristis  apostlis ;  for,  as  J?is  Seynt  Jon  seij?,  treu]?e  in 
lif,  ]?at  a  man  drede  God,  makij?  a  man  a  lewed  man ;  and,  as 
who  seij),  no  clerk,  but  treu])e  in  Hf  and  prudence,  ]?at  is,  know- 


»  The  reference  is  perhaps  to  St.  Ambrose.  Exp.  j 


Lib  IV.  ^ 


!^8o 


WYCLIF'S  WORKS. 


2.  that  relating 
to  benefices ; 
as  when  men 

fet  preferment 
y  means  of 
money, 


or  by  per- 
suasion and 
influence. 


yng  of  creaturis  bo|)e  er]?ely  and  gostlj,  and  usyng  of  every  iii 
his  degre,  and  wise  techynge  of  Goddis  lawe  after  \q  nede  of 
]>e  peple,  makij)  a  man  to  be  a  prest.  perfore  sei}?  Seynt  Aus- 
tyn,  J?at  he  ]?at  disire)?  Jje  stat  of  bischop  for  to  have  worschipe 
and  reverence  of  men  and  worldly  goodis,  owe})  to  understonde 
])at  he  is  no  bischop ;  and  J^e  same  sentence  seij>  Seynt  Gregory 
in  his  Pastoralis.  And  )?e  same  reson  seme]?  of  prestis ;  and 
Jjerfore  Seynt  Austyn  biddi}>,  ]?at  sich  a  sovereyn  j^at  spekej?  not 
good  cleenely  for  hymself,  but  worldly  worschipe  and  temperal 
wynnyng,  ]?at  he  schal  not  rikene  him  among  Goddis  servauntis. 
For  certis,  as  Crisostom,  and  On^ene,  and  lawe  canoun  wit- 
nessen,  siche  a  weiward  prest  makij?  Goddis  hous  a  den  of 
Jeeves. 

Cap.  V. 

On  ]>re  maneres  ben  men  symonyentis  in  beneficis,  bi  ^ifte 
of  money  to  ]>e  patroun  for  presentacioun,  or  to  prelat  for 
collacion,  or  ^evyng  institucion,  or  induction,  or  bi  brocage 
maade  to  mene  persones  for  to  have  ony  beneficis  of  J?e  chirche. 
And  j)is  is  cursed  heresie,  for  it  presume)?  to  sille  ]?e  Holy  Gost, 
as  ])e  lawe  witnessi]? ;  sij?  it  presume]?  to  sille  J?e  ^iftis  of  ]?e  Holy 
Gost,  j)at  schulden  be  ^oven  frely  to  alle  men,  as  Crist  biddi)?. 
On  )?e  secunde  manere  don  many  men  symonye,  whanne  )?ei 
serve  lordis  or  prelatis  undwe  servyces  longe  tyme,  for  to  have 
a  benefice  in  ))e  ende  of  here  servyce.  And  herefore  })ei  biheten 
to  serve  lordis  and  prelatis  in  worldly  office  on  here  owene  cost, 
and  dwellen  in  here  courtis  absent  fro  here  chirchis ;  and  J?is  is 
cursed  marchaundise  wij?  temperal  servyce  and  benefices  of  ])e 
Chirche.  And  oure  Lord  Jesus  drof  alle  siche  out  of  ]?e  temple, 
in  token  ]?at  fei  ben  not  approved  of  him  in  Jje  Chirche,  but 
schuUen  be  dreven  to  helle  bi  jugement  of  God,  3if  })ei  lasten  in 
)>is  synne  to  here  de)?.  And  ]?erfore  seij?  Seynt  Gregory  and  ]>q 
lawe,  ])at  ]?ei  })at  don  siche  symonye  schullen  be  dampnyd  in 
everelestynge  fier  of  helle,  but  ^if  )?ei  resygnen  here  benefices, 
and  in  tyme  of  dej?  ben  founden  in  scharpe  penaunce. 

On  ])e  jjridde  manere  don  men  symonye  bi  tunge,  J?at  neij^er 
3even  gold  ne  servyce  to  lordis,  ne  prelatis,  ne  mene  persones, 
but  bi  flateryng  and  preier  of  my^ty  men  comen  to  benefices, 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


%%\ 


more  J>aii  bi  holynesse  of  lif  and  ablete  to  ]>er  office.  For  })es 
comen  not  to  ]jes  benefices  bi  Crist,  ))at  is  dore  of  holy  Chirche, 
but  bi  j?e  fend,  to  whom  ]?ei  maken  sacrifice  for  love  of  woridly 
heienesse  and  erj^ely  muk,  ]?at  \€i  seken  more  ]?an  Goddis 
honour,  or  profit  of  Cristene  soulis.  perfore  ]?e  Chirchis  lawe 
witnessi]?,  jjat  ^if  a  man  come  to  benefice  bi  symonye,  ^e,  don 
bi  his  frend,  hym  unwyttynge,  he  mot  resigne  it,  and  ellis  he 
may  not  be  savyd.  For,  as  Crist  sei]?,  he  is  a  ny^t  fef  and  a  day 
]?ef ;  and  a  l?ef  may  do  no  verrey  penaunce,  but  ^if  he  restore 
pat  ])mg  J)at  he  ha))  takyn  awey,  as  Seynt  Austyn  seij? ;  namely, 
5if  he  be  of  power  J)erto.  And  ])is  symonyent  is  of  power  to 
resigne ;  and  ferfore  he  mote  nedis  resigne  his  benefice  wilfully 
and  frely,  wifjouten  desiryng  to  have  it  a3en,  as  Seynt  Richard 
of  Armaw^  techi).  For  bi  rigour  of  >e  lawe  he  schulde  be 
degradid,  for  Jjc  blasphemye  j?at  he  dide  to  God  in  sillyng  pe 
Holy  Gost,  as  moche  as  was  in  hym.  And  certis,  howevere  we 
speken  of  dispensacion  of  ])e  Bischop  of  Rome,  ))is  symonyent 
mot  do  verey  pennaunce,  and  gete  a  newe  ri^t  or  title,  bi  grace 
of  God  and  ablete  of  kunnyng  and  wil  to  his  office,  wij?  open 
just  lif  and  verrey  techyng  of  his  parischenis,  and  ellis  he  holdi}? 
his  benefice  to  his  dampnacion ;  and  namely  ^if  he  waste  pore 
mennes  liflode,  in  pride  and  riche  array,  in  glotonye  and 
drounkennesse,  and  gretej  festis  of  riche  men;  as  officeris  of  J)e 
bischop,  and  getteris  of  countre.  And  ])es  ]?re  menes  of  symonye 
ben  wel  groundid  in  holy  writt  and  reson,  and  Seynt  Gregory 
and  Seynt  Bede  declaren  hem  wel,  wij?  J?e  comyn  lawe  of  J)e 
Chirche.  But  what  man  comej?  now  to  ony  fat  benefice  or 
prelacie  wi}?outen  ^ifte  of  money  or  servyce,  or  flateryng  and 
preier  bo}?e  of  himself  and  ojjere  grete  men  of  J?e  world  ?  For 
now  many  lordis  axen  moche  for  presentacion,  and  longe 
worldly  servyce  of  J?es  clerkis,  bifore  here  benefices  and  aftir; 
and  of  privy  ^iftis  and  preieris  is  noon  ende  in  mannus  witt. 
Who  getij?  ony  fat  benefice  of  jje  Bischop  of  Rome  wi))Outen 
siche  flateryng  and  preier,  and  gold  for  his  dede  lede  a  and  jje 
first  fruytis,  and  omage,  and  swerynge,  o]?er  ]?an  Crist  and  his 
apostlis  diden  ?     And  certis  his  takyng  of  j^e  first  fruytis  is  no 

'^  By  the  *  dede  lede '  is  meant  of  course  the  lead  of  the  seal  attached  to 
a  papal  bull. 


a83 


WrCLIF'S  WORKS. 


3.  Simony  re- 
lating to 
sacraments ; 


for  instance, 
by  the  extor- 
tion of  fees  at 
ordination ; 


lesse  heresie  )?an  takyng  of  lordis  for  ^ifte  or  presentynge  of 
here  benefices,  but  j)at  he  do]>  more  general  heresie,  and  more 
traitourly  to  God;  for  he  schnlde  be  his  chif  viker  in  holy  lif, 
and  trewe  techyng,  and  ri^tful  governaunce  of  Cristis  Chirche, 
and  now  is  most  open  his  traitour  under  colour  of  holynesse, 
and  sutely  wasti)?  rewmes,  drawing  from  hem  moche  gold  and 
goode  curatis,  where  lordis  maken  lesse  evyl  curatis,  and  spenden 
Jje  gold  {)at  J>ei  taken  among  men  in  ]?e  same  rewme.  And 
certis,  what  clerk,  lord,  or  comyner  a^enstondi))  not  J?is  cursed 
heresie  bi  hisjpower,  wi]?outen  doubte  he  schal  be  pertener  wi]?  ^ 
J?e  first  ^  fynderis  of  j^is  errour,  as  Seynt  Gregory  techij?  and  ]?e 
lawe  canoun. 

Cap.  VI 

5it  on  Jjes  \ve  maners  don  many  men  symonye  in  sacramentis, 
as  ordris,  masse  synging,  confession,  and  alle  ]?e  sevene  sacra- 
mentis of  holy  Chirche.  First  in  ordris ;  who  evere  ^evej)  holy 
ordris  for  money  to  himself  or  his  servauntis,  or  for  preier  of 
men,  or  J>ank  of  hem,  j^ou^  he  take  no  money,  he  do]?  symonye, 
and  sille]?  ]?e  Holy  Gost  as  moche  as  is  in  him,  as  witnessij> 
Seynt  Gregory,  Seynt  Bede,  and  oJ?ere  seyntis,  wi]>  lawe  canoun. 
But  Lord !  who  come])  to  ony  holi  ordris  wij)0uten  extorsion  of 
money  for  harbour  fees,  and  grete  raunsons  for  letteris  ?  And 
sij)  ]?is  money  is  taken  bi  maistri  for  ordris  ])at  men  taken,  for 
ellis  ]5ei  schuUen  not  be  ordrid,  or  ellis  ponyschid  to  j^e  double 
or  treble,  and  here  weddis  taken,  who  may  excuse  oure  bis- 
chopis  from  extorsion  of  symonye?  And  feyned  excusacion, 
])at  ]3ei  taken  j^is  not  for  ordris  ^evyng  but  for  cost  of  wrytyng 
and  o])ere  officeris  bisinesse,  accuse]?  hem  more  J^an  excuse]?. 
For  ]?ei  taken  for  wryttyng  and  selyng  of  a  litel  scrowe,  wi]? 
sixe  or  sevene  lynes,  twelve  pens  or  two  schillyngis;  and  certis 
Jjis  is  foul  extorsion.  For  hem  nedej?  no  lettre  wi]?  here  seel  bi 
Goddis  lawe ;  but  witnessynge  of  here  felowis  and  oJ?ere  trewe 
men  is  ynow^,  hou  j>ei  weren  ordrid  at  siche  a  tyme.  And  hem 
nedi])  not  many  tymes  to  be  schavyn,  and  3if  it  were  nede,  \e\ 
my^tten  be  schavyn  at  a  comyn  harbour,  and  clippen^  alle  a  ^eer 


1  corrected;  w]),frist,  X. 


corrected ;  clipynge,  X. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


283 


for  J?e  money  J?at  here  harbour  takij?  at  onys  »,  And  certis  Jjei 
han  worldly  goodis  at  J?e  fuUe  to  fynde  here  ofiiceris  in  her 
servyce,  and  to  helpe  pore  men  at  nede,  J^ou^  \€\  robben  hem 
not  a^enus  here  wille,  and  maken  hem  to  bie  here  ordris  a^enus 
])e  gospel  and  comyn  lawe  expresly.  Certis  it  semej),  j?at  alle 
doyng  in  })is  mater  is  cursed  corserie  of  symonye,  ^evynge  ])e 
sygne  of  holy  ordris  for  temperal  drit.  And  so  fast  Jjei  eleven 
]?eronne,  J)at  unnejjes  is  ony  lewid  wrecche  putt  abak,  ^if  he  wole 
5eve  moche  dritt ;  J>at  bi  here  prestis  and  heie  corserie  God  and 
holy  Chirche  ben  foule  blasphemed,  and  presthod  and  good  lif 
moche  distroied,  and  Cristene  men  foule  sclaundrid,  and  synne 
and  trecherie  encressid.  And  ]>is  cursed  fruyt  schewi]),  for  what 
ende  }?ei  ^even  sygnes  or  holy  ordris. 

Hon  confession  and  absolucion  is  don  for  covetise  and  pride 
men  may  li3tly  see.  For  in  confession  we  seken  more  after 
tij)es  and  oure  temperal  wynnyng  }>an  after  kepyng  of  Goddis 
hestis,  or  contricion  for  synne,  or  paying  of  dettis  to  pore  men, 
owe  J?ei  nevere  so  moche  and  ben  in  power  to  paye ;  and  we 
enjoynen  penaunce  as  us  like}?,  and  namely  to  seie  massis,  and 
oifre  to  }?e  heie  auter,  and  certeyn  ymages  for  oure  wynnyng. 
But  we  speken  ^  over  litel  for  to  visete,  and  ofFre  to  pore  men, 
and  maken  broken  briges  and  causeis  where  men  and  bestis  and 
catel  perischen  ofte.  And  ^if  men  foolily  avowen  to  go  to 
Rome,  or  Jerusalem,  Caunterbury,  or  o]?ere  pilgrimagis,  })at  we 
chargen  more  J?an  fe  grete  avowe  maad  of  oure  Cristendom,  to 

^  corrected ;  spekyng,  X. 


a  If  these  petty  extortions  at  the 
time  of  ordination  were  really  of 
common  occurrence  when  our  author 
wrote,  it  was  not  for  want  of  en- 
deavours to  put  them  down  on  behalf 
of  the  rulers  of  the  church.  A  con- 
stitution of  Archbishop  Stratford, 
dated  in  1342,  expressly  decrees  that 
no  more  than  sixpence  shall  be  de- 
manded for  the  letters  of  orders  (the 
*  litel  scrowe '  that  the  writer  speaks 
of),  and  that  nothing  else  shall  be 
paid  on  any  other  accomit,  either  to 
marshals,  porters,  door-keepers,  or 
barbers.  The  business  of  the  epi- 
scopal barber  was  to  shave  the  head 


of  the  candidate  for  ordination,  so 
that  the  corona,  or  round  bald  space 
on  the  top  of  the  head,  might  be 
trim  and  seemly.  A  constitution  of 
Archbishop  Boniface  (temp.  Heniy 
III)  orders  all  the  clergy  to  observe 
this  as  well  as  other  proprieties  of 
clerical  costume.  Lyndwood  tells 
us  that  the  circular  form  of  the 
corona  was  regarded  as  the  emblem 
of  the  absence  of  dirt  and  unclean- 
ness ;  '  quia  ubi  angulus  ibi  sordes.' 
See  Lyndwood's  Provinciale,  art.  De 
Censibus,  and  Gibson's  Codex  Jur. 
Eccl.  Atigl,  Tit.  vi.  Cap.  x. 


by  abusing,  for 
unworthy  ends, 
the  power  of 
the  priest  over 
his  penitent  in 
the  sacrcunent 
of penance; 


a84 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


by  the  ex- 
tortion of 
exorbitant 
marriage  fees ; 


kepe  Goddis  hestis,  and  forsake  )je  fend  and  alle  his  werkis. 
For  J?ou5  men  breken  J>e  hieste  comaundementis  of  God,  J?e 
lewideste  parische  prest  schal  assoile  anoon,  but  of  J?e  founed 
vowis  maad  of  oure  owene  heed,  many  time  a^enus  Goddis 
wille,  noman  schal  assoile  but  grete  worldly  bischopis,  or  \e 
most  worldly  prest  of  Rome,  ]?e  emperoures  maister  and  Goddis 
felawe,  or  God  of  \q  erj^e.  And  ])ei  wolen  not  dispense  wij)  ])es 
vowis,  but  5if  ))ei  han  Jje  cost  \2X  men  schulden  make,  inward 
and  outward  \  Lord !  why  kunnen  not  men  of  reson  see,  j>at 
j?is  is  ^  open  covetise,  and  coloured  under  holynesse,  and  cursed 
symonye,  and  blaspheme  heresie  ?  It  passej?  mannus  witt  to  telle 
what  pride  and  coveitise  of  prestis  is  norischid  herby,  and  what 
synne,  boj^e  lecherie,  and  extorsion,  and  heresie,  and  blasphemye, 
is  brou^t  up  herby.  But  nefeles  confession  maad  to  trewe 
prestis,  and  witty  in  Goddis  lawe,  do])  moche  good  to  synful 
men,  so  J)at  contricion  for  synnes  before  don  come  ferwi]?,  and 
good  lif  and  keping  Goddis  hestis,  and  werkis  of  mercy  don  to 
pore  men,  sue  after. 

Hou  J)e  sacrament  of  matrimonye  is  bou3t  and  sold  men  may 
openly  se.  For  no  man  schal  be  weddid  but  ^if  he  paie  sixe 
pens  on  Jje  bok  ^,  and  a  ryng  for  his  wif,  and  sumtyme  a  peny 
for  Jje  clerk,  and  covenaunt  makyng  what  he  schal  paie  for 
a  morewe  masse,  and  ellis  he  schal  not  be  weddid  \o\X7,  he  lyve 
in  nevere  so  gret  lecherie.  And  hereto  j^ei  techen  men  J^at  J)ei 
schullen  not  seie  ]?e  wordis  of  sacrament  bifore  |)e  banes  be 
cried  in  ]?e  chirche ;  and  sumtyme  it  was  don  for  good  entent ; 
but  now  it  is  turned  into  coveitise  and  raveyn  and  symonye. 
But  J)e  lewideste  heresie  ]?at  evere  Sathanas  foond  is  putt  forj> 
for  excusyng  of  J?is  olde  roton  synne.  For  prestis  han  many 
5eer  seld  jjus  |)is  sacrament,  j^erfore  it  is  now  lawe  and  privylegie 

^  corrected;  his,  X. 


*  For  a  similar  denunciation  of 
this  practice  see  vol.  ii.  p.  381. 

b  This  surely  was  not  a  veiy  heavy 
tax  upon  matrimony.  Taking  into 
accoimt  the  altered  value  of  money, 
the  fee  of  sixpence,  near  the  end  of 
the  fourteenth  century,  may  be  con- 
sidered equivalent  to  fifteen  times 
that  sum  at  the  present  day,  or  seven 
and  sixpence.    Now  seven  shillings 


and  sixpence,  I  am  told,  is  the  or- 
dinary fee  given  by  a  lalDom-er  here 
in  Oxfordshire  to  the  clergyman  that 
marries  him ;  and  probably  the  rate 
is  much  the  same  in  other  counties. 
The  Registrar,  of  course,  will  not 
marry  him  under  half  a  guinea. 

Neither  Lyndwood  nor  Gibson 
supplies  us  with  any  infonnation  on 
the  subject  of  this  note. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


285 


of  ]?e  Chirche.  But  certis  jjis  is  not  ho[ly]  Chirche,  ))at  wole 
no})ing  but  treuj)e  and  equyte,  but  it  is  Anticristis  clerkis  and 
synagoge  of  Sathanas. 

And  in  many  places  ]?e  same  errour  regnej)  of  Jjc  sacrament 
of  cristendom  and  of  J>e  laste  anoyntyng,  and  sumtyme  in  biry- 
ing,  for  many  coveitouse  prestis  axen  gredely  money  for  ]?es 
doyngis,  or  ellis  ]?ei  schuUen  not  be  cristened,  ne  oyntid,  ne 
biried  wiJ?outen  mortuarie^-.  And  for  al  ))is  is  neijjer  Goddis 
lawe  ne  reson  alleggid,  but  old  totyng  of  wrongful  takynge  of 
poore  mennus  goodis,  a^enst  here  wille  and  Goddis  comaunde- 
ment  expresly.  And  of  confirmacion  of  children,  and  crown- 
ing of  benetis^,  renne]?  Jjc  same  extorsion  in  summe  placis. 
But  whi  J^at  pore  prestis  and  lewid  men,  in  tyme  of  nede,  may 
lawefully  baptise  children,  and  not  conferme  hem,  is  gret  won- 
der among  men  of  reson ;  si]?  Crist  comaundid  his  disciplis  to 
baptise  alle  men,  and  chargide  hem  not  to  conferme  men,  as 
bischopis  usen.  For  bi  baptym  schal  a  child  come  to  hevene 
wijjouten  siche  confermyng,  but  not  bi  sich  confermyng  wi{)- 
outen  baptym.  And  ^if  a  prest  sacri)?  Goddis  body,  and  makij? 
breed  and  wyn  turne  into  Cristis  flesch  and  his  blood,  bi  vertu 
of  his  ordre  and  Goddis  wordis,  whi  may  he  not  blisse  a  ^ong 
child  wij?  a  rag  and  oyle  ?     It  semej?  \dX  bischopis  holden  pis 


•  a  Mortuaries  were  '  a  kind  of 
ecclesiastical  heriots,  being  a  cus- 
tomary gift  claimed  by  and  due  to 
the  minister  in  veiy  many  parishes 
on  the  death  of  his  parishioners. 
They  seem  to  have  been  originally, 
like  lay  heriots,  only  a  voluntary 
gift.'  So  far  Blackstone  (quoted  in 
Todd's  Johnson's  Dictionaiy),  bring- 
ing out  clearly  the  actual  legal  com- 
pulsion to  the  pa}Tnent  of  mor- 
tuaries ;  —  while,  with  professional 
euphemism.  Dr.  Cowell  in  the  In- 
terpreter prefers  to  insist  on  the  theo- 
retical spontaneity  of  the  offering. 
A  Mortuary,  says  he,  *  is  a  gift  left 
by  a  man  at  his  death  to  his  parish 
church,  for  the  recompense  of  his 
personal  tythes  and  offerings  not 
duly  paid  in  his  life-time.'  The  pay- 
ment of  Mortuaries  was  enjoined  by 
statute  (13  Edw.  I),  and  also  by 
several  archiepiscopal  constitutions. 


b  crowning  of  benetis.']  By  this  ap- 
pears to  be  meant  the  ceremony  of 
making  the  corona  (see  note  on  p. 
283)  on  the  head  of  a  benet  or  ex- 
orcist, which  corona,  together  with 
the  tonsure,  or  cutting  off  of  the  hair 
below,  so  as  to  leave  the  ears  ex- 
posed, constituted  the  tonsura  cleri- 
calis,  and  was  if  not  an  order  itself, 
at  least  a  predisposition  and  pre- 
paration to  orders.  See  Lyndwood, 
art.  De  Vita  et  Hon.  Cler.  The  ex- 
orcist was  called  a  benet,  because  of 
his  frequent  use  of  aqiia  henedicta, 
'  eau  benite,'  in  the  performance  of 
his  functions.  (See  Prompt.  Parvu- 
lorwn  (Camd.  Soc),  and  Mr.  Way's 
useful  note.)  But  why  heriets  are 
singled  out  by  our  author  rather 
than  the  two  inferior  orders  of  Os- 
tiarius  and  Lector,  I  have  not  been 
able  to  discover. 


and  by  similar 
abuses  con- 
nected with 
christenings, 
extreme 
unction,  and 
the  burial  of 
the  dead. 


If  priests,  and 
even  laymen  in 
case  of  need, 
may  baptise, 
•why  may  they 
not  confirm  ? 


286 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


Simony  in 
various  forms 
as  connected 
with  tlie  saying 
of  mass. 


more  wor]?i  and  nedful  J?an  Cristis  body  and  ]je  sacrament  of 
baptym ;  jjerfore  to  magnyfie  here  staat  in  pride  and  chargyng 
of  Cristene  men,  ))ei  reserven  })is  newe  confermyng  to  hemself, 
and  putten  Jje  more  travaile,  and  more  wor))i  and  nedful  sacra- 
mentis,  on  pore  prestis.  And  in  J)is  Jjei  schewen  her  vanyte 
and  worldly  dignyte. 

Cap.  VII. 

But  now  is  nede  to  telle,  hou  prestis  crien  her  masse  for 
money,  and  sillen  jje  sacrament,  }>at  is  Cristis  flesch  and  his 
blood.  Alle  J50  J^at  ben  maade  prestis,  more  to  lyve  in  wor- 
schipe  of  \q  world,  at  gentlemennys  staat,  and  for  worldly 
myr]?e  and  bodily  welfare  and  ese,  Jjan  to  lyve  in  devocion  and 
profite  to  Cristene  soulis,  to  sue  Crist  in  mekenesse  and  gostly 
traveile,  in  preiere  and  studyynge  and  techyng  of  Cristis  gospel, 
and  to  be  ensaumple  and  myrrour  of  pacience,  chastite,  and 
oJ?ere  vertues,  ben  smyttid  wij?  symonye,  and  on  sum  maner 
sellen  }>is  worJ)i  sacrament,  whanne  ))ei  seyn  masse  for  money, 
or  name  of  holynesse,  or  bodily  nede,  more  }>an  for  devocion 
of  Crist,  of  helping  of  soulis  in  purgatorie,  and  of  gostly  love  to 
make  men  vertuouse  in  lif,  and  namely  in  unyte  in  charite. 
For  but  ^if  men  wolen  here  prestis  for  tene  mark  3-,  sixe,  or 
sevene,  ]?ei  wil  not  dwelle  wij>  hem  in  honeste  place  to  cumpayne, 
and  seie  here  masse,  but  goo  where  ]?ei  may  most  gete  for  here 
song,  ]?ou5  J)ei  schullen  worse  serve  God  ]jere  }>an  at  ])e  first 
place,  where  men  wolden  3yven  hem  resonable  liflode,  ^e, 
moche  more  J>an  Crist  or  ony  of  his  apostlis  toke  for  himself. 
And  to  J)is  ende  many  drawen  hem  to  grete  citees,  where  is 
occasion  of  moche  synne,  not  for  to  distroie  it,  but  raj^ere 
encresse  it  be  taverne  goyng,  pleiyng  at  ^e  tablis,  chees,  and 
ojjere  vanytees.  And  fewe  drawen  hem  to  scole,  to  lerne  holy 
writt,  and  edifie  hemself  and  o}>ere  Cristene  peple.  But  who 
may  seie  })at  })es  prestis  sellen  not  foule  her  masse?  si)>  J)ei 
seken  more  grete  salaries  and  lykyng  of  J^e  world  ])an  to  seie 
here  masse  in  clennesse  of  lif,  and  brennyng  devocion  to  Crist 
for  his  passion,  in  whos  mynde  ))is  holy  sacrament  was  ordeyned 

a  See  vol.  i.  p.  291,  note  a. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


287 


of  Crist  himself,  pus  farij)  J^e  most  del  of  bischopis  and  grete 
prelattis,  j>at  sejoi  here  masse,  more  for  presence  of  lordis  and 
grete  placis,  for  to  be  holden  holy  and  have  ofFryngis  and  ^iftis, 
J>an  for  devocion  or  compunccion  of  here  synnes  and  her 
brel?eren  synne,  and  to  make  pees  and  charite.  And  }?us  it 
fare]?  of  persones,  munkis,  and  freris,  j?at  don  here  servyce  and 
massis  more  for  name  of  holynesse  and  wynnyng  of  worldly 
muk,  ])an  for  clene  love  of  God,  and  gostly  helpe  of  Cristene 
soulis. 

And  eche  prest  deme  wisly  himself,  whi  he  sei])  his  masse, 
and  in  what  life ;  for  ^if  Jjei  ben  not  in  clene  lif,  charite,  and 
devocion,  but  in  pride,  coveitise,  lecherie,  envye,  glotonye,  or 
o])ere  grete  synnes,  J?ei  dispisen  God  ful  gretly,  and  as  moche 
as  is  in  hem  \ti  slen  him,  and  don  hym  more  dispite  and 
vileyne  })an  diden  Judas  Scarioth  and  Jewis,  ]?at  naieled  him  on 
])e  croos,  and  leiden  him  in  a  cold  stone.  For  Seynt  Poul  sei)?, 
Who  J?at  rescey ve}>  ]?is  sacrament  unworJ?ily,  eti]?  and  drynkyj)  his 
dampnacion.  And  Seynt  Joon  Crisostom  1  sei}?,  We  slen  Crist 
in  us,  whanne  we  lesen  feij?  and  charite  of  Crist.  And  Seynt 
Bede  seij?,  We  sellen  Crist  whanne  we  forsaken  treufe,  and 
taken  falsnesse  and  meyntene  it.  And  Seynt  Austyn  seij?,  pat 
Cristene  men  trespassen,  and  don  more  dispit  to  God,  whanne 
J?ei  dispisen  him  bi  pride,  coveitise,  and  fals  swerynge,  ]?an  }?e 
Jewis  J?at  naileden  him  on  ]?e  croos ;  and  namely  })es  heretikis, 
bi  siche  symonye  as  is  bifore  seid,  for  aU  symonyentis  ben  wor)?i 
to  be  forsaken  of  alle  trewe  men.  And  but  ^if  })ei  amenden 
hem  after  good  monestyng,  j?ei  schullen  be  chastised  and 
brou^te  doun  bi  straunge  poweris,  J?at  ben  seculer  lordis ;  for  in 
comparison  of  ]?e  heresie  of  symonye,  alle  synnes  ben  counted 
for  nou^t,  as  \q,  lawe  sei]?  expresly. 

A !  Lord,  hou  moche  is  oure  kyng  and  oure  rewme  holpen 
bi  massis  and  preieris  of  symonyentis  and  heretikis,  ful  of 
pride  coveitise  and  env}^e?  ]?at  haten  so  moche  pore  prestis, 
techynge  Cristis  lif  and  J?e  gospel,  to  meyntene  holy  life  of 
Cristene  peple  and  ]>e  kynges  regalie,  ]?at  ]?ei  cursen  hem  and 
prisonen  hem  wiJ?outen  answere,  whanne  J)ei  ben  redi  reulid  in 

^  corrected ;  Crislosiom^  X. 


The  author 
proves  from 
the  Fathers 
how  great 
holiness  is 
required  m 
a  priest ; 


and  contrasts 
with  this  pic- 
ture the  pre- 
valent vice  and 
hypocrisy  of 
the  persecuting 
clergy  of  his 
own  day. 


^88 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


alle  goodnesse  and  treu]?e  after  holy  writt ;  namely  si]?]3en  oure 
prelatis  lyven  in  open  extorsion  and  Luciferis  pride,  and  sillen 
men  leve  to  lye  in  synne  of  lecherie  and  avoutrie  for  annuel 
rente,  and  Jjerto  lyven  in  pompe  of  worldly  array  and  glotonye 
and  drounkenesse,  and  wasten  pore  mennus  lifelode  in  grete 
festis  and  fate  hors,  and  eten  and  drynken  pore  mennus  lif, 
and  bilden  grete  paleis  in  Cristene  mennys  blood,  and  ben 
clojjid  and  slepen  Jjer  inne.  Where  \qi  plesen  God  in  offrynge 
]?is  sacrament  of  unyte  and  pees,  ])e  while  here  hondis  ben  ful 
of  ]?e  bote  blood  of  Cristis  children  and  eires  of  hevene? 
Whanne  ]?ei  taken  bi  raveyne  and  extorsion  pore  mennus 
goodis,  and  wasten  hem  in  festis  and  o])ere  vanytees,  ])an  j^ei 
eten  and  drynken  pore  mennus  blood  and  her  lif;  for  ]?ei 
spendiden  here  blood  for  getyng  of  ]7es  goodis  Jjat  })es  worldly 
prestis  wasten  }>us,  and  bi  ])es  goodis  ]?ei  schulden  sustyne  here 
lif.  And  ])is  sentence  is  wisely  taken  of  Goddis  word  bi  ])e 
prophetis,  as  Robert  Grosted  and  o}>ere  doctouris  declaren 
pleynly,  and  certis  }>es  weiward  heretikis  stiren  God  ra})ere  to 
vengaunce  J)an  mercy,  as  Seynt  Gregory  prove]?;  and  here 
blissyng  turne])  in  to  cursyng,  and  here  preier  in  to  synne. 
And  Seint  Poul  sei]),  ])at  J?ei  defoulen  Goddis  Sone  as  moche 
as  is  in  hem,  and  ]>erfore,  as  to  hem  self,  })ei  offeren  defouled 
bred,  as  Seynt  Gregory  and  Seynt  Jerom  witnessen,  wi]?  J^e 
comyn  lawe  of  holy  Chirche.  Certis  Jewis  suffriden  Crist  to 
be  leid  in  a  clene  stoon  after  his  dee]? ;  but  ]?es  viciouse  prestis, 
ful  of  pride  coveitise  and  heresie,  putten  his  bodi  in  here  soule, 
])at  is  foulere  a  ]?ousand  fold  ])an  ony  stynkynge  privey  in  er]?e. 
And  si]?]?en  here  foule  soule  is  in  \e  develis  possession,  }>ei 
bitaken  Cristis  body  into  f>e  fendis  power  as  moche  as  in  hem 
is.  But  ne])eles,  as  seiyng  of  ]?e  masse  in  unclene  lif,  and 
wi]?outen  devocion,  and  unwor]?!  resceyvyng  of  ]>is  blessed 
sacrament,  ful  moche  and  neer  hondis,  most  displesi]?  God,  so 
seiyng  of  masse  wi]?  clennesse  of  holy  lif  and  brennyng  devo- 
cion, ful  moche  and  neer  hondis,  most  plesi]?  God  Almy^tty, 
and  profiti]?  to  Cristene  soulis  in  purgatorie,  and  to  men  ly  vynge 
in  er]?e,  to  wi]?stonde  temptacions  of  synne,  and  encresen  pees 
and  charite.  perfore  J^enk  ^e,  clene  prestis,  hou  moche  ^e  be 
holden  to  God,  ]?at  ^af  jou  power  to  sacre  his  owene  preciouse 

WYCLIF. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS, 


289 


body  and  blood  of  breed  and  wyn,  whiche  power  he  grauntid 
nevere  to  his  owene  modir  ne  aungel  of  hevene.  perfore  wij? 
alle  50ure  desk  and  reverence  and  devocion  do  ^  youre  office 
and  sacramentis. 

Cap.  VIIL 

Of  })is  may  men  see  hou  perilous  it  is  to  coveite  prelacie  or 
gret  benefice  in  ])e  Chirche,  si)?  no  man  almost  come)?  to  hem 
wi}30Uten  pride,  veyn  glorie,  and  symonye.  perfore  seide 
Seynt  Gregory  and  J)e  comyn  lawe  of  ]?e  Chirche,  }>at  honour 
or  prelacie  schulde  not  be  ^oven  to  hem  ]?at  seken  and  coveiten 
it,  but  to  siche  men  as  fleen  honouris  and  dignyte ;  and  })e 
same  seij?  Seynt  Austyn  and  Crisostom,  wi]?  ojjere  doctoures. 
For  Crist  techi]>  us  bi  Seynt  Poul,  fat  no  man  schal  take  honour 
to  hym,  but  he.Jjat  is  clepid  of  God,  as  Aaron  was.  perfore 
Moyses  and  ]?e  holy  prophete  Jeremye,  halewid  in  his  moder 
wombe,  excusiden  hem  mekely  whanne  God  badde  hem  take 
])e  ledyng  and  governyng  of  }?e  peple;  and  ]?e  holy  prophete 
Ysaye  durst  not  take  ]?is  offis  at  Goddis  profer,  til  he  was 
clensed  fro  synne  bi  angelis  mynystracion,  and  enflawmed  wi]? 
Goddis  science  and  charite.  perfore  Seynt  Gregory  and  Seynt 
Austyn  fiedden  at  al  here  power  to  be  bischopis,  but  sou^tten 
to  lyve  in  devocion  and  studie  of  holy  writt  and  in  lowe  degre, 
and  coveitiden  not  J)e  heyenesse  of  ]?e  statis,  but  wij>  sorowe 
and  grete  drede  of  God,  and  for  grete  nede  of  Cristene  soulis, 
token  ])is  staat,  not  of  honour,  but  of  traveile  and  bysynesse, 
as  Austyn  and  Jerom  witnessen.  Lord  !  what  stirej?  us  foolis, 
ful  of  ignoraunce  and  moche  synne,  ]?at  kunnen  not  governe 
o  soule  wel,  to  seke  so  bisily  grete  statis  where  we  schullen 
governe  many  fousand,  and  for  ]?e  leste  of  hem  alle  answere 
at  domes  day  to  J^e  blood  of  Jesus  Crist, — gilti  of  schedyng 
]>erof  3if  ony  perische  bi  oure  defaute.  Where  strong  scham- 
pions  and  pileris  of  holy  Chirche  dredden  so  sore  to  governe 
a  fewe  soulis,  whi  roten  festues  seken  so  moche  charge  ? 
Certis  it  is  ful  so})  J)at  Seynt  Jon  wi})  ])e  gilden  mou]?  sei|>,  wij? 
lawe  canoun,  ]?at  what  clerk  sekij)  or  desire]?  prelacie  or  primacie 


WORKS.      VOL.  III. 


^  corrected.;  to,  X. 
U 


Those  who 
seek  high  posts 
and  digmties  in 
the  Church  are 
not  fit  to  have 
them 


proved  from 
the  Fathers 
and  from  the 
canon  law. 


%^o 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS, 


in  erj)e,  schal  fynde  confusion  in  hevene.  And  who  wolde 
desire  sich  dignyte  of  )>e  Chirche,  in  whiche  he  muste  forsake 
his  owene  profit,  and  be  servaunt  of  alle  men,  and  bounden  in 
tyme  to  take  wilful  de)?  for  oj^er  mennys  helpe,  and  answere  for 
so  many  soulis  to  Crist,  rytful  domesman?  Certis,  sei]?  ]?is 
seynta,  no  man  but  he  ])at  dredij?  not  Goddis  harde  dom. 
perfore  sei)?  Seynt  Austyn  and  J?e  comyn  lawe,  ])at  no  ]?ing  in 
j)is  world  is  more  traveilous,  more  harde,  and  more  perilous  J)an 
])e  office  of  bischop,  prest  or  dekene,  to  do  it  wel  as  oure 
emperoure  Crist  comaundij? ;  and  ^if  it  be  evyl  don,  no  J)ing  is 
more  wrecchid  ne  more  dampnable  in  Goddis  dom.  But  what 
was  ]?e  good  reulynge  of  J)is  staat  he  lernede  nevere  fro  child- 
hod  ne  ful  age  of  man.  And  j^erefore  Seynt  Austyn  crie]>  in 
]?e  story  of  his  lif,  ])at  he  felide  nevere  God  so  moche  wro]? 
a^enus  hym,  as  whanne,  in  peyne  of  his  synnes,  he  suifride  him 
take  }?e  grete  charge  of  bischopis  staat.  perfore  he  flei^  algatis 
citees  where  bischopis  weren  olde,  lest  \q  peple  wolde  have 
hym  bischop.  perefore  me  J)enke]?  treuly,  ]?at  who  evere  come  J? 
wel  to  ony  benefice  in  fe  Chirche,  he  seki}>  not  dignyte  ne 
honour  of  men  undir  him,  but  traveile  and  servyce,  and  dispit 
of  worldly  hienesse,  as  diden  Crist  and  his  disciplis,  and  ojjere 
holy  doctouris  and  bischopis,  as  Seynt  Martyn,  Seynt  Colas, 
and  siche  o]^ere.     And  loke  J>at  no  worldly  clerk  excuse  hym^ 

make])  him  take  his  office ;  for  Seynt  Gregory 

sei])  in  ]?e  lawe,  whanne  a  man  come]?  to  siche  a  staat  as 
bringij)  wij?  hym  worschipe  and  ese,  ^if  he  come  jjerto  of  his 
owene  desire,  he  fordoij?  to  himself  J)e  vertue  of  obedience. 
And  )>erfore  Moyses  forsoke  ]?e  ledynge  of  \q  peple  as  fer  as 
durst  for  wra]>})e  of  God.  And  wanne  bodely  traveile  and  disese 
is  putt  bi  sovereyn  on  j^e  suget,  but  ^if  he  take  it  J)anne  of  his 
owene  desire,  it  is  not  plesaunt  to  God.  perfore  Seynt  Poul 
forsok  riches  and  honour  of  Jje  world  as  dritt,  and  wilfully  putte 
him  to  traveil  and  peyne  and  martirdom.     And  in  tokene  of  J)is 

^  Several  words  are  lost  here,  through  their  having  been  inadvertently 
cut  off  when  the  MS.  was  bound.  The  sense  seems  to  require  the  insertion 
of  some  such  words  as  '■for  pal  love  of  i,oulis.* 

a  St.  John  Chrys.  Conim.  in  Ada  Aposi,  Horn.  III.  §  4. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS, 


%()\ 


obedience  Crist  fledde  awey  whanne  J^e  peple  wold  have  maad 
him  kyng,  as  J)e  gospel  of  Jon  witnessej? ;  but  he  oifred  hym 
self  wilfully  to  Jerusalem,  to  suffre  peyne,  woundis,  and  dis- 
pitous  de]>  for  ojjere  mennus  nede  and  profit. 

And  certis  oure  worldly  clerkis  my^tten  longe  ynow^  be 
wi]?outen  hem,  bifore  \2X  trewe  prelatis  wolden  prese  on  hem ; 
and  5if  Jjei  weren  opyn  trewe  men  in  Goddis  cause,  Jjei  schulden 
sunere^  gete  pursuyng  cursing  and  prisonyng,  or  brennyng, 
of  worldly  coveitouse  prelatis,  }>an  fatte  benefices  or  grete  dig- 
nytees.  perfore  Seynt  Gregory  techi}>  in  his  Pastoralis^  J^at 
whanne  bischoprichees  weren  pore,  and  bischopis  weren  }>e 
first  in  martirdom  for  Cristene  feij?,  ]>anne  it  was  wor))i  grete 
preysynge  to  coveite  a  bischopriche.  But  now,  sij>  bischop- 
riches  ben  riche,  and  many  worldly  bysinesses  kny5tt  ferto, 
it  is  not  do  but  dredeful  to  have  bischopriches.  perfore  Seynt 
Bernard  wrot  to  Egenye^  J)e  pope,  J)at  he  drede  no  vermyn  so 
moche  to  come  to  ]?e  pope  as  foul  lust  to  be  lord;  and  ^it 
comynly  in  ]?at  tyme  popis  weren  poysond,  for  coveitise  of  ]?e 
staat  ]>at  oj^ere  men  hadden  }>erto.  And  to  refreyne  synful 
ydiotis  fro  siche  statis  and  beneficis,  sei]?  lawe  canoun,  he  ]?at 
passij;  oJ?er  in  honour  or  dygnite  of  l?e  Chirche,  he  is  most  foul 
of  alle  but  ^if  he  passe  o]?ere  men  in  kunnynge  and  holynesse. 
Of  J?es  few  wordis  may  worldly  foolis  see  here  pereles  and 
sclaundris,  and  do  no  symonye  for  holy  ordris  ne  benefices  ne 
sacramentis,  bi  feyned  colour  of  dispensyng  and  privylegie, 
and  customes  of  Anticristis  weiward  collegie  and  synagoge 
of  Sathanas. 


^  corrected;  sumere,  X. 

*  There  is  nothing  about  the 
poverty  of  bishops  in  the  passage 
from  St.  Gregory's  Pastorale  here 
cited.  He  was  considering  the 
text,  '  If  any  man  desireth  the  office 
of  a  bishop  he  desireth  a  good 
work/  and  observes, — '  Quamvis 
notandum,   quod    illo    in    tempore 


^  read  Eugenye. 

hoc  dicitur,  quo  quisquis  plebibus 
praeerat,  primus  ad  martyrii  tor- 
menta  ducebatur.  Tunc  ergo  lauda- 
bile  fuit  episcopatum  quaerere, 
quando  per  hunc  quemque  dubium 
non  erat  ad  suppHcia  graviora  per- 
venire.'     {Past.  Pars  I.  cap.  8.) 


Application  of 
the  principle  to 
present  cir- 
cumstances. 


'ZgZ; 


WYCLIF'S  WORKS. 


Worldly  priests 
are  guilty  of 
the  accursed 
sin  of  slander, 
when  they 
maintain  that 
Christ  and  his 
apostles  lived 
like  them- 
selves, 


Cap.  IX. 
Also  alle  \o  ])at  putten  sclaundre  or  evyl  fame  on  ony  men, 
for  whiche  hem  nedi]?  to  be  purged,  whanne  ]?ei  don  J>is  mali- 
ciously, ben  solempnely  acursed  by  Goddis  lawe  and  mannys. 
Here  worldly  prestis,  J^at  ben  bounden  to  sue  Crist  and  his 
apostlis  in  lyvyng  prechyng  and  abstynence,  as  Seynt  Jerom 
and  here  owene  lawe  witnessen,  owen  to  drede  ful  sore  of  ]?is 
ri^tful  curs.  For  si]))?en  in  wordis  and  dedis,  and  resceyving 
of  here  gostly  office,  J?ei  seyn  and  crien  ]?ei  suen  Crist  and  his 
postlis,  jjei  seyn  in  dede  Jjat  Crist  and  his  postlis  lyveden  J>us 
worldly,  and  diden  not  here  office,  as  ]?ei  faren  now.  And 
certis,  ^if  Crist  schal  be  holden  verrey  prophete  and  techere 
and  verrey  God,  he  mut  purge  hym  of  J)is  sclaundre ;  for  ellis 
his  lif  lawe  and  techyng  is  fals,  and  alle  his  disciplis  gone  in 
J?e  same  sclaundre.  And  J)is  wickid  fame  is  put  on  Crist  and 
his  apostlis  bi  malece,  and  for  coveitise  of  worldly  goodis ;  for 
Jjei  desserveden  not  to  have  jjis  foule  name  of  worldly  lif  and 
necligence  and  sleyng  of  Cristene  soulis.  pan  it  is  putt  on 
him  for  malice,  and  coveitise  of  worldly  clerkis,  and  for  to 
colour  here  owene  raveyne,  bi  whiche  ]>ei  stelen  fro  lordis  and 
comyns  here  temperal  lordischip  and  goodis.  Certis  in  })e  olde 
lawe  a  blaspheme  J^at  despisid  God,  puttyng  fals  errour  on  him, 
schuld  be  stoned  to  dej?  of  alle  jje  peple ;  and  in  j>e  lawe  of 
grace  alle  men  schulden  caste  stones  of  charitable  correpcion 
or  reproving.  And  ^if  it  be  resonable  J>at  a  man  schal  be 
hangid  for  stelyng  of  fourtene  pens,  moche  more  schulden^ 
J)es  blasphemeris  of  God,  ]?at  stelen  so  many  lordischip^ia  and 
temperal  goodis  from  comynte  of  seculeris,  and  wasten  hem  in 
synne.  It  is  grete  synne  to  gabbe  on  a  pore  man ;  it  is  more 
to  gabbe  on  an  holy  man,  and  defame  hym ;  but  most  synne 
it  is  to  gabbe  on  Crist,  hedde  of  alle  seyntis  and  lorde  of  alle 
lordis.  Also  it  is  grete  synne  to  lie  and  disceyve  men  bi  lesyng 
of  here  tempera!  goodis ;  more  to  disceyve  in  spiritual  goodis^ 
as  vertues  and  good  lif ;  but  most  to  disceyve  men  in  fei]?  and 
myrrour  of  Cristis  lif,  )?at  is  gi'ond  of  alle  rightful  lif  after. 

^  corrected ;  sadden,  X. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


^93 


For  no  seyntis  lif  is  wor]?,  but  in  as  moche  as  it  is  acordyng 
wi]>  Cristis  lif;  )?erfore  it  is  worse  a  Jjousand  fold  to  robbe 
Cristene  men  of  J?is  tresour,  ]?an  of  alle  erjjely  goodis  |?at  evere 
weren  or  schullen  be. 

Also  worldly  proude  clerkis,  ful  of  coveitise  and  ypocrisie, 
sclaundre  pore  prestis  as  heretikis,  for  ]?ei  techen  holy  writt, 
and  namely  j?e  gospel  and  Jje  pore  lif  of  Crist  and  his  apostlis, 
a^enis  here  worldly  lif,  to  distroie  synne  and  norische  holy 
lyvyng  in  prestis  lordis  and  comyneris;  and  seyn  and  meyn- 
tenen  faste,  in  word  and  dede,  ]?at  heresie  is  ful  feij?  of  ]>e 
gospel,  and  saad  treu}?e  of  holy  writt  is  heresie,  for  it  is  a^enst 
here  proude  worldly  lif.  And  herefore  j?ei  fallen  into  Goddis 
curs  and  alle  his  seyntis,  J^at  for  j?is  sclaunder  lordis  and  comy- 
neris doren  not  here  j^e  gospel  and  Goddis  hestis  prechid  of 
pore  prestis  in  Goddis  name,  but  ben  constreyned  to  here 
fablis  and  lesyngis  prechid,  and  flateryng,  in  stede  of  Goddis 
word.  And  of  ]?e  noumbre  of  Goddis  curses  set  in  his  lawe 
upon  siche  ypocritis  is  not  esy  to  wise  men  to  sette  a  terme, 
for  witty  men  may  not  fully  comprehende  alle  ]>es  curses  in 
Jjis  lif. 

Also  J^ei  sclaundren  foule  oure  modir  holy  Chirche,  ])at  is 
Cristis  spouse,  wij)  here  coveitise  and  customes  and  privelegies. 
For  whanne  ]>ei  bryngen  up  newe  slei^tis  of  covetise  and  job- 
bynge  of  lewede  mennys  goodis,  }>ei  seyen  ]?at  alle  J)is  is  for 
honour  and  devocion  of  God  and  holy  Chirche ;  and  ^if  ony 
man  wi]?stonde  hem  in  j>is,  ]?ei  feynen  him  acursed,  and  enemye 
of  God  and  holy  Chirche.  As,  ^if  a  pore  man  have  longe 
founden  moche  wex,  brennynge  bi  fore  a  rotyn  stok,  ^if  a  trewe 
man  teche  ]?is  pore  man  to  paie  his  dettis,  fynde  his  wif  and 
children  breed  and  cloj),  and  ^if  he  may  strecche  ferjjere,  to  do 
his  almes  to  pore  bedrede  men,  old  and  feble,  crokid  and  blynd, 
as  God  biddij),  j>ei  bo}?e  ben  holden  cursed  and  enemy es  of 
holy  Chirche,  for  as  moche  as  \>ei  don  Cristis.  biddyng,  and 
more  mercy  to  here  pore  nei^eboris,  and  leven  unskilful  devo- 
cion and  blynde  mawmete  and  foul  ypocrisie  of  prestis.  But 
certis  God  blissi}?  alle  siche  merciful  men,  and  grauntej?  hem 
)?e  blisse  of  hevene.  And  ]>es  coveitouse  prestis,  ful  of  maw- 
metrie,  crien  faste  Sathanas  curs  and  tirauntrie  a^enst  Cristis 


and  that  'poor 
priests'  teach, 
not  the  gospel, 
but  heresy, 


and  that  holy 
Church  ap- 
proves of 
idolatrous  and 
superstitious 
devotions  more 
than  of  the 
pure  service  of 
God  and  our 
neighbour. 


294 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


On  the  abuses 
of  the  right  of 
sanctuary 
claimed  for 
particular 
Churches. 


breperen,  eyris  of  hevene.  Moreover  J>ei  crien  faste,  ^if 
coveitouse  prestis  han  be  in  possession  of  o])ere  mennus  goodis 
fourty  ^eer  or  j)ritti,  wrongfully,  a^enst  Goddis  bidding,  ]?ei  may 
not  be  taken  from  hem  on  no  maner;  for  J)e  vertu  of  pre- 
scripcion,  bi  long  custom  of  synne,  haj?)?e  made  hem  lordis,  and 
holy  Chirche  approve)?  J)is,  and  cursej?  alle  men  contrarie  herto, 
in  wille  word  or  dede. 

Also  ]?ei  chalengen  fraunchise  and  privylegie  in  many  grete 
chirchis,  j?at  wickid  men,  opyn  Jeeves,  mansleeris,  ]?at  han 
borwed  here  nei3eboris  goodis  and  ben  in  power  to  paie  and 
make  restitucion,  ])ere  schuUen  dwelle  in  seyntewarie,  and 
no  man  empeche  hem  bi  processe  of  lawe,  ne  oo})  sworn  on 
Goddis  body  and  used.  And  J?ei  meyntenen  stifiy  J?at  ]?e  kyng 
mote  conferme  }?is  privylegie  and  tieste  of  Jeeves  and  robberie 
of  J)is  rewme,  a5enst  Goddis  hestes,  ri3twisnesse,  and  his  opyn 
00]?,  bi  whiche  he  is  sworn  to  do  justice  and  equite  to  alle  his 
lege  men.  And  for  ]?is  privylegie,  ]?at  is  opyn  heresie,  J>es 
proude  worldly  clerkis  wolen  coste  and  fi^tte  to  meyntene  it 
for]?,  for  wynnyng  of  worldly  dritt ;  but  for  to  meyntene  privy- 
legie of  Cristis  gospel,  or  Cristis  mekenesse  and  povert,  wolen 
))ei  not  coste  a  fer|?ing,  but  spende  many  Jjousand  pound  to 
make  it  heresie,  and  curse  ^  prisone  and  brenne  alle  men  ]?at 
techen  trewely  \e  gospel,  and  jie  pore  lif  of  Crist  and  his  postlis. 
Certis  it  were  grete  synne  to  sclaundre  ]?e  Quene  of  Englond, 
or  Empresse,  wij>  synne  of  avowtrie,  where  siche  were  ful  trewe 
and  clene  and  chast  to  here  laweful  husbonde ;  it  is  a  ]?ousand 
fold  more  synne  to  sclaundre  holy  Chirche,  Cristis  spouse, 
whiche  Chirche,  as  Seynt  Poul  seij?,  is  a  pilere  and  foundement 
of  trewjje,  wi]?  here  cursed  ypocrisie  and  robbyng  of  Cristen 
mennis  goodis  bi  long  custom  of  wrong  and  synne.  Certis 
alle  Cristene  men  schulden  crie  out  on  ]?es  cursed  heretikis,  ]?at 
sclaundren  Crist  and  holy  Chirche  his  trewe  spouse.  For  in 
J?is  })ei  maken  holy  Chirche  a  bande  of  here  synne,  and  res- 
ceitour  of  here  raveyn,  and  sclaundren  holy  Chirche  wi]?  fe 
cursede  dedis  of  Anticristis  chirche  and  synagoge  of  Sathanas. 
And  )?us  )?ei  seyn  good  evyl  and  evyl  good,  for  to  have  Goddis 
curs. 

^  The  MS.  has  a  word  here  which  is  undecipherable. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


295 


Cap.  X. 

Also  alle  men  J?at  distourblen  ^  )?e  pees  of  holy  Chirche 
and  J?e  kyng  ben  cursed  solempnely  bi  Goddis  lawe  and 
mannys.  Certis  pees  of  Cristis  Chirche  stondej?  in  verrey 
sadnesse  of  fei]>,  hope,  charite,  mekenesse,  and  pacience,  and 
holdyng  of  Cristis  ordeynaunce,  and  verrey  pes  of  J?e  kyng  and 
his  rewme,  and  verrey  subjeccion,  and  ri^tful  domes,  and  just 
ponyschyng  of  mysdoeris,  and  relevyng  of  pore  men,  faderles 
children  and  moderles,  and  pore  widewis.  And  who  evere  do  J? 
most  a^enst  j?e  poyntis,  disturblij?  most  }>is  verrey  pees,  and 
no  man  ellis.  First,  alle  worldly  clerkis  }3at  wolen  not  holde 
hem  payed  wi]?  holy  writt  and  )?e  ordynaunce  of  Crist,  to  lyve 
in  mekenesse,  wilful  povert,  and  besy  traveil  in  gostily  werkes, 
as  Crist  and  his  posUis  diden,  disturblen  verrey  pees  of  holy 
Chirche  and  Cristendom.  Lord !  how  grete  hyndryng  of  ^ 
Cristen  fei]?  is  it,  j?at  so  many  clerkis  leven  holy  writt,  and  namely 
Cristis  gospel,  and  studyen  hej»ene  mennys  lawis  and  worldly 
coveitouse  prestis-  tradicions,  maad  of  here  owene  willardis 
dom  for  here  pride  and  coveitise,  and  charge  hem  more  )>an 
Goddis  hestis  !  Sif>]?en  Goddis  lawe  is  li3t,  swete,  and  esy,  and 
best  wole  brynge  men  to  hevene,  and  at  \^  fulle  occupie  alle 
prestis  wittis  in  Jjc  world  til  ]?e  day  of  dom.  And  oJ?ere  tra- 
dicions of  synful  men  ben  ful  of  errour,  and  maken  many 
snaris,  or  gnaris,  to  lette  men  in  J)e  weie  to  hevene,  J>at  bifore 
was  siker  and  pleyn,  wijjoute  ony  lettid. 

Lord  I  what  charite  is  it  for  hem  ])at  schulden  be  most  gostly 
prestis  to  make  werre  in  alle  Cristendom  for  here  worldly  cause 
and  stynkynge  lordischipe,.  a^enst  Cristis  biddyng  and  hf,  and 
graunte  ful  absolucion  and  relessyng  of  alle  peynes  in  purga- 
tory, for  to  slee  eche  Cristene  man  o}?er,  as  ^  don  Jjes  proude 
prestis  of  Rome  and  Avynoun,  wij)  here  worldly  clerkis  on  bo]>e 
sidis.  Certis  \€\  disturblen  verry  pees  of  al  holy  Chirche  and 
alle  Cristendom  ]?erto.  Lord!  what  mirrour  of  mekenesse  is 
fis,  J>at  bischopis  and  prestis,  monkis  chanons  and  freris,  ]>at 
schulden  be  meke  and  pacient  and  lambren  among  wolvys  bi 


By  their  up- 
holding 01 
human  laws 
and  traditions, 
worldly  priests 
disturb  the 
peace  of 
Church  and 
State, 


and  in  par- 
ticular by  stir- 
ring up  war,  as 
these  two 
popes  at  Rome 
and  Avignon 
are  doing. 


^  corrected ;  distribule?i^  X. 


cor. ;  oft  J  X. 


^  cor.;  a?id^  X. 


296 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


Courts  Chris- 
tian, so  called. 


Persecuting- 
spirit  of  world- 
ly priests. 


techyng  of  Crist,  ben  more  proudly  arraied  in  armer  and  o)?ere 
costis  of  warns,  and  more  cruel  in  here  owene  cause  ]?an  ony 
oJ?ere  lord  or  tiraunt,  ^e,  hejjene  emperoursi  For  J^ei  wolen 
wijjouten  pite  and  answere  curse,  prisone,  slee,  and  brenne  trewe 
prestis,  ]?at  techen  pleynly  Cristis  lawe  and  his  lif  a^enst  here 
pride  coveitise  and  ypocrisie.  Lord !  what  ensaumple  of 
pacience  ^even  ]?es  worldly  prestis  and  religiouse,  J^at  schulden 
5eve  alle  here  goodis  and  here  bodely  lif  to  kepe  o))ere  men  in 
pees  and  in  charite,  as  Crist  and  his  lawe  techen,  and  now 
pursuen  men  so  cruely  for  a  litel  trespas  or  no^t,  bi  londis 
lawe,  bi  Cristen  court,  clepid  in  name,  but  in  dede  Sathanas 
trone,  and  bi  open  tirauntrie, — Jjat  a  man  my^tte  soonere  gete 
grace  and  ri5twisnesse  at  J)e  kyng  or  emperour  j?an^  at  hem,, 
for  Goddis  drede  is  not  in  hem,  ne  love  of  God  and  desire  of 
hevene,  but  }>e  world  and  joie  ]?erof  and  pride  of  Lucifer  and 
cruelte  of  Sathanas.  And  seke  wisely  in  alle  here  dedis,  and 
]50u  schalt  fynde  j^at  ]>ei  seken  worldly  heynesse,  and  prosperite 
of  worldly  muk,  and  ese  of  body,  and  wombe  joie,  and  noris- 
chyng  of  synne  for  annuel  rente,  and  pilyng  of  here  sugetis 
bo])e  lerid  and  lewid,  and  casten  to  -distroie  holy  writt,  and 
myrrour  of  Cristis  lif  and  his  postlis,  and  alle  men  J?at  techen  it. 
And  ]?us  ])ei  clepen  reste  and  encresyng  of  J?is  cursed  worldly 
lif,  f>e  pees  of  holy  Chirche.  But  certis  Crist  cam  ^  in  to  |)is 
world  to  distroie  Jjis  fals  pees,  as  he  sei}>  hym  self,  and  to  make 
pees  bitwixe  God  and  Cristene  men  bi  fei]?  and  holy  Hf,  and 
forsakyng  of  worldy  muk  and  joie,  and  bi  suffryng  of  peynes 
in  body  for  trewe  techynge,  and  holdyng  of  mekenesse  and 
charite.  But  whoevere  wol  be  about  to  meyntene  J^is  [pees  ^] 
of  God,  and  distroie  fals  pees  of  ^e  fend,  of  Jje  worldly  and 
fleschly  temptacions,  he  schal  be  cursed  pursued  and  slayn 
wi]?outen  pite  or  open  answere.  And  ))us  J>ei  cursen  Crist  and 
alle  his  trewe  servauntis,  in  }?is  world  and  in  hevene,  for  J>ei 
alle  wole  distroie  J;is  reste  in  synne  j?at  ))ei  clepen  pees  of  holy 
Chirche.  And  pus  })ei  colouren  alle  here  cursed  synnys  under 
name  of  Cristis  spouse,  and  falsly  sclaundren  hir  and  oure 
Savyour  Crist. 


^  corrected;  \)at,  X, 


cor. ;  chain,  X. 


supplied  conjecturally. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


397 


8  He  did  not  claim  'benefit  of 
clergy,'  the  right  to  be  tried  by  an 


ecclesiastical  rather  than  by  a  secu- 
lar court. 


The  worldly 
priests  under- 


pendence  on 
the  part  of 
churchmen  of 
all  secular 
jurisdiction. 


I  Kings  ti.  26. 


Cap.  XI. 

3it  worldly  clerkis  and  feyned  religious  breken  and  disturblen 
moche  be  kyngis  pees  and  his  rewmes.     For  hir  prelaries  of  his  I  S? ?hVreafm^by 

,  ,  .  .       ,  ,  .  r  1  .  •       i  asserting  inde- 

world,  wi);  prestis  lesse  and  more,  crien  faste,  and  wnten  m  ' 
here  la^vis,  ];at  ]?e  kyng  haj>  no  jurisdiccioun  ne  power  of  here 
persones,  ne  goodis  of  holy  Chirche.  And  ^it  Crist  and  his 
postlis  weren  most  obediaunt  to  kyngis  and  lordis,  and  tau3ten 
alle  men  to  be  suget  to  hem  and  serve  hem,  trewely  and  wil- 
fully, in  bodily  werkis  and  tribut,  and  drede  hem  and  worschipe 
hem  bifore  alle  o}?ere  men.  First  ))e  wise  kyng  Salamon  put 
doun  an  heie  bischop  J>at  was  fals  to  hym  and  his  rewme, 
and  exilide  him,  and  ordeyned  a  good  prest  for  him,  as  })e 
]>ridde  bok  of  Kyngis  tellij?.  And  Jesus  Crist  paiede  tribut  to 
emperour,  and  comaundid  men  to  paie  him  tribute.  And  Seynt 
Petir  comaundi]?  in  Goddis  name  Crist ene  men  to  be  suget  to 
every  creature  of  man,  ej^er  to  kyng,  as  more  hie  J?an  oJ?ere, 
o))er  to  deukis,  as  sent  of  him  to  j)e  vengaunce  of  mysdoeris, 
and  preisyng  of  goode  men.  Also  Seynt  Poul  comaundij)  bi 
auctorite  of  God,  l?at  every  soule  be  suget  to  hieris  poweris, 
for  f>er  is  no  power  but  of  God ;  princes  ben  not  to  jje  drede 
of  good  werk,  but  of  evyl  werk.  Wilt  J?ou  not  drede  J?e  potes- 
tate  ?  do  ^  good  and  ]?ou  schalt  have  preisyng  Jjerof,  for  he  is 
Goddis  mynystre  to  fe  into  good.  Soj)ly,  ^if  )?ou  hast  doun 
evyle,  drede  ]?ou,  for  he  beri]?  not  ))e  swerd  wi]?oute  cause,  for 
he  is  Goddis  mynystre,  vengere  into  wra]?f)e  to  hym  \2X  do]> 
evyl.  per  fore  j^orou^  nede  be  ^€  suget,  not  only  for  wra}?])e 
but  for  conscience.  Paie  to  alle  men  dettis,  bo]?e  tribuyt  and 
custom,  (for  ]?ingis  borun  aboute  in  J?e  lond,)  and  drede  and 
honour  and  love.  And  oure  Savyour  Jesus  Crist  suffrid  mekely 
peynful  dej?  of  Pilat,  not  excusynge  him  for  his  jurisdiccion 
bi  his  clergie  ^,  And  Seynt  Poul  proferide  h}Tn  redy  to  suflfre 
dej)  bi  dom  of  ))e  emperours  justice,  ^if  he  were  wor]?i  to 
de)?,  as  Dedis  of  Aposths  techen.     And  Poul  appelide  to  J^e 

^  corrected ;  /o,  X. 


298 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


their  one  ob- 
ject being  to 
pull  down  the 
power  of  kings 
and  nobles  and 
exalt  their  own. 


hefene  emperour  fro  }>e  prestis  of  Jewis,  for  to  be  under 
his  jurisdiccion  and  to  save  his  lif.  Lord!  whoo  ha})  maad 
oure  worldly  clerkis  exempt  from  kyngis  jurisdiccion  and  chas- 
tisynge,  si)?j?en  God  ^evij)  kyngis  ])is  oflSce  on  alle  mysdoeris  ? 
Certis  no  man  but  Anticrist,  Cristis  enemye ;  si}?en  clerkis, 
and  namely  hie  prestis,  schulden  be  most  meke  and  obedient 
to  lordis  of  })is  world,  as  weren  Crist  and  his  apostlis,  and  teche 
o]?ere  men  bo)3e  in  word  and  dede  to  be  myrrour  of  alle  men, 
to  5if  ]?is  mekenesse  and  obedience  to  \e  kyng  and  his  ri^tful 
lawis.  How  stronge  Jeeves  and  traitours  ben  j?ei  now  to  kyngis 
and  lordis,  in  denying  ]?is  obedience,  and  in  ^evyng  ensaumple 
to  alle  men  in  }>e  lond  for  to  be  rebel  a^enis  ))e  kyng  and 
lordis  !  For  in  J>is  )?ei  techen  lewid  men  and  comyns  of  J?e 
lond,  bo]?e  in  wordis  and  lawis  and  opyn  dede,  to  be  fals  and 
rebel  a^enis  J)e  kyng  and  oJ?ere  lordis.  And  \is  seme]?  wel  bi 
here  newe  lawe  of  decretalis,  where  J)e  proude  clerkis  have 
ordeyned  ])is, — j^at  oure  clergie  schal  paie  no  subsidie  ne  taxe, 
ne  helping  of  oure  kyng  and  oure  rewme,  wifouten  leve  and 
assent  of  })e  worldly  prest  of  Rome ;  and  ^it  many  tymes  ]?is 
proude  worldly  prest  is  enemye  of  oure  lond,  and  prively 
meyntene])  oure  enemy es,  and^  weren  a^enst  us  wi|?  oure  owene 
gold.  And  ])us  J)ei  maken  J)is  alien  proudest  prest  of  alle  o})ere, 
to  be  cheef  lord  of  alle  goodis  fat  clerkis  han  in  ]?e  rewme,  and 
])at  is  of  ]?e  most  pert  ])erof.  Where  ben  more  traitours  boj^e 
to  God  and  holy  Chirche,  and  namely  to  here  lege  lord  and  his 
rewme;  to  make  an  alien  worldly  prest,  enemye  to  us,  cheef 
lord  of  J)e  most  pert  of  oure  rewme  ? 

And  comynly  alle  fe  newe  lawis  ]?at  clerkis  han  maad  ben 
sutilly  conjectid  by  ypocrisie,  to  brynge  doun  power  and 
regalie  of  lordis  and  kyngis  ]?at  God  ordeynede,  and  to  make 
hem  self  lordis,  and  alle  at  here  dom.  Certis  it  seme]?  ]?at  j^es 
worldly  prestis  distroien  more  kyngis  regalie  and  lordis  power, 
])at  God  him  self  haj>  ordeyned  for  governaunce  of  Cristene 
men,  J?an  God  distroiej?  ])e  fendis  power.  For  God  settej?  him  a 
terme  what  he  schal  do  and  no  more,  but  he  suffrij?  his  power 
to  laste,  to  profite  of  goode  men,  and  just  ponyschyng  of  mys- 

^  read  to. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS, 


299 


doeris ;  but  J?es  worldly  clerkis  wolen  nevere  cesse  ^if  \€\  may, 
til  Jjei  han  fully  distroyed  kyngis  and  lordis,  and  here  regalie 
and  power. 

Also  J)es  newe  religious,  and  namely  freris,  distroien  and 
disturblen  ]je  pees  and  reste  of  j?e  kyng  and  his  rewme;  for 
})orou3  privei  confession  ]?ei  norischen  moche  synne,  namely 
lecherie,  avoutrie,  and  synne  a^ennis  kynde,  extorsions  and 
robberie  and  usure,  for  to  have  pert  ]?erof,  and  tellen  not  ))e 
treu]?e  in  confession,  for  drede  of  lesyng  bo}>e  frendischipe  and 
wynning,  and  meyntening  of  here  feyned  ordre.  And  bi  )?is  is 
strif  and  debate  among  curatis  and  here  children  in  God  ^ ;  and 
in  many  tymes  open  flatting  for  mortuaries  and  prechyng ;  and 
\€\  doren  not  seie  ))e  treu}>e  a^enst  J)e  worldly  prestis  of  Rome, 
j?ou3  he  robbe  nevere  so  foul  houre  lond  bi  symonye  and  false- 
hed  of  perdon  and  privylegies,  whanne  fei  knowen  wel  J?e 
treujje,  for  drede  ]?at  he  wold  take  awey  ]?es  ]?re  poyntis,  J?at  is, 
prechyng,  schryvyng,  and  biryng.  And  for  esy  penaunce  of 
money  ]?at  J?ei  enyoynen  men,  for  trentalis  ^  and  masse  pens, 
and  makyng  of  gaie  wyndowis  and  grete  housis,  J)at  J?e  world 
may  see  and  preise,  ]?e  moste  viciouse  men,  as  avoutreris, 
extorsioneris,  usureris,  and  open  }>eves,  gon  to  ]>es  ypocritis,  and 
forsaken  here  owene  curatis  ))at  wolden  sumwhat  telle  hem  ])e 
perilis.  And  herefore  of  fals  purchas,  of  wickid  extorsion  and 
robberie,  come]?  nevere  restitucion  for  siche  privey  schriftis  and 
penaunce  of  masse  pens;  and  where  ]?ei  regnen  most  in  hous- 
ehold, prechyng  and  stryvyng,  ]?ere  regne]?  most  synne.  And 
sijjen  discencions  wi]?infor]?,  and  open  werris  wi]30utenforj>, 
comen  most  for  synne  and  norischyng  of  synful  men  in  here 
myslyvyng,  ]?es  weiward  and  coveitous  confessouris  disturblen 
most  }?e  pees  of  ]?e  kyng  and  his  rewme,  sij?}?en  )?ei  norischen 
moste  synne  bi  fals  prechyng  of  lesyngis,  fablis,  and  veyn 
cronyclis, — bi  sikernesse  of  letteris  of  fraternyte  and  synguler 
preieris,  and  disceyven  men  of  J?e  treu]?e  of  Goddis  word,  and 

1  corrected;  good.X. 


a  A  trental  was  '  an  office  for  the 
dead  that  continued  thuty  days,  or 
consisting  of  thirty  masses;  from  the 


Italian     trenta,     that    is,    trigiiita' 
Cowell's  Interpreter.,  sub  voce. 


The  peace  of 
realm  is  also 
disturbed 
throug^h  the 
practices  of  the 
friars,  who  by 
giving  illusory 
or  corrupt 
penances  in  the 
confessional, 
foster  sin. 


300 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


I  Kings  xviii. 
18, 


Bishops  are 
often  perjured, 
— as  in  the  case 
of  those  who 
have  sworn  to 
go  and  preach 
to  the  heathen, 
and  then  stay 
in  England  in 
the  capacity  of 
suffragan 
bishops, 


perverte  almesdede  fro  pore  bedrede  and  feble  men  to  hemself, 
bi  colour  of  ypocrisie.  And  for  ])is  ende  ]je  holy  prophete 
Helye  seide,  J?at  kyng  Acab  disturblede  Jje  lond  of  Israel.  And 
comynly  \e  peple  of  God  hadde  evere  pees  and  vittorie  but  for 
here  owene  synne,  as  Jje  processes  of  Goddis  law  schewij?. 
And  certis  ^if  men  taken  regard  ^  to  J)e  ground  of  holy  writt, 
bo)?e  J?e  Olde  Testament  and  Newe,  and  to  lyvyng  of  Crist  and 
his  postlis,  and  to  ]?e  Kf  and  governaunce  of  oure  worldly  clerkis, 
)7ei  may  openly  se  J?at  oure  worldly  biynde  clerkis  ben  most 
traitours  of  Crist  and  his  lawe,  and  most  traitours  to  fe  kyng 
and  his  rewme,  and  moste  distroien  pees  of  holy  Chirche  and 
Cristene  londis. 

Cap.  XII. 

Also  alle  \o  ])at  forsweren  hem  are  justly  cursed  of  God  and 
man.  First,  bischopis  maad  of  ]?e  court  of  Rome,  who  ^  sweren 
to  go  and  converte  hej?ene  men  in  placis  of  here  bischoprichis, 
don  not  in  dede  })is  office,  but  dwellen  in  Engelond,  and  bicomen 
riche  bischopis  suffragans,  and  pillen  and  robben  oure  peple  for 
halowyng  of  chirches,  chirche3erdis,  auteris,  and  ornamentis  of 
j?e  chirche.  And  }>us  J?ei  ben  Juries  forsworen;  first,  for  l?ei 
levyn  to  converte  he]?en  men  to  bileve,  of  which  ))ei  taken  cure 
wilfully;  ])e  secunde,  for  J^ei  don  not  treuely  here  office  to 
profit  of  her  maistris  to  whom  f)ei  ben  sworon.  For  Jjei  sillen 
here  sacramentis,  and  })ingis  j?at  perteynen  to  sacramentis,  ])at 
Jjei  schulden  do  frely  as  Crist  comaundij?,  and  distroie  synne  bi 
here  power,  })at  ])ei  norischen  now  for  money  and  favour  of 
worldly  men.  pe  J^ridde  tyme,  j?ei  don  not  treujje  and  profit  to 
]?e  kyng  and  his  lege  men,  as  bo]?e  J^ei  and  here  maistris  ben 
sworen,  but  falsly  robben  his  lege  men  of  here  goodis  for  ^evyng 
of  spiritual  }?ingis,  and  kepen  moche  of  ))is  muk  to  hemself,  and 
wasten  it  in  gay  mytris  and  ryngis  and  ojjere  worldly  vanytees ; 
and  bi  J)is  doyng  )?ei  ben  grete  traitours  to  God,  to  here  kyng, 
and  to  here  maistris.  perfore,  as  capital  traitours  and  chef 
heretikis,  ]?ei  schulden  be  hurlid  out  of  oure  rewme,  but  ^if  |?ei 
wolen  treuely  make  satisfaccion,  and  do  trewely  here  office. 


corrected ;  reward,  X. 


2  corrected ;  and,  X. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


301 


Also  alle  bischopis  and  possessioneris,  sworen  to  be  trewe  and 
holy  to  }?e  kingis  conseil  and  profit,  se  men  opynly  forsworen. 
For  Jjei  drawen  alle  Jie  wynnyng  ])at  J?ei  may  fro  ]?e  kyng  to 
hemself,  and  ]?e  proude  prest  of  Rome,  makyng  him  chef  lord 
of  moche  part  of  J^e  rewme  and  of  j?e  kyngis  power,  makyng  \q 
conseil  of  Jje  kyng  knowen  to  him,  as  \€\  ben  sworen  to  J)e 
pope.  And  of  ]?is  oflice  serven  freris,  confessouris  of  grete 
lordis  and  ladies,  and  ]?is  norischij)  hate  and  envye  and  debates 
and  werris  myche  in  Cristene  peple. 

Also  oure  bischopis  ben  sworen  to  meyntene  j?e  honour  and 
dignyte  of  Petre  and  Poul,  but  \€\  moste  distroien  it  of  alle  men 
in  erjje  at  here  power.  For  here  honour  and  dignyte  was  to 
kepe  Cristis  conseilis  of  gostly  wilful  povert,  mekenesse, 
pacience,  and  charite,-  and  to  be  servauntis  of  alle  men  to  save 
here  soulis;  and  J?ei,  under  colour  of  hem,  desiren  to  be 
gretteste  lordis  of  J)e  world  bi  ypocrisie,  to  get  moche  drit  of  J^e 
world  by  pleting  cursing  and  fi3ttyng,  to  sclaundre  of  God  and 
alle  his  servauntis. 

Also  men  of  lawe  and  jurours  han  non  conscience  to  for- 
swere  hem  for  twel  pens  and  her  dyner,  and  make  many  false 
eires ;  and  many  lordis,  J)at  schulden  be  pileris  of  ri3twisnesse 
and  meyntene  pore  men  in  ri^t,  wolen  hire  questis,  and  con- 
streyne  hem  bi  manas  to  forswere  hem,  for  enemyte  J>at  )?ei 
han  to  a  man,  or  for  coveitise  of  wynnynge.  Viteleris,  mar- 
chauntis,  and  chapmen,  forsweren  hem  alle  day  for  muk  of  )>e 
world,  }>at  unne]?is  may  ony  trewe  word  be  among  hem.  pe 
same  weie,  officeris  of  lordis,  [who]  ^  sweren  to  do  ri^t  to  alle 
men,  and  trewely  lok  j^e  lordis  profit,  gederen  to  hemself, 
robben  j?e  tenauntis,  and  maken  J)e  lordis  pore.  How  men 
breken  fe  solempne  oj?  and  profession  maad  in  here  cristen- 
dom,  to  forsake  ];e  devel  and  alle  his  werkis,  and  kepe  Goddis 
hestis,  it  is  li3t  to  se  and  hard  to  amende.  Of  oure  religious 
possessioneris  and  o]?ere,  how  jjei  kepen  here  profession  of 
povert,  chastite,  and  obedience,  is  no  word  to  speke  nowe,  for 
alle  ben  fosworen  or  ellis  .  .  .  .  ^.  pei  maken  not  profession  io 
here  patrouns  reule,  as  Benet,  Austyn,  Domynyk,  and  Fraunseis, 


supplied  conjecturally. 


a  word  dropped  out  here. 


and  of  those 
who,  to  be 
true  to  the 
pope,  are 
false  to  their 
king^. 


Perjury  is  also 
rife  among  the 
laity,  high  and 
low. 


303 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


A  curse  is  also 
incurred  by 
those  who 
make  false 
heirs ;  in- 
stances of 
this  sin. 


The  clergy, 
always  grasp- 
ing at  lands 
and  lordships, 
will  not  cease 
till  they  get  all 
the  kingdom 
into  their 
hands. 


for  noon  of  hem  alle  kepij)  it,  but  stryve)?  ajenst  Goddis  reule 
and  here  owene,  and  a^enst  alle  men  )?at  traveilen  to  brynge 
hem  to  Cristis  reule. 

Cap.  XIII. 

Alle  ])0  )?at  maken  false  eiris  ben  cursed  grevously  of  God 
and  man.  First,  prelatis  and  lordis  ]?at  maken  evyl  curatis,  as 
eiris  of  Cristis  office,  to  kepe  Cristene  soules  bou^t  wij?  Cristis 
precious  blood,  rennen  sore  in  J)is  curs.  Also  clerkis,  J?at  pur- 
chasen  hem  lordischipis,  and  putten  out  lordis  sones  and  cosyns 
and  ny5  blood,  rennen  in  j)e  same  curs ;  for  ]?ei  holden  hem  out 
bi  pie,  bi  cavyllacions  and  false  questis,  hind  for  money  and 
frendischip,  and  dryven  to  forswere  hem  for  drede  of  here 
lordischip  and  tirauntrie.  For  J^ei  holden  it  wel  spendid  and 
geten,  al  ]?at  ]?ei  may  purchase  wij?  ri^t  or  wrong  of  seculer 
mennis  goodis,  and  holde  it  or  ^  bi  many  3eris,  for  ]?anne  vertu 
of  prescripcion,  }>at  is,  havyng  of  o)?ere  mennis  goodis  bi  long 
tyme,  make])  hem  lordis  of  whatevere  fing  jjei  wrongfully  sette 
bond  onne.  But  certis  Crist  ^,  lord  of  treuj^e  and  ri^twisnesse, 
is  not  ground  ne  autour  of  J?is  wynnynge,  but  Sathanas  fadir  of 
lesyngis,  to  whom  jjei  maken  sacrifice  and  omage  for  j^is  falsly 
geten  lordischip. 

Also  ])es  feyned  religious,  and  o^exe  worldly  clerkis,  amortisen 
many  grete  lordischipis  bi  fals  title  and  gret  ypocrisie.  For  l^ei 
feynen  to  lordis  ]?at  Crist  is  maad  eir  of  alle  here  goodis,  and  he 
forbedif)  clerkis  to  have  siche  lordischipis,  and  in  his  owne  per- 
sone  wolde  noon  have,  ne  his  apostlis,  but  fledden  it  as  venym, 
as  al  his  lawe  and  here  lif  schewen.  And  bi  })is  amortysyng  f>ei 
wolen  nevere  cesse,  til  alle  }>e  seculer  lordischip  of  oure  lond  be 
in  here  hondis,  clene  awey  fro  seculer  lordis.  For  J?ei  seyn  ])at 
J>ei  may  lawfully  have  al  \2X  men  wolen  ^eve  hem,  and  alle  J?at 
})ei  may  purchase  by  sotel  menys,  bi  preising  of  here  preieris 
and  o)?ere  gostly  helpe,  and  stelyng  of  chartris,  and  distreynyng 
of  5onge  eiris ;  and  no  man  may  take  ou^t  from  hem,  ne  ))ei  ^eve 
ne  selle  ony  lordischip  out  of  here  hondis.  And  )?us  litel  and 
htel  J)ei  may  gete  al  Jje  rewme  into  here  owene  hondis.    Trewely 


omit  or. 


*  corrected ;  Cristis,  X. 


CONTROVERSIAL   TRACTS. 


303 


Grist  haj?  alle  j?es  lordischipis  wel,  whanne  seculer  men  han 
hem  and  spenden  hem  wel,  moche  betere  j>an  whanne  Luciferis 
heretikis  wasten  hem  in  glotonye,  lecherie,  and  worldly  vanyte. 
And  Jjei  drawen  J>es  lordischipis  fro  j^e  comynte  of  Cristene  men, 
]>at  is  holy  Chirche,  and  murferen  hem  in  a  litel  covent  of 
Sathanas  synagoge,  }>at  ben  moche  worse  J?an  hejjene  mys- 
creauntis.  And  so  bi  name  of  holy  Chirche  j?ei  distroien  holy 
Chirche,  and  magnifien  Anticristis  chirche ;  as  who  wolde  under 
])e  baner  of  ))e  kyng  of  Engelond  disseyve  bi  treson  his  lege 
men,  and  brynge  hem  into  his  enemys  power. 

Also  ])es  mendynauntis,  Men  ours,  falsly  and  sutely  maken 
wrongful  eiris ;  for  )jei  maken  J?e  worldly  bischop  of  Rome,  J>at 
schulde  be  most  perfit  in  gostly  povert  and  mekenesse,  and 
most  forsake  J^e  world,  after  Crist  and  Petir  and  Poul,  to  be  chef 
lord  ^  of  alle  here  goodis  ^  prevey  and  apert.  For  J>ei  may  no 
lordischipe  have  of  hem,  for  here  heie  perfit  povert,  and  of  )?is 
false  makyng  of  lord  and  eier  ]?ei  han  bullis  as  privylegies. 
Wi  ben  not  }?es  cursed  traitours  ? 

.  Also  religious  and  grete  colegies  and  cathedral  chirchis  maken 
many  false  eieris;  for  J^ei  maken  hemself,  ]?at  ben  riche,  un- 
kunnyng,  and  unable,  to  be  successouris  of  Crist  and  his  postlis, 
and  cure  of  mennus  soulis,  and  to  be  eyris  perpetual  of  tij?es 
and  ofifryngis,  J)at  schulden  be  pore  mennus  Mode.  And  alle 
J?is  is  doun  bi  fals  suggestion,  symonye,  and  peiryng  of  gov- 
ernaunce  of  holy  Chirche,  for  J^ei  ben  riche  at  ))e  fuUe,  and 
[do]  ^  not  ]3e  office  of  a  curat  nei}>er  in  techynge  ne  relevyng  of 
parischenys  and  helpynge  fe  Chirche  as  jjei  schulden,  but  alle 


^  corrected;  lordis,  X. 

^  The  bull  vesting  all  the  pro- 
perty, houses,  church  furniture,  &c., 
of  the  Franciscan  Order  in  the  Holy 
See,  resei-ving  to  them  the  usufruct 
only,  was  promulgated  by  Innocent 
IV  ( 1 243-1 264),  a  wise  and  resolute 
pope.  But  the  more  rigid  and 
ascetic  members  of  the  Order — the 
Spiritualists— deemed  this  arrange- 
ment an  unworthy  compromise,  and 
succeeded  in  obtaining  from  Nic- 
holas IV  (1288-1292),  himself  a 
Franciscan,  a  bull  sanctioning  the 


^  supplied  conjecturally. 

opinion  that  Christ  practised  an 
absolute  poverty.  A  reaction  ensued  ; 
and  after  John  XXII  (1315-1334) 
had  annuUed  the  bull  of  Nicholas  IV 
by  one  which  was  published  among 
his  own  Extravagarites,  and  so  came 
to  be  regarded  as  incorporated  in 
the  canon  law,  the  pious  half-mea- 
sure of  Innocent  IV  seems  to  have 
been  at  length  generally  acquiesced 
in  by  the  Order.  See  Milman's 
Latin  Christianity,  vols.  vi.  and  vii. 


The  Francis- 
cans, to  whom 
the  Pope  is  uni- 
versal heir,  are 
signally  liable 
to  this  curse. 


as  are  also 
colleges  and 
cathedral 
churches. 


304 


WFCLJF'S  WORKS. 


Worldly  priests 
break  the 
testament  of 
Christ,  because 
he  bequeathed 
poverty  and 
persecution  to 
his  disciples, 
but  they  choose 
instead  riches 
and  honour. 


goj)  to  no^t  and  to  Anticristis  covent.  And  certis  it  is  not  in 
mannys  witt  to  telle  alle  ]?e  harme  ]?at  comej)  hereof,  bo]je  bodely 
and  gostly.  And  of  hem  J?at  geten  false  eiris  of  mennus  wifes, 
bi  privy  schryvyng  and  of  ere  homly  daliaunce,  avyse  eche  man 
who  ben  siche. 

Cap.  XIV. 

Alle  J)0  J)at  letten  |>e  juste  wille  of  a  dede  man  ben  cursed 
solempnely  of  God  and  man.  pe  trewe  testament  of  Jesus  Crist 
was  maad  on  Schire  porisday  at  ny^t,  in  whiche  he  biqua]?  to 
his  disciplis  and  here  successouris  pees  in  hem,  and  tribulacion 
and  persecucion  for  his  lawe  in  J?is  world.  But  worldly  clerkis 
breken  foule  j?is  wor])i  testament  of  Crist,  for  \d  seken  pees  and 
prosperite  of  }>is  world,  and  pees  wij?  J?e  fend  and  here  flesch, 
and  wolen  sufFre  no  traveile  for  kepynge  and  techynge  of 
Goddis  law,  but  ra|?ere  pursuen  pore  men  }>at  wolden  teche  it, 
and  so  maken  werre  a3enst  Crist  and  his  peple  for  havyng  of 
worldly  muk,  J>at  Crist  forbedij?  to  alle  his  clerkis.  In  J?e  Hf  of 
Crist  and  his  gospel,  ))at  is  his  testament,  wi]?  lif  and  techyng  of 
his  postlis,  oure  clerkis  schuUen  not  fynde  but  povert,  meke- 
nesse,  gostly  traveile,  and  dispisyng  of  worldly  men  for  reprov- 
yng  of  here  synnes,  and  grete  reward  in  hevene  for  here  goode 
lif  and  trewe  techyng,  and  wilful  sofforyng  of  de]?.  perfore 
Jesus  Crist  was  pore  in  his  lif,  ]>at  he  hadde  no  house  of  his 
owene  bi  worldly  title  to  reste  his  heed  ])erinne,  as  he  hymself 
seij?  in  \q  gospel.  And  Seynt  Petir  was  so  pore  ))at  he  hadde 
neijjer  silver  ne  gold  to  5eve  a  pore  crokid  man,  as  Petir  wit- 
nesse])  in  ]je  bok  of  Apostlis  Dedis.  Seynt  Poul  was  so  pore 
of  worldly  goodis  }>at  he  traveilede  wijj  his  hondis  for  his  liflode 
and  his  felowis,  and  suffride  moche  persecucion,  and  wakyng 
of  gret  ])0U5t  for  alle  chirches  in  Cristendom,  as  he  hymself 
witnessij?  in  many  placis  of  holy  writt.  And  Seynt  Bernard 
writi]?  to  ])e  pope,  }>at  in  J?is  worldly  aray,  and  plente  of  londis 
and  gold  and  silver,  he  is  successour  of  Constantyn  J?e  emperour, 
and  not  of  Jesus  Crist  and  his  disciplis.  And  Jesus  conferm- 
yng  J>is  testament  seide  to  his  apostlis  after  his  risyng  fro  dej) 
to  life.  My  Fadir  sente  me  and  I  sende  30W, — Jjat  is,  to  traveile, 
persecucion,  and  povert  and  hunger  and  martirdom  in  }>is  world, 

WYCLIF. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


Z^S 


and  not  to  worldly  ^  as  clerkis  usen  now.  Bi  ]?is  it  seme|?,  J>at 
alle  jjes  worldly  clerkis  havyng  seculer  lordischipe,  wi]?  aray  of 
worldly  vanyte,  ben  hugely  cursed  of  God  and  man,  for  ]?ei 
doun  a^enst  Jje  ri3tful  testament  of  Crist  and  his  postlis. 

Also  \€\  taken  mynystracion  of  dede  mennus  goodis  a3enst 
here  juste  wille,  under  colour  of  holynesse,  and  turnen  }?e  goodis 
to  here  kychenys  and  o]?ere  nedeiis  offices,  and  ]?at  is  worse,  to 
here  glotonye  and  drounkenesse,  and  festyng  of  riche  men,  and 
sufFren  dede  mennis  wifes  and  children  and  oj^ere  pore  men  fare 
fill  harde  and  in  gret  myschief.  Also  fei  taken  dede  mennis 
goodis  for  provynge  of  testamentis,  a^enst  here  juste  wille,  and 
a^enst  )?e  statute  of  oure  kyng,  and  sumtyme  in  fraude  of  )?is 
statute,  where  \€\  schulden  take  but  ei^te  pens  at  ]?e  moste. 
pei  feynen  hem  pore  to  acounte  for  alle  ))e  goodis,  and  J?an  for 
aquitaunce  taken  moche  gold  of  pe  dede  mennis  goodis ;  for 
ellis  J)ei  wolen  make  executours  to  coste  moche  bi  somonyng 
fro  place  to  place,  Jjou^  l?ei  ben  redy  to  counte  for  alle  }?e  testa- 
ment. And  ^it  bi  Goddis  lawe  and  mannys  Jjei  schulden  not 
entermete  hem  j^us  of  testamentis  ne  worldly  occupacion.  per- 
fore,  a^enst  holy  writt,  J)e  popis  lawe,  and  kyngis  statute  and 
good  conscience,  \€\  robben  comyns  of  oure  lond  of  many 
J?ousand  pound;  and  al  J?is  is  doun  bi  ypocrisie  of  Anticrist 
under  colour  of  holynesse.  And  bi  so  moche  J?ei  ben  worse 
J?an  outlawis  and  comyn  ])evys,  for  \€\  doun  J)is  robberie  apertly, 
and  justifien  it  bi  colour  of  holynesse,  ])at  no  man  may  a^en- 
stonde  hem  wi|>outen  open  werre.  And  fei  meyntenen  J?is 
cursed  ]?efte  boJ?e  bi  seculer  power  and  spiritual  swerd  and 
colour  of  holynesse,  bi  feyned  privylegies  of  holy  Chirche, 
moche  more  fan  doun  o]?ere  comyn  Jjeves  and  outlawis,  and 
J?erfore  ]?ei  ben  cursed  heretikis,  wor])i  to  have  more  peyne  ]>an 
ojjere  strong  outlawis. 

Also  ))es  worldly  clerkis  and  religious,  dowid  wij)  temperal 
rentis  and  londis,  breken  foule  Jje  ri^tful  wille  of  here  dede 
founderis ;  for  j^ei  wasten  moche  here  goodis  in  pride  and  grete 
festis  and  newe  bildyngis,  where  here  founderis  wille  was  to 


^  Some  such  word  as  pompe  or  richesse  has  been  omitted  through  error  of 
the  scribe.  I 

WOBKS.      VOL.  III.  X 


Also  they  ad- 
minister to  the 
property  of 
poor  men  cor- 
ruptly, and 
exact  large 
suras  for 
probate. 


Also  they 
waste  and 
misappropriate 
endowments 
designed  by 
their  founders 
to  answer 
pious  and 
charitable 
ends. 


3o6 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


Worldly  priests 
fall  under  a 
double  curse, 
for  they  falsify 
both  the  char- 
ters of  the 
king,  and  the 
charter  of  the 
King  of  kings, 
i.e.  the  gospel. 


fynde  many  meke  prestis,  and  devout  in  Goddis  servyce,  and 
hospitalite  of  pore  nedy  men  of  \q  countre.  And  alle  \i%  good- 
nesse  is  wij>drawen  bojje  of  meke  prestis  and  devout  bedemen, 
and  herboryng  and  fedyng  of  nedy  men;  and  proude  worldly 
clerkis,  ]>at  han  no  savour  in  Goddis  servyce,  brou3t  up,  and  ^it 
fewe  in  noumbre,  Jjere  ]?e  founder  ordeynede  manye ;  and  J)ei 
ben  myrrour  of  pride,  coveitise,  slow]?e,  glotonye,  and  drounke- 
nesse,  and  namely  of  lecherie  and  meyntenyng  of  synne,  where 
here  foundere  wolde  have  hem  mirrour  of  mekenesse,  devocion, 
and  abstynence,  and  stoppyng  of  synne.  And  Jjus  J^ei  ben 
endurid  in  here  errour  worse  ]?an  Sodom  and  Gomor,  and  dis- 
pisen  God  in  here  lif,  and  disceyven  here  founderis  as  ^  Cristene 
peple  bi  here  veyn  criyng,  whoos  preier  God  cursej?,  as  he 
witness!]?  bi  \q  prophete  Malachie. 

Cap.  XV. 

Alle  ]30  ]?at  falsen  )?e  kyngis  chartre  and  assenten  Jjerto  ben 
cursed  solempnely  of  God  and  man,  puppliched  foure  tymes  in 
])e  ^eer.  SiJ?  ]?e  kyng  sei]?  in  his  chartre,  ]?at  he  ^eve]?  ])is  maner 
or  lond  into  siche  an  hous  of  prestis  or  religious,  into  pure  and 
perpetual  almes,  Jjei  falsen  Jjis  chartre  whanne  j^ei  clepen  hem- 
self  lordis  of  J)is  worldly  goodis,  and  denyen  |?at  j?ei  ben  almes- 
men  or  bedemen,  namely  ^if  ]?ei  denyen  in  dede  goode  con- 
dicions  for  whiche  ]?e  kyng  ^af  Jjes  goodes.  Moche  more  ]?ei 
ben  cursed  }>at  falsen  J^e  chartre  of  alle  kyngis,  ]?at  is,  holy  writt, 
in  whiche  God  chargi])  alle  his  prestis  to  lyve  in  honest  povert, 
and  forsake  seculer  lordischip,  and  bisie  hem  in  spiritual  office, 
as  Crist  and  his  apostlis  diden. 

Also  ]?ei  falsen  ])e  kyngis  chartre  bi  grete  treson,  whanne  ]?ei 
maken  J^e  proude  bischop  of  Rome,  ]?at  is  cheef  manquellere  in 
er|?e  and  meyntenour  ])erof,  to  be  chief  worldly  lord  of  alle 
goodis  )5at  clerkis  han  in  oure  rewme,  and  J>at  is  almest  alle  Jse 
rewme  or  ]?e  more  pert  of  it.  For  he  schulde  be  most  meke 
and  pore  prest,  and  most  bisy  in  Goddis  travaile  to  save 
mennus  soulis,  as  weren  Crist  and  his  postlis,  si}?  he  clepi]?  him- 


point. 


For  as  perhaps  we  should  read  and^  but  the  MS.  is  obscure  at  this 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


307 


self  chief  viker  of  Crist.  And  hereby  Jjes  worldly  clerkis  ben 
traitours  to  God  and  here  lege  lord  ])e  kyng,  whos  lawe  and 
xegalie  })ei  distroien  bi  here  power,  and  false  traitouris  to  Jje 
pope,  whom  })ei  norischen  in  Anticristis  werkis,  for  to  have 
here  worldly  staat  m  richessis  and  lustis  meyntened  bi  hym. 

Also  whanne  ])ei  geten  leve  to  amortise  ony  lond  or  rente,  ]?ei 
certifien  to  \e  kyng  J^at  J)is  schal  be  to  encrese  of  holy  Chirche 
and  stablyng  of  his  rewme,  and  up  J)is  condicion  Jjei  geten  it, 
where  it  is  to  distruccion  of  Cristis  Chirche,  and  peinynge  of 
alle  ]?e  rewme,  and  norischyng  of  debate  bitwixe  clerkis  and 
lordis  and  here  tenauntis.  And  ^it  whanne  ]?ei  geten  leve  to 
amortise  twenti  markis  wor))  lond  bi  a  writt,  ad  quod  dampnum, 
]?ei  amortisen  moche  more  j?an  \q  kynge  grauntid  hem  leve 
.j)erto.  And  whanne  many  londis  schulde  falle  into  }je  kyngis 
[hondis]  ^  bi  eschet  or  o}>ere  juste  menes,  ]?es  worldly  clerkis 
and  veyn  religious  meden  gretly  J?e  kyngis  officeris  and  men  of 
lawe,  to  forbarre  ]?e  kyngis  ri^t,  and  maken  hemself  lordis 
wrongfully.  And  ]>us  bi  J?e  kyngis  goodis  J)ei  maken  his 
officeris  and  lege  men  to  forswere  hem,  and  defraude  here  lege 
lord.  But,  Lord !  where  ben  falsere  and  cursedere  traitouris  in 
erpe  ?  Also  many  worldly  peyntid  clerkis  geten  ])e  kyngis  seel, 
hym  out-wittynge,  and  senden  to  Rome  for  benefices  moche 
gold ;  and  whanne  );e  kyng  sendij?  his  privey  seel  for  to  avaunce 
goode  clerkis,  and  able  bojje  of  good  lif  and  gret  kunnyng  to 
reule,  Jjei  bryngen  forj)  hereby  many  worldly  wrecchis,  unable 
to  reule  o  soule  for  defaute  of  kunnyng  and  good  lyvyng,  and 
J>us  usen  Jje  kyngis  seel  a^enst  Goddis  honour  and  Jje  kyngis, 
and  profit  of  Cristene  peple,  where  ]?e  kyng  undirstondij?  to  do 
wel  bi  here  suggestion.  And  ]?erfore  ])e  kyng  ha]?  many  cursed 
peynted  clerkis  aboute  hym,  ^if  he  take  hede  to  here  lif,  kunn- 
yng, and  reulyng  of  J)e  Chnche.  Also  men  of  lawe  }?at  faveren 
lewide  clerkis  in  jjis  wrong  for  wynnyng  and  worldly  frendi- 
schipe,  rennen  in  )?is  same  curs ;  and  so  don  confessours  and 
conseilours  {>at  tellen  not  ]>is  disseit  bo]?e  to  kyng  and  o))ere 
men,  and  namely  prechouris,  ]>at  schulden  warne  men  of  })is 
peril. 

^  The  word  was  evidently  omitted  by  accident. 
X  2 


Instances  of 
their  defraud- 
ing the  king. 


3o8 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


The  canon  law 
lays  a  heavier 
curse  on  those 
who  disobey 
a  papal  bull 
than  on  those 
who  oppose 
the  gospel. 


Undue  influ- 
ence and  im- 
portance 
obtained  by 
these  bulls. 


which  are  now 
involving 
;  Christendom  in 
the  horrors 
of  war. 


Cap.  XVI. 

Alle  J}0  J>at  falsen  };e  popis  bulle  or  bischopis  letteris  ben 
cursed  grevously  in  alle  chirches  foure  tymes  in  ]>e  ^eer.  Lord  I 
whi  was  not  Cristis  gospel  putt  in  fis  reverence  among  oure 
worldly  clerkis  ?  Here  it  seme}?  ]>ei  magnyfien  })e  popis  bulle 
more  J?an  ]?e  gospel ;  and  in  token  on  jjis  ]?ei  ponyschen  more 
J)0  men  ]?at  trespassen  a^enst  ]>e  popis  bulle  fan  ]>o  ])at  tres- 
passen  a^enst  Cristis  gospel.  And  hereby  men  of  ]>is  world 
dreden  more  ]>e  popis  leed,  and  his  comaundement,  ]?anne  ]>e 
gospel  of  Crist  and  Goddis  hestis;  and  ]>ns  wrecchis  of  J)is 
world  ben  brou^t  out  of  bileve,  hope,  and  charite,  and  rotid  in 
heresie  and  blasphemye,  ^e,  worse  l?ane  ben  he]?ene  houndes. 

Also  fenne  clerkis  ]?at  kunnen  not  rede  and  undirstonde  a 
vers  of  fe  Sauter,  ne  telle  Goddis  comaundementis,  bryngen 
for])  a  bulle  of  leed  witnessynge  fat  fei  ben  able  to  governe 
many  soulis,  a^enst  Goddis  dom  and  opyn  experience  of  treufe  ■ 
and  to  pursue  fis  false  bulle  fei  costen  and  traveilen  and  fi3tten 
many  tymes ;  and  for  geten  ^  of  fis  false  bulle  fei  ^yven  myche 
gold  out  of  oure  rewme  to  alyens  and  enemys,  and  many  per- 
sones  ben  dede  herefore  in  oure  enemys  hondis,  to  coumfort  of 
hem  and  oure  confusion. 

Also  fe  proude  prest  of  Rome  settij?  ymagis  of  Petre  and 
Poul  and  his  leed,  and  makif  Cristene  men  to  bileve  fat  alle  fat 
his  buUis  speken  of  is  don  bi  here  auctorite  and  Cristis ;  and 
so,  in  as  moche  as  he  may,  he  makif  fis  bulle  fat  is  fals  to  be 
Petris  and  Poulis  and  Cristis,  and  in  fat  makef  hem  false. 
And  by  fis  blasphemye  he  robbif  Cristendom  of  bileve  and 
good  lif  and  worldly  goodis,  and  makif  hem  to  serve  Anticrist 
and  synne,  whanne  f  ei  weren  to  serve  God  and  charite.  And 
of  fis  falsyng  is  noon  ende  in  mannis  witt,  for  it  encresef  evere 
more,  in  newe  fyndyngys  of  blasphemye,  and  robbynge  of 
Cristendom  bofe  of  gostly  goodis  and  worldly,  and  namely 
whanne  f ei  bryngen  f e  seel  or  baner  of  Crist  on  f e  croos,  fat 
is  tokene  of  pees,  mercy,  and  charite,  for  to  slee  alle  Cristene 
men  for  love  of  tweie  false  prestis  fat  ben  opyn  Anticristis,  for 


read  getynge. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


309 


to  meyntene  here  worldly  staat,  to  oppresse  Cristendom  worse 
Jjan  Jewis  weren,  a^enst  holy  writt  and  Kf  of  Crist  and  his  postlis. 
And  almest  alle  men  in  ])is  world  assenten  and  meyntenen  \\% 
false  sleyng  of  Anticrist  and  his  felowis ;  and  ^if  ony  pore  men  telle 
])e  tren]>e  of  holy  writt  a^enst  ]?e  tirauntrie  of  Anticrist  and  his 
officeris,  nou^t  ellis  but  cm"se  hem,  prisone,  brenne,  and  slee,  wi]>- 
Guten  answere.  Nowe  it  seme]?  ]>at  Jones  prophecie  and  Apo- 
calips  is  fulj&Ued,  ]?at  no  man  schal  be  hardy  to  bye  and  sille 
wij?outen  token  of  ]?e  cursed  beste,  for  no  man  schal  now  do 
ou^t  in  ]?e  chirche  wi]?outen  false  bullis  of  Anticrist,  not  takyng 
reward  to  worchyng  of  Crist  and  Holy  Gost  in  mennus  soulis, 
but  alle  to  his  dede  bullis,  bou^t  and  seld  for  gold  as  men  byen 
or  sillen  oxen  or  bestis. 

Cap.  XVII. 

5it,  alle  \o  Jjat  mysti)jen  ony  goodis  ben  cruely  cursed  foure 
tymes  in  J)e  ^eer.  Here  men  wondren  moche  whi  worldly  pre- 
latis  and  feyned  clerkis  cursen  not  for  defaute  of  werehis  of 
mercy  doun  to  pore  nedy  men,  as  Crist  techij) ;  si)?en  ]?e  gospel 
tellij?  jjat  at  domesday  Jesus  Crist  schal  reckene  generally  wij) 
men  for  werkis  of  mercy ;  and  ^if  \€\  han  not  doii  hem  jjere  as 
Crist  biddi|),  J?ei  schullen  be  dampnyd  wijjouten  ende.  But  of 
tipes  schal  Crist  speke  J?anne  no  word,  but  ^if  men  graunten  J>at 
ti])es  ben  werkis  of  mercy  and  ahnes,  as  is  fedyng  and  clo)?ing 
of  pore  men.  Certis  it  seme)?  alle  J>is  cursyng  is  for  here  owene 
coveitise  ^  not  for  synne  of  ]?e  peple  and  trespas  a^enst  God,  for 
Jjanne  \€\  schulden  more  curse  ]?ere  where  more  synne  and 
more  dispit  a^enst  God  and  his  lawe ;  but  J)is  is  not  don,  as  alle 
witti  men  may  opynly  see ;  ferfore  J?ei  cursen  wrongfully,  and 
so  ciursen  hemself,  and  envenymen  J?e  peple  Jjat  \€\  diden  wi]?. 

pe  secunde  tyme  men  wondren  more  whi  worldly  prestis 
cursen  so  faste  J)e  pore  peple  for  ]?ei  paien  not  here  ti]?es  at  here 
likyng,  ]je  while  fei  ben  a  j?ousandfold  more  cursed  of  God,  for 
J)ei  don  not  here  gostly  office  in  trewe  prechyng,  and  holy 
ensaumple  of  lyvyng,  and  mynystryng  of  sacramentis.  And  ^it 
God  chargijj  a  J)OUsandfolde  more  Jjes  dettis  of  gostly  dedis, 

^  corrected ;  coveiiouse,  X. 


Against  the 
practice  of 
anathematiz- 
ing those  who 
defraud  the 
church  respect- 
ing tithes. 


310 


WYCLIF'S  WORKS. 


]?an  alle  J)e  muk  of  J?is  world.  And  as  men  of  lawe  techen, 
he  )?at  is  ri^tfully  cursed  may  not  lawefuUy  curse  anoj?er  man, 
sifen  he  is  dede  gostly,  and  out  of  holy  Chirche. 

pe  jjridde  tyme  men  wondren  most  whi  coveitouse  prestis  and 
worldly  clerkis  cursen  so  faste  and  cruelly  in  here  owene  cause 
and  wynnyng,  sijjen  J)ei  schulden  schewe  mekenesse  and  pa- 
cience  in  here  owene  cause  and  wrong,  as  diden  Crist  and  his 
apostlis.  And  si]?  Crist,  verrest  bischop  of  alle,  cursede  not  for 
his  tij?es,  ne  whanne  men  ^aven  him  nei]?er  mete  ne  drynk  ne 
herbore ;  and  he  blamyde  his  cosyns  and  apostlis  for  j^ei  wolden 
have  do  vengaunce  on  ])is  peple ;  but  Crist  seide  ]>at  mannis 
Sone  cam  not  to  lose  mennus  lyves  and  soulis,  but  to  save  hem, 
as  ])e  gospel  of  Luk  witnessef>,  whi  cursen  oure  weiward  curettis 
so  many  mennus  soulis  to  helle,  and  bodies  to  prison,  and  loos 
of  catel,  and  sumtyme  to  dej?,  for  a  litel  muk,  whanne  pei  ben 
cursed  of  God  for  symonye  don  in  here  entre,  and  levyng  of 
prechyng  and  ensaumple  of  holy  lif,  and  Jjerfore  })e  ti]?es  ben 
not  dewe  to  hem,  but  only  peyne  and  helle  ?  Many  tymes  \d 
ben  cruel  turmentours,  Jjat  slen  a  soule  bou^t  wi]>  Cristis  pre- 
cious blood,  ]?at  is  betre  ]>an  alle  richessis  of  |?is  world,  for  sixe 
pens  or  foure.  Salamon  provyde  bi  witt  ^oven  of  God,  j>at 
whanne  tweyne  horis  stryvede  whos  was  ]?e  child  ]?at  lyvede,  ])e 
child  was  hern  {)at  wolde  have  it  on  lyve,  and  not  hern  ])at 
wolde  have  it  deed.  Moche  more  }?es  ben  not  gostly  fadris  of 
Cristene  soulis,  \2X  wolen  dampne  hem  to  helle  bi  here  cursyng 
for  a  litel  rotyn  dritt.  But  ]?ei  ben  werse  ])an  ony  turmentours 
of  hejjene  houndes ;  for  |?ei  turmentiden  ))e  body,  and  not  }»e 
soule  everemore ;  but  ]?es  Sathanas  children  casten  bi  alle  here 
power  to  slee  ])e  soule  in  everelastynge  peyne.  Certis  fes 
weiward  curatis  of  Sathanas  semen  in  J)is  poynt  worse  J?an  fendis 
of  helle,  J>at  turmenten  no  soule  in  helle  but  only  for  evere- 
lastynge synne ;  and  J^es  Sathanas  clerkis  cursen  souHs  to  helle 
for  a  litel  temperal  dette,  ]?at  J?ei  wolen  paye  as  soone  as  jjei 
may,  and  many  tymes  whanne  it  is  not  dette,  but  bi  long  errour 
and  Jjefte  and  custom  broujt  up,  ajenst  Goddis  comaundement 
and  good  reson  and  charite. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS, 


311 


Cap.  XVIII. 

And  5it  ]?ei  cursen  pore  men  for  ti]?es,  whanne  J?ei  may  not 
paie  for  povert,  and  whanne  curatis  schulden  3yve  hem  of  here 
owene  goodis ;  and  ^if  beggyng  weren  lifful,  }?ei  schulden  begge 
at  riche  men  for  to  releve  here  pore  bre]?eren,  and  algatis  be 
trewe  procuratours  for  pore  men  at  grete  lordis  and  riche  men, 
as  Seynt  Poul,  bi  comyn  assent  of  apostlis,  was  for  pore  men  in 
here  nede.  Also  ])ei  schulden  not  resseyve  offryngis  and  ^iftis 
of  men  ]>at  weren  at  debate  and  discord,  as  Goddis  lawe  and 
mannis  witnessen,  wij?  deciaryng  of  Seynt  Jon  Crisostom  upon 
Jje  gospel  of  Matheu, — ne  of  usure  and  wrongful  geten  goodis, 
lest  ]?ei  weren  pertener  of  J?e  synne,  but  stire  hem  to  make  hem 
restitucion,  and  leve  here  synne,  and  schewe  in  dede  Jjat  ]?ei 
seken  more  profit  and  savynge  ^  of  Cristene  soulis  Jeanne  here 
owene  wynnynge  or  worschipe,  as  God  do)?  bi  his  Godhed,  and 
Jesus  Crist  bi  his  manhed,  and  alle  his  disciplis  after  him. 

At  fe  laste  men  wonderen  hugely  whi  curatis  ben  so  chariouse 
to  ]je  peple  in  takynge  ti)?es,  si}?}>en  Crist  and  his  apostlis  token 
no  tij^es  as  men  doun  nowe,  and  nei]?er  spaken  of  hem,  to  [be  ^] 
paied  j)us,  neij?er  in  gospel  ne  in  pistel,  in  J>e  perfit  lawe  of 
fredom  and  grace,  but  Crist  lyvede  on  almes  of  Marie  Maude- 
ien  and  o)?ere  holy  men  and  wymmen,  as  J^e  gospel  tellij?, 
and  apostlis  lyveden  sumtyme  bi  labour  of  here  hondis,  and 
sumtyme  taken  pore  liflode  and  clo]?,  ^ovyn  of  fre  wille  and 
devocion  of  ]?e  peple,  wijjouten  axing  or  constreynyng.  And 
to  ]>is  ende  Crist  seij)  to  his  postlis,  fat  J?ei  schulden  ete  and 
drynke  siche  as  men  setten  bifore  hem,  and  take  nei))er  gold 
ne  silver  for  here  prechyng  and  ^evyng  of  sacramentis.  And 
Poul,  ^evyng  a  general  reule  for  prestis,  seij?  })us.  We  havyng 
fode  and  clo]?is  to  hile  us,  wij)  })es  })inges  be  we  apayed.  And 
Jesus  Crist  and  Poul  proveden,  ]?at  prestis  prechynge  trewely 
]?e  gospel  schulden  l}^e  bi  or  of  J>e  gospel,  and  no  more  of  }?e 
tijjes.  Certis,  as  tij^es  were  dewe  prestis  and  dekenes  in  fe  olde 
lawe,  so  jjanne  was  bodily  circumcision  nedeful  to  alle  men,  but 
not  nowe  in  ]>e  lawe  of  grace.     And  jit  Crist  was  circumcidid, 


Against  rigour 
in  deinancfiig 
tithes  and 
laxity  in  ac- 
cepting 
offerings. 


Christ  neither 
paid  nor  re- 
ceived tithes ; 
yet  he  paid 
tribute  to 
Caesar. 


^  corrected ;  savydj  X. 


supplied  conjecturally. 


312 


WYCLIF'S  WORKS. 


Tithes  are  not 
due  under  the 
gospel,  and 
should  not  be 
recoverable  by 
legal  process. 


but  we  reden  not  where  he  took  ty})es  as  we  don,  and  we  reden 
not  in  alle  ]?e  gospel  where  he  paiede  ti)?es  to  hie  prestis  or  bad 
ony  man  do  so,  but  boj^e  he  paiede  tribut  to  Jje  emperour  for 
hym  and  his,  and  comaundide  o])ere  men  to  do  so. 

Lord !  whi  schullen  oure  worldly  clerkis  charge  more  Cristene 
peple  wij>  ti]?es,  oiFringis,  and  customes,  l?an  diden  Crist  and  his 
aposths,  and  more  })an  men  weren  chargid  in  J^e  olde  lawe  ? 
For  Jeanne  alle  prestis  and  dekenes  and  officeris  of  ]?e  temple 
weren  susteyned  bi  tij^es  and  offryngis,  and  hadden  noon  ojjere 
lordischip ;  but  now  o  worldly  prest,  ))at  is  more  unable  j?anne 
o))ere,  bi  vertu  of  Anticristis  bullis  ha]?  alle  ]?e  ti}>es  and  ofFrynges 
to  himself,  and  oJ>ere  prestis  more  kunnynge  in  Goddis  lawe 
and  of  clenner  lif,  han  no  ])ing  but  temperal  almes.  And  in 
o  countre  is  o  maner  of  ]>ing,  and  in  ano])er  faste  bi  is  contrarie 
maner;  and  ^if  tijjes  weren  dewe  bi  Goddis  comaundement, 
Jjanne  every  where  in  Cristendom  schulde  be  o  maner  of  tifyng. 
And  5it  men  axyn  now  more  tif>es,  of  many  J?inges  J?at  God 
spac  not  in  )?e  olde  lawe.  Wolde  God  }?at  alle  wise  men  and 
trewe  men  wolden  enquere  where  it  were  betre  for  to  fynde 
goode  prestis  bi  fre  almes  of  \t  peple,  and  in  a  resonable  and 
pore  liflode,  to  teche  ))e  gospel  in  word  and  dede,  as  diden  Crist 
and  his  postlis,  ]jan  to  paie  Jjus  ti)?es  to  o  worldly  prest  necligent 
and  unkunnynge,  as  men  ben  now  constreyned  bi  censures  and 
bullis  and  newe  ordynaunce  of  prestis.  3^^  H^  meke  lif  com 
a^en,  symonye,  coveitise,  necligence  and  strif  and  plee  and 
worldlynesse  [of  ^]  prestis  schullen  down,  and  trewe  techyng  of 
Goddis  word,  and  ensaumple  of  holy  Hf,  and  pees  and  charite, 
schullen  regne  in  Cristendom.  3if  ])is  be  betre  ]?an  }>is  newe 
ordynaunce  of  proude  and  coveitouse  prestis,  as  men  moten 
nedis  graunte,  for  lyvng  and  ensaumple  of  Crist  and  his 
apostlis,  who  maade  Anticrist  and  worldly  prestis  so  hardy  to 
charge  Cristene  men  wij>  j)is  newe  ordynaunce  ]?at  [is  ^]  more 
costy  and  profitable  ?  Si)3en  Crist  and  alle  his  discipHs  hadden 
nevere  ony  power  but  to  encresyng  of  holy  Chirche,  and  edifi- 
ynge  of  Cristene  soulis  to  heveneward,  who  5af  Anticrist  and 
his  worldly  prestis  ))is  power  to  hyndre  and  peire  J?o  goode 

^  supplied. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


3^3 


ireulyng  of  holy  Chirclie  bi  so  gret  charge  and  cost  ?  5^^  I'is 
first  ordynaunce  of  Crist  and  his  postlis  come  a^en  into  Cris- 
tendom,  ])an  schal  Cristene  peple  be  fre  to  take  her  tijjes  and 
offryngis  fro  weiward  prest,  and  not  meyntene  hem  in  here 
synne,  as  }>ei  ben  now  constreyned  bi  Anticristis  power  and 
censures,  and  frely  and  wilfully  ^yve  a  resonable  lifiode  to  goode 
prestis :  and  J)is  were  moche  betere  and  esiere,  bo]?e  for  prestis 
and  comyns,  bo]?e  for  })is  world  and  J^e  tojjer. 

Cap.  XIX. 

Also  J)ei  cursen  alle  men  Jjat  beren  out  ony  goodis  of  maneres 
or  gramiges  of  men  of  \q  Chirche,  a^enst  J)e  wille  of  here 
keperis.  Here  men  wondren  moche  whi  )}ei  cursen  not  alle 
hem  ]>at  beren  out  ony  ))ing  of  lordis  placis  and  pore  mennus 
houses,  sifjjen  ]?ei  ben  many  times  more  cursed  of  God  J>an  fe 
firste.  It  seme]?  ]?ei  reken  nevere  of  here  nei^beris  harm  so  ])at 
here  lust  be  performed.  But  men  wondren  more  whi  ))ei  cursen 
jje  kyng  and  his  trewe  officeris,  J>at  for  felonye  or  dette  or  eschet 
taken  his  owene  goodis,  a^enst  ]?e  wille  of  a  false  prest  traitour, 
out  of  J>es  graunges,  and  taken  noon  hede  whejjere  J>ei  don  ])is 
bi  processe  of  lawe  or  elHs  bi  extorsion  and  tirauntrie.  And 
it  seme]?  ]>at  ]?ei  understonden  ]?is,  how  evere  it  be  taken,  wrong- 
fully or  justly,  bi  here  newe  dampnacion  J?at  Jjei  maden  at 
London  in  ]?e  erjje  schakyng,  where  ]?ei  saiden  ])at  it  is  errour 
to  seie  }?at  seculer  lordis  may  at  here  dom  take  temperal  goodis 
fro  ]?e  Chirche,  ]?at  trespassi]?  bi  long  custom  \  yii  ]?is  be  errour, 
as  ]?ei  seyn  falsly,  ]?anne  \q  kyng  and  seculer  lordis  may  take 
no  fer]?ing  ne  fer])ing-wor])  fro  a  worldly  clerk,  ])0U3  he  owe 
hym  or  his  lege  men  nevere  so  moche  good,  and  may  wel  paye 
it  and  wole  not.  And  ]?us  ))e  kyng  schal  be  cursed,  ^if  he  do 
ri^twisnesse  in  his  rewme  on  his  lege  men,  and  brynge  a 
Sathanas  out  of  his  olde  synne  and  Jjefte,  whiche  ]?ing  Jje  kyng 
is  bounden  for  to  do  bi  Goddis  owene  word.  And  sij>  ]7e 
persones  schullen  have  more  privylegie  ]/anne  worldly  muk 
annexid  to  hem,  sijjen  fei  ben  betre  in  kynde  and  gronde  of 


a  This,  according  to  Walsingham 
(vol.  ii.  p.  59,  Rolls  edition),  was 
the  sixth   of  the  conclusions   con- 


demned as  erroneous  at  the  Council 
of  London  in  1382. 


Against  the 
practice — in- 
volving- dis- 
loyalty— of 
cursing  all 
those  who 
deprive  the 
Church  of  any 
property. 


The  canon  of 
the  Council  of 
London  on 
this  point. 


314 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


Absurd  conse- 
quences which; 
would  flow 
from  its 
adoption. 


privylegie  of  J)es  goodis,  moche  more  ]?e  kyng  ha]j  no  power 
of  ])e  bodies  of  clerkis.  And  ]?is  menen  ])ei  in  here  opyn  lawe, 
bi  whiche  ]jei  maken  clerkis  exempt  fro  seculer  domesmen,  til 
|?ei  ben  degraded  bi  dom  of  bischopis.  Of  ]?is  wrongful  sen- 
tence 50ven  of  bischopis  in  ]?e  er]?e  to  don,  wij?  good  reson 
suen  ]jes  poyntis,  ]?at  ]?ou5  a  collegie  of  clerkis,  or  covent,  or 
religious,  ben  open  ]?eves,  and  robben  and  sleen  J?e  kyngis  lege 
men,  ^it  ])e  kyng  may  take  no  ferjjing-wor]?  good  fro  hem,  for 
alle  worldly  goodis  ben  temperal  J?ingis,  and,  as  }>ei  seyn,  noon 
seculer  lordis  may  lawefully  take  temperal  J>ingis  fro  ]?e  Chirche 
}>at  trespassij)  bi  long  custom. 

Also,  ]?ou5  comynte  of  clerkis  and  religious  sende  gold  and 
goodis  of  }>e  rewme  to  aliens  and  enemyes  wif>outenfor]?,  and 
resseten  many  ]?ousand  enemyes  in  here  paleices  and  grete 
houses,  stronge  as  castellis,  to  robbe  slee  and  brenne  alle  men 
in  oure  lond,  ^it  no  man  may  take  ony  goodis  fro  hem  bi  fe 
same  reson. 

Also,  ]?ou5  an  hous  of  monkes  freris  or  clerkis  ymagynen  to 
poysone  ])e  kyng,  queene,  and  alle  j?e  lordis  of  oure  rewme, 
as  ])ei  han  bifore  ]?is  tyme  boj^e  popis  emperours  and  kyngis, 
^it  ]?e  kyng  wi]?  alle  his  lordis  mayn  not  ponysche  hem  in  o 
ferJ)ing-wor]?  of  good.  Also,  \o\x^  a  frere  monk  or  prest,  bi 
comyn  assent  of  ]?e  covent,  defoule  quen  bifore  ]?e  kyngis  eyen, 
and  moche  more  in  privey  chaumberis,  ^it  ]?e  kyng  may  not 
ponysche  ]?e  leste  of  hem  in  o  ferJ>ing-worJ)  of  good. 

Also,  J?ou5  ]?e  clergie  bi  comyn  assent  caste  fe  kyngis  de]?, 
quenys,  and  of  alle  ]?e  gentel  blood  of  ]?e  rewme,  and  conspiren 
to  be  kyngis  in  hemself,  and  make  oon  of  hem  kyng  of  alle 
]?e  world,  ^it  ]?e  kyng  wij?  alle  his  lordis  may  not  ponysche  hym 
in  o  ferJ)ing-worJ)  of  good.  And  si]?en  ]?e  bodies  of  clerkis  ben 
betere  fan  goodis  of  ]?is  world,  si]?  Jje  kyng  haj)  no  power  on 
here  goodis  })at  ben  lesse,  he  ha)?  no  power  of  here  bodies  J)at 
ben  betre  in  kynde,  and  cause  of  privylegies  of  here  goodis. 
And  }>us  )?e  kyng  is  constreyned  bi  Anticristis  lawis  to  suffre 
and  meyntene  opyn  l?eves  and  mansleeris,  and  traitours  of  God 
and  alle  men,  in  here  opyn  cursed  synne.  And  ]?ou5  clerkis 
my^tten  lawefully  have  seculer  lordischipis,  ^it  J?ei  han  justly 
forfetid  hem  alle,  sij?}?en  bi  comyn  assent  J?ei  han  conspired  }?us 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


3^5 


a^enst  Goddis  mageste,  ye  kyngis  regalie,  wel  groundid  in  holy 
writt,  and  a^enst  here  owene  solempne  oj).  But  ])es  blynde 
moldewerpis,  evere  wrotyng  in  J?e  er)>e  aboute  er])ely  muk, 
schullen  wite  bi  holy  writt  and  Cristene  bileve,  jjat  fou^  J^e  kyng, 
Goddis  viker,  take  temperal  goodis  fro  worldly  cursed  prestis 
and  Anticristis  religious,  ful  of  pride  coveitise  symonye  heresie 
and  blasphemye,  and  meyntening  of  o]?ere  mennus  synnys,  ^it 
J>e  kyng  taki})  not  ]?es  goodis  evyle  from  holy  Chirche,  but  justly 
taki]>  jjes  goodis  of  holy  Chirche,  evyl  occupied  bi  Sathanas 
clerkis,  and  restore  J?  hem  to  holy  Chirche.  For  ]>anne  bi 
Goddis  auctorite  he  taki]?  ]?es  goodis  from  Anticristis  chirche, 
j)at  is  traitour  and  enemye  of  God,  of  ]?e  kyng  his  viker,  and 
alle  men,  in  Goddis  half,  and  restaure]?  hem  to  holy  Chirche, 
whanne  he  depertij)  hem  wisly  to  just  men,  to  helpe  of  pore 
men,  and  encresyng  of  vertuouse  lif  boj^e  of  prestis  lordis  and 
comuneris. 

And  in  ]?is  poynt  J^es  worldly  clerkis  and  feyned  religious 
fallen  into  Luciferis  pride,  and  into  heresie  a^enst  ]?e  crede  of 
Cristene  men.  For  ]?ei  holden  hemself  men  of  holy  Chirche 
and  noon  oJ?ere,  where  J?e  crede  sei]?  ))er  is  on  general  holy 
Chirche  of  alle  men  and  wymmen  ])at  schullen  be  savyd,  and 
of  goode  ^  angelis,  and  Jesus  Crist  is  hed  of  j?is  holy  Chirche. 
And  as  Judas  was  a  )>ef  and  no  membre  of  Crist,  ne  pert  of 
holy  Chirche,  ]?ou3  he  mynistride  ^  ])e  ordre  of  bischopod,  but 
was  a  devel  of  helle,  as  Crist  sei]?  in  J^e  gospel,  so,  ^if  fes 
worldly  clerkis  schullen  be  dampned  for  here  cursed  synnes, 
as  coveitise  ypocrisie  symonye  and  dispeir,  as  Judas  was,  \€\ 
ben  fendis  of  helle  and  no  Cristene  men,  ne  membris  of  Crist, 
ne  pert  of  holy  Chirche.  And  J?us  J^e  beste  of  hem  alle  woot 
not  where  he  be  a  man  of  holy  Chirche  bi  Goddis  apprevyng, 
or  ellis  a  fende  of  helle  now  dampnyd  in  Goddis  knowyng. 
perfore  \€\  schulden  meke  hem  self  bo}3e  to  God  and  man,  and 
leve  ]?is  fendis  pride  and  Anticristis  tirauntrie,  and  open  tresoun 
and  blasfemye  a^enst  God  and  his  viker  )?e  kyng. 


^  corrected ;  goodis,  X. 


corrected ;  mysurde,  X. 


Pride  and  ex- 
clusiveness  of 
the  worldly- 
clergy. 


3i6 


WrCLIF'S  WORKS. 


The  curse  pro- 
nounced on 
thieves  and 
receivers  falls 
on  the  clergy 
themselves. 


The  prvilege 
of  sanctuary 


Cap.  XX. 

Alle  Jjeves  and  alle  ])at  reseten^  hem  wyttyngly,  and  alle  con- 
sentours  to  hem  in  synne,  ben  cursed  of  God,  and  foure  tymes  in 
])e  5eer  of  men,  in  alle  parische  chirches.  First,  alle  clerkis  of 
our  lond  semen  cursed  in  J)is  poynt,  for  in  eche  parische  chirche 
a  comyn  ])ef  and  mansleere  schal  be  resseyved  fourty  dales  at 
J>e  leste,  and  no  lawe  passe  on  hym  to  make  restitucion,  Jjou^ 
he  be  of  power,  and  to  ponysche  him  justly  for  chastisyng  of 
o]?ere  mysdoeris;  but  after  fourty  dales  he  schal  forswere  ])e 
kyngis  lond,  and  ]?anne  many  tymes  he  robbe])  more  and  slej) 
mo  men,  in  trist  of  siche  refute.  And  )?is  makij?  many  stronge 
Jjeves  and  cursed  manquelleris  in  oure  lond ;  and  to  meyntene 
]}is  resset  and  norischyng  of  Jeeves,  oure  worldly  clerkis  wolen 
coste  and  traveile  and  lyve  and  die ;  and  ])erfore  Jjei  ben  stronge 
schameles  heretikis,  to  meyntene  ]?is  opyn  errour  a5enst  Goddis 
lawe. 

Also  grete  houses  of  religion,  as  Westmynstre,  Beverle  ^,  and 

^  corrected;  receseien,  X, 


*  Dugdale's  Monasticon  contains 
ample  information  about  these  pri- 
vileges of  sanctuary  attached  to  cer- 
tain churches.  To  Westminster 
Abbey  the  right  was  conceded,  ac- 
cording to  Stow,  the  historian  of 
London,  by  an  express  charter  of 
Edward  the  Confessor;  but  Wid- 
more  doubts  the  authenticity  of  this 
charter,  and  considers  that  the  pri- 
vilege probably  followed  soon  upon, 
and  as  a  consequence  of,  the  canoni- 
zation of  King  Edward.  High  and 
low  sought  and  benefited  by  the 
privilege;  amongst  others,  Eliza- 
beth, queen  of  Edward  IV,  first  in 
1470,  and  again  in  1483,  and  the 
poet  Skelton,  who  died  in  sanctuary 
in  1529. 

The  story  of  the  sanctuary  at  St. 
John*s  collegiate  church  of  Beverley 
is  like  a  golden  thread  of  romance 
nmning  down,  through  the  dim 
records  of  six  hundred  years.  The 
common  belief  about  this  famous 
foundation  (originally  the  work  of 


St.  John  of  Beverley  early  in  the 
eighth  century,  but  aftei*wards  de- 
stroyed by  the  Danes), — a  belief 
attested  by  a  charter  of  Henry  V, 
was,  that  when  King  Athelstan,  re- 
turning victorious  from  Scotland  in 
the  year  925,  redeemed  by  a  lavish 
grant  of  lands  and  liberties  his 
knife,  which  on  the  march  out  he 
had  left  upon  the  high  altar,  he  did 
so  in  these  words, '  As  fre  make  I 
the,  as  hert  may  think  or  eigh  may 
see.'  Or,  as  it  is  in  a  metrical  ver- 
sion, also  given  by  Dugdale,  of  the 
same  transaction,  which  is  probably 
as  old  as  the  middle  of  the  thir- 
teenth century, — 

'  Swa  mikel  fredora  give  I  ye, 
Swa  hert  may  think  or  eghe  see.' 

This  church  of  Beverley,  however, 
was  not  exempted  from  the  ordinary 
jurisdiction  of  the  Archbishop  of 
York;  rather  it  was  he  who  exer- 
cised, or  superintended  the  exercise 
of,  the  great  franchises  which  it  pos- 
sessed.      The    privileged     circuit, 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


3^7 


o]?ere,  chalengen,  usen,  and  meyntenen  J)is  privylegie,  J^at  what- 
evere  Jjef  or  felon  come  to  f  is  holy  hons  of  religion,  he  schal 
dwelle  )?ere  alle  his  lif,  and  no  man  enpeche  hym,  Jjou^  he  owe 
pore  men  moche  good  and  have  ynou5  to  paye  it.  And  J?ou3 
he  robbe  and  slee  every  ny^t  many  men  out  of  ]?e  fraimchise, 
and  every  ^  day  come  a3en,  he  schal  be  meyntened  ]?erto  bi 
vertu  of  Jjis  opyn  heresie.  And  ]?es  feyned  clerkis  crien  faste, 
j?at  })e  kyng  and  alle  ]?e  lordis  ben  bounden  bi  vertu  of  here  o]?, 
in  whiche  ])ei  sweren  to  meyntene  holy  Chirche  and  ri^ttis  Jjerof, 
for  to  meyntene  ])is  open  fefte  a^enst  Goddis  heste  and  here 
owene  o)?,  in  whiche  J)ei  sweren  to  doo  ri^twisnesse  to  eche 
man  and  meyntene  eche  man  ]?erinne.  And  jjus  J>ei  maken 
holy  Chirche  and  her  lege  lord  fe  kyng  patrons  of  here  Jjefte, 
under  colour  of  holynesse  and  devocion.  But  certis  ]?es  placis 
ben  synagogis  of  Satanas,  dennes  of  ]?eves,  and  worse  ]?an 
Sodom  and  Gomor,  as  J?o  })at  resceyven  not  Cristis  word  in  Jje 
gospel ;  and  ]>es  ben  cursed  ypocritis,  and  weiward  traitours  to 
God  and  here  lege  lord  ]?e  kyng  and  alle  Cristendom,  and  fei 
ben  confermed  in  J?is  heresie,  J)at  ]>ei  wolen  lyve  and  die  j^erfore. 
Also  alle  curatis  and  prestis  fat  comen  not  to  j?es  statis  bi  ]?e 

^  corrected ;  evere^  X. 


within  which  fugitives  from  secular 
justice  were  protected,  was  called 
the  Leuga,  and  is  described  in  the 
Domesday  survey.  A  stone  chair, 
,  called  the  Frid-stol,  or  stool  of 
peace,  stood  on  the  right  of  the 
high  altar ;  to  this  chair  those  who 
sought  sanctuary  repaired,  and  in  it 
they  were  seated  during  the  cere- 
mony of  admission.  The  form  of 
oath,  administered  by  the  arch- 
bishop's bailiff  to  the  suppliant,  is 
preserved  in  one  of  the  Harleian 
MSS.  No.  4292,  being  a  register  of 
persons  who  sought  sanctuary  for 
various  crimes  in  the  reigns  of 
Edward  IV,  Henry  VII,  and  Henry 
VIII.    It  ran  as  follows : — 

*  Sir,  tak  hede  on  your  oth.  Ye 
shal  be  trew  and  feythful  to  my 
lord  Archbishop  of  York,  lord  off 
this  towne,  to  the  provest  of  the 
same,  to  the  chanons  of  this  chirch, 


and  aU  othir  ministers  thereof. 

*  Also  ye  shal  here  gude  hert  to 
the  baillie  and  xii  governors  of  this 
town,  to  all  burgesses  and  comyners 
of  the  same. 

*Also  ye  shall  here  no  poynted 
wapen,  dagger,  knyfe,  ne  none  other 
wapen  ayenst  the  kyngs  pece. 

'  Also  ye  shal  be  redy  at  all  your 
power,  if  there  be  any  debate  or 
strif  or  oder  sothan  case  of  fyre 
within  the  town  to  help  to  surcess 
it. 

'  Also  ye  shal  be  redy  at  the  obite 
of  Kyng  Adelstan,  at  the  Dirige 
and  the  Messe,  at  such  time  as  it  is 
done,  at  the  wamyng  of  the  bel- 
man  of  the  town,  and  do  your 
dewte  in  ryngyng,  and  for  to  offer 
at  the  messe  on  the  mome,  so  help 
you  God  and  thies  holy  evan- 
gelists/ 

And  then  gar  hym  kisse  the  book. 


annexed  to  cer- 
tain churches 
is  greatly 
abused. 


The  rulers  both 
of  Church  and 


3i8 


State  are  cor- 
rupt from  the 
highest  to  the 
lowest. 


Various  ways 
in  which  men 
may  fall  under 
the  curse  pro- 
nounced 
against 
tliievery; 


WTCLIF'S  WORKS, 

dore,  J)at  is,  Crist,  ])at  is  to  seie,  bi  mekenesse  to  seke  Goddis 
worschip  and  savyng  of  mennus  soulis,  but  for  pride  coveitise 
and  bodily  welfare,  ben  ny^t  Jieves  and  day  jseves,  as  Crist  seij? 
in  \t  gospel,  and  Seynt  Austyn  expoune]?  it  so.  And  sifen  alle 
ressettours  and  meynteneris  of  siche  wityngly  ben  cursed,  and 
Jje  pope  resseti]?  hem  and  meynteni}?  hem,  and  bischopis  also, 
and  ])e  kyng  and  parischens,  alle  ]>es  semen  cursed  jjeves,  sifen 
\€\  may  not  be  excused  bi  ignoraunce  of  Goddis  lawe  and  here 
open  dedis  to  knowe  and  wite  hou  J?ei  ben  fevys.  And 
parischens  ben  so  constreyned  bi  Anticristis  lawis  to  meyntene 
hem  in  here  ]?efte ;  for  ]?ou5  \€i  knowen  }>at  here  curat  is  a  cursed 
])ef,  wi])drawynge  trewe  prechynge  and  ensaumple  of  good  lif, 
and  dide  grete  symonye  in  comyng  to  his  benefice,  ^it  J^ei 
schuUen  not  be  suffrid  to  wi])drawe  here  ty]?es  here,  as  long  as 
a  grete  prelat  of  Anticrist  wole  suffre  him  in  his  synne,  for 
money  or  necligence  or  favour.  But  of  alle  ]?evys,  ]}e  pope 
makyng  siche  cm-atis  bi  his  bullis  for  gold,  and  lordis  and  o]?ere 
prelatis  presentynge  siche  unable  clerkis  for  here  worldly  ser- 
vyce  and  money,  ben  in  ]?e  grete  hienesse  of  robberis,  and 
meyntenours  of  opyn  J)eves.  And  }>ei  may  not  be  excused  bi 
ignoraunce,  for  Seynt  Poul  sei]?,  he  ]?at  ha]?  not  cure  of  his 
owene,  and  most  of  his  homely  meynne,  he  ha])  forsaken  })e  fei]? 
and  is  werse  ]3an  an  unfei])ful  man  ]?at  nevere  toke  Cristendom. 
For  \€\  may  openly  see  ]?at  \t  dedis  of  J^es  curatis  ben  opynly 
contrarie  to  Cristis  lif  and  his  lawe,  and  to  many  siche ;  as  ]>ei 
maken  curatis  of  many  ]?ousand  soulis  \€\  wolden  not  bitake 
kepyng  of  a  fewe  hoggis,  and  holde  hem  from  her  office  of 
kepyng  of  hoggis,  as  J?ei  doun  a  from  keping  of  soulis ;  ])erfore 
]?ei  setten  more  pride  bi  a  fewe  hoggis  ]?an  bi  many  Jjousand 
soulis  bou^te  wi]?  Cristis  preciouse  blood. 

Also  alle  tyrauntis  and  extorsioneris  and  conselours  and  con- 
sentours  J?erto,  fallen  in  j)is  grete  cm's,  for  alle  ])at  ])ei  han  ])us 
is  ]?efte,  bi  Goddis  jugement  and  reson ;  and  alle  curatis  and 
prelatis  J?at  taken  tyjjes  and  offryngis,  and  doun  not  here  spi- 
ritual office,  of  God  ordeyned^  in  his  lawe,  ben  cursed  |?evys; 

^  corrected ;  orde^ne\y  X. 
a  That  is,  as  the  curates  withhold  themselves. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


319 


for  ]?is  hire  is  not  ordeyned  to  hem  but  for  doyng  of  ])is  spi- 
ritual oflice.  And  jjerfore  Seynt  Poul  biddi]?,  )?at  he  ]?at  werchi]? 
not,  ete  not.  Also  alle  Jjat  mysusen  here  goodis  in  wast,  pride, 
glotonye,  or''o))ere  synnes,  or  |)at  wijsholden  werkis  of  mercy  fro 
nedi  men  in  tyme  of  grete  nede,  rennen  in  grete  curs,  for  \€\  han 
and  holden  J?es  goodis  a3enst  Goddis  comaundement,  to  harm  of 
hem  and  ojjere  men,  as  Ambrose  and  Austyn  witnessen  in  many 
placis.  Alle  \o  ])at  mysusen  ]?e  my5ttis  of  here  soule  or  body, 
and  drawen  hem  fro  Goddis  servyce  and  holynesse  into  ]je 
fendis  service  and  synne,  fallen  in  ])is  same  curs ;  for  Jjei  stelen 
Goddis  goodis  from  his  servyce  and  worschipe,  as  moche  as 
in  hem  [is  ^],  and  bi  hem  maken  sacrifice  to  ]?e  fend,  in  whos 
servyce  ]?ei  spenden  hem. 

3it  alle  \o  ]>3t  disseyven  here  nei^eboris  in  ony  chaffare  or 
servyce,  bi  false  o]?is,  false  cautelis,  and  false  wei^ttis  or  mesures, 
ben  stronge  ))evys,  for  alle  ]>at  Jjei  getten  J>us  J)ei  geten  falsly, 
a^enst  Goddis  comaundement,  bi  colour  of  holynesse  and 
equite;  and  ferfore  ]?ei  lasten  stille  in  her  synne  wifouten 
peyne  of  mannys  lawe,  comynly  more  [jan  don  oj^ere  open 
])evys.  Also  stronge  beggeris,  under  colour  of  holynesse,  rennen 
faste  in  J?is  curs;  for  sotely  bi  many  slei^tis  expresly  agenst 
Goddis  comaundement,  ]?ei  robben  J?e  pore  peple  fro  moche 
good,  and  bederede  men  from  here  liiiode,  and  bryngen  ]>e 
peple  in  heresie  many  weies.  For  ]>ei  maken  ]>e  peple  bileve 
])is,  {)at  it  is  betre  to  ^eve  here  almes  to  riche  men  and  stronge 
]?an  to  pore  men  and  nedy,  as  Crist  comaundi]?.  perfore  of 
alle  jjevys  Jjcs  semen  most  cursed,  for  Jjei  robben  contynuely, 
bojje  of  temperal  goodis,  of  mennus  children,  and  of  gostly 
goodis,  and  sleen  soules  and  bodies  bo)?e  of  riche  and  pore 
under  colour  of  holynesse.  And  alle  }?ei  fiat  may  distroie  })is 
synne  and  doun  not,  assenten  ])erto,  and  fallen  in  J)is  curs; 
and  J?is  cui'syng  and  Jjefte  woundej)  almest  al  Cristendom. 

Cap.  XXL 

Alle  J)0  J>at  clippen  ]>e  kyngis  money,  and  J?at  kytten  mennus 
purses,  ben  solempnely  cursed  in  parische  chirches.     Here  it 

^  supplied  conjectiuuUy. 


The  pope,  as 
the  greatest 
plunderer, 
comes  under 


320 


WrCLIF'S  WORKS. 


the  curse  pro- 
nounced 
against  coiners 
and  cut-purses. 


■which  falls 
also  on  the 
general  body 
of  the  secular 
clergy, 


as  well  as  on 
lawyers, 
bailiffs,  &c 


seme})  J?at  J)e  proude  worldly  preste  of  Rome,  and  alle  his 
fautours,  ben  most  cursed  of  clipperis  and  purse-kerveris,  for 
Jjei  drawen  oute  of  oure  lond  pore  mennus  liflode,  and  many 
jjousande  mark  bi  ^ere  of  jje  kyngis  money,  for  sacramentis  and 
spiritual  J?ingis,  ]>at  is  cursed  heresie  of  symonye,  and  makij>  al 
Cristendom  assente  and  meyntene  )?is  heresie.  And  certis  ]?ou5 
oure  rewme  hadde  an  huge  hill  of  gold,  and  nevere  ojjere  man 
toke  J?erof,  but  only  J?is  proude  worldly  prestis  collectour,  bi 
proces  of  tyme  Jjis  hil  moste  be  spendid,  for  he  taki]>  evere 
money  oute  of  oure  lond,  and  sendij?  nou^t  a^en  but  Goddis 
curs  for  his  symonye,  and  acursed  Anticristis  clerk  to  robbe 
more  Jje  lond,  or  wrongful  privylegie,  or  ellis  leve  to  do  Goddis 
wille,  }>at  men  schullen  not  do  wi]?outen  his  leed  and  biyng  and 
sillyng.  But  Jjou^  oure  kyng  take  tallage  of  l?e  peple  as  he 
may  lawefuUy,  for  nedeful  helpe  of  ]?e  lond,  ^it  ]?e  money 
dwellij)  stille  in  oure  rewme,  to  profit  ]?erof  in  manye  pertis. 
Also  worldly  prelatis  and  clerkis  kerven  foule  pore  mennus 
purses,  whanne  J?ei  wasten  ]?e  chirche  goodis,  J>at  ben  mennus 
sustenaunce,  in  pride  glotonye  lecherie  and  oJ>ere  vanytees. 
For  }»ei  ben  procuratours  or  tresureris  of  pore  men  in  takyng 
dymes  and  offryngis,  and  as  wel  \ti  my^tten  take  it  out  of  here 
purses  openly  and  devoure  it,  as  ])us  to  gete  it  bi  extorsion, 
wrong  customs,  and  Anticristis  censuris,  more  J?an  ]?ei  schulden 
paye  bi  Goddis  lawe  and  good  conscience.  For  ^if  Jjei  kittide 
J)us  openly  here  purses,  }>ei  schulden  reckevere  it  bi  comyn  lawe, 
but  of  J)is  sotel  kittyng  of  here  purs  fei  geten  no  remedie,  but 
evere  ben  more  robbid  and  more  ;  and  \q  ende  for  whiche  ]>ei 
ben  J?us  robbid  is  many  tymes  to  fynde  haukis  and  houndis, 
and  riche  pelure,  and  proude  hors,  to  hie  prestis  and  curatis, 
Jjat  schulden  be  myrrour  of  mekenesse  and  chastite  and  gostly 
traveyle  and  hevenly  lif. 

Also  somenors  bailies  and  servauntis,  and  ojjere  men  of  lawe, 
kitten  perelously  mennus  purses,  for  j?ei  somenen  and  aresten 
men  wrongfully  to  gete  J?e  money  out  of  his  purse,  and  sumtyme 
suffren  hem  to  meyntene  hem  in  wrongis  for  money,  to  robbe 
o)jere  men  bi  false  mesures  and  wei^ttis,  and  in  ]?is  J?ei  kitten 
bojje  partis  purses.  And  men  of  lawe  contryven  ofte  newe 
sotel  poyntis,  to  delaye  just  proces  of  lawe  for  money,  and 

WYCLIF. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS, 


3^1 


hyndiyng  of  ri^twisnesse  in  J?e  peple ;  and  ]?is  is  don  so  sotilly 
under  colour  of  lawe,  ]>at  a  pore  man  is  betre  to  forsake  his 
owene  goodis  J)an  to  calenge  it  and  plete  jjerfore.  And  3if  his 
purse  were  opynly  kit,  he  schulde  get  sum  rekenere  ))erof,  but 
now  bi  colour  of  equite  al  is  stoppid.  But  of  alle  purs-kitteris 
false  confessours  ben  J^e  werste ;  for  whanne  J^ei  schullen  make 
wickid  men  to  restore  J)ing  wrongfully  geten,  and  to  cesse  evere 
after,  bi  trewe  witnessynge  of  peyne  dewe  J^erfore,  jjei  assoilen 
wickid  men  li^tfully,  for  to  have  pert  of  here  ]?efte,  and  hereby 
]?ei  norischen  evyle  men  in  here  wrongis  and  robbyng  of  ]?e 
peple. 

Cap.  XXII 

Alle  j)0  ]>at  leyn  bond  on  fadir  or  modir'  in  violence  ben 
cursed  of  God  and  man.  Men  leyn  here  hondis,  ]>at  is,  here 
werkis,  in  violence  on  ^  God  and  holy  Chirche,  here  gostly  fadir 
and  moder,  whanne  ]?ei  sclaundren  God  and  holy  Chirche  wij> 
here  worldly  weiward  lif,  and  dispisen  him  bi  grete  o]?is  and 
false  and  nedeles,  and  o]?ere  grete  synnes.  For,  as  Seynt  Austin 
seij?  on  ];e  Sauter  a  j^es  wickid  men  dispisen  God  more  ]?an  ]?e 
Jewis  ]5at  naileden  him  on  ]?e  cross,  and  in  here  wille  Jjei  cruci- 
iien  Crist,  whanne  ]?ei  wolen  not  forsake  here  synne  for  his 
love  ne  drede.  Also  ]?ei  leyn  bond  violently  on  Crist,  whanne 
}?ei  sclaundren  and  pursuen  ^vrongfully  ony  membre  of  Crist, 
and  namely  for  tellyng  of  treu]?e  and  reprovyng  of  synne,  as 
Crist  and  his  posdis  tau^te.  Whanne  \ti  crien  ])at  alle  men 
leiynge  bond  on  a  clerk  bi  violence  be  cursed,  whi  ben  not  alle 
oure  worldly  prelatis  hugely  cursed,  J?at  violently  and  wi]?outen 
answere  prisonen  prestis,  redy  to  be  justified  bi  holy  writt  and 
reson,  and  to  lyve  after  Cristis  Hf  and  his  postlis,  and  helpe 
o]?ere  prestis  J?erto }  Certis,  whanne  worldly  prelatis  and  clerkis 
bi  here  false  gloses  and  fals  lif  distroien  ]?e  treuj^e  of  Cristis  lif 
and  his  postlis  as  moche  as  ]jei  may,  ]?anne  ]?ei  sleen  Crist  and 
his  postlis,  as  Seynt  Jon  Crisostom  witnessej?  ^. 
^  corrected ;  )f>at  in,  X. 


a  S.  Aug.  Enarr.  in  Psalm  Ixviii, 
sermo  ii.  *  Minus  enim  peccaverunt 
Judaei  crucifigentes  in  terra  ambu- 
lantem,  quam  qui  contemnunt  in 
coelo  sedentem/ 

WOEKS.      TOL.   IIT. 


^  S.  Joan.  Chrys.  in  Matt.  v.  ho- 
milia  ix.  '  Qui  autem  veritatem 
Christi  denegat,  ipsum  denegat 
Christum,*  et  seq. 


The  persecu- 
tors of  the  poor 
priests  fall 
under  the  curse 
pronounced 
against  those 
who  lift  their 
hand  against 
father  or 
mother. 


322 


The  curse  pro- 
nounced 
against  those 
who  maintain 
false  causes 
falls  upon 
worldly  priests, 
and  also  on 
many  landlords 
and  lawyers. 


WFCLIF'^S  WORKS. 

Also  in  J)at  jjat  jjei  faveren  false  prechouris  and  wickid  men, 
Jjei  leyn  hond  in  violence  on  Crist  and  his  prophetis,  and  fy^tten 
cursedly  ageniis  oure  moder  holy  Chirche ;  for  in  \2X  J)ei  meyn- 
tenen  Goddis  enemys,  to  lese  and  dampne  children  of  holy 
Chirche  J)oru5  false  techyng  and  evyl  ensaumple. 

Also  alle  ]?at  taken  and  meyntenen  false  causes  ben  cursed 
grevously,  as  j)ei  ben  worj^i,  bo]?e  of  God  and  man.  Here 
worldly  clerkis  wij?  here  fautours  rennen  fully  in  J)is  curse ;  for 
J)ei  meyntenen  here  worldly  lif  a^enst  ]?e  trewe  techyng  of  Crist 
and  his  lawe,  and  wole  not  leve  her  worldlynesse  for  prechynge 
ne  peyne,  in  J)is  world  ne  in  \t  toJ?er.  Also  lordis  holdynge 
grete  lovedaies,  and  bi  here  lordischip  meyntenenge  j^e  fals 
pert,  for  money  frendischip  or  favour,  fallen  opynly  in  ]?is  curs, 
and  so  don  men  of  lawe,  wij?  alle  false  witnesses  }>at  meyntenen 
falsenesse  a^enst  treu]?e,  wityngly  or  unwittyngly.  For  in  alle 
l)is  fals  meyntenyng  J)ei  holden  wij)  }»e  fend  a^enst  God,  and  as 
moche  as  is  in  hem,  J?ei  fordoun  \e  ri3twisnesse  of  God,  and 
so  God  himself,  and  magnyfien  Sathanas  more  ])an  God.  And 
bi  J?is  poynt  many  J)at  semen  ful  holy  and  devout  ben  gretly 
acursed ;  for  fou^  ))ei  ben  devout  in  preieris  and  si^tte  of  men, 
^it  here  meyne  schal  holde  wrongis  at  lovedayes  %  and  bere  doun 
treuj>e  and  pore  men  in  here  ri^t,  bi  colour  of  lordis  knelynge 
in  ]?e  chapel.  And  \q  colour  of  holynesse  blyndi}^  moche  of  jje 
peple,  }>at  Jjei  perseyven  not  ]?e  treuj)e  but  beren  it  doun,  and 
holdi)?  wi]?  falshed,  and  seyn  )?us, — pes  grete  lordis  and  wise 
men  wolde  not  holde  wi]?  )?is  pert  but  ^if  J)ei  knewen  ]?at  it  were 
trewe,  sij?en  }>ei  ben  so  devout  in  here  preieris,  and  knowen 
Goddis  lawe  and  mannis  so  fully.  And  bi  J?is  doyng  ))es  hie 
lordis  and  men  of  lawe  ben  maistris  of  errour,  techyng  it  in 


*  In  Tittis  Andronicus,  act  i.  sc.  2, 
Satuminus,  after  announcing  his  in- 
tention to  reconcile  enemies  and 
pardon  offences,  says — 

'  This  day  shall  be  a  love-day,  Tamora.* 

The  word  occurs  also  in  the  Vision 
of  Piers  Plowman.  The  passage  in 
the  text  tlirows  indirect  light  on  this 
old  custom,  instituted  to  prevent 
litigation ;  we  see  knights  and  yeo- 
men kneeling  in  the  castle-chapel, 


a  general  gathering  in  the  hall, 
statements  from  both  sides,  arbitra- 
tion and  reconciliation.  But  as  to 
the  exact  form  of  procedure  upon 
such  occasions,  I  can  nowhere  meet 
with  information.  The  Paston 
Letters  may  perhaps  contain  some- 
thing which  would  throw  light  on 
the  matter;  but  so  far  as  I  could 
examine  a  book  in  many  volumes, 
unfurnished  wdth  an  index,  my 
search  was  sterile. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS, 


323 


word  and  dede,  and  constreynen  pore  men  to  holde  for]),  bi 
manas  of  bodi  and  loos  of  catel  and  o}>ere  persecuciouns,  and 
]>erfore  ]?ei  ben  not  only  heretikis  but  princes  of  heretikis,  as 
fei  ]>at  chefly  meyntenen  oj^ere  men  in  synne  and  compelle  hem 
}?erto.  Clerkis  }jat  don  ev}4  and  meyntene  it  bi  sotilte  of  word 
ben  sly  or  sotel  heretikis,  but  ]?es  lordis  of  prestis,  Jsat  ben  bis- 
chopis,  and  oj^ere  officeris  ]jat  meyntenen  o]?ere  men  in  synne, 
ben  sotil  maistris  of  errour  and  princis  of  heretikis.  And 
worldly  lordis  J?at  don  wrong,  and  constreynen  pore  men  to 
assente  to  here  wrong,  ben  rude  or  boistouse  heretikis.  And 
comynly  alle  mysdoeris  fallen  in  Jjis  curs,  for  \€\  meyntenen 
a  fals  quarele  a3enst  God  and  his  seyntis. 

Cap.  XXIII. 

Alle  ]7at  drawen  men  out  of  J)e  chirche  or  seintuarie,  whanne 
J)ei  fleen  J?eder  for  sukour  after  here  manslau^ter  or  ]?efte,  ben 
cursed  hugely  of  oure  prelatis,  lesse  and  more.  Here  men 
wondren  moche  whi  alle  manqueUeris  schullen  have  ]?is  fraun- 
chise  of  Jje  sche,  si]?  God  grauntide  it  only  to  hem  ]?at  sleen  bi 
ignoraunce,  or  happily,  not  wilfully,  and  bi  noon  enemyte ;  and 
alle  siche  as  sleen  a  man  wilfully  bi  enemyte,  and  bi  chastyng 
and  aspiynge  bifore,  schulden  be  drawen,  ^e,  fro  ]?e  auter,  to  be 
deed  bi  Goddis  comaundement.  And  Salamon  ])e  wise  kyng 
dide  )>is  in  dede ;  but  bi  oure  privylegie,  ^if  a  kyng  or  seculer 
justice  do  ])is  comaundement  of  God  and  just  ponyschyng  of 
wickednesse  and  disturbleris  of  J^e  pees,  he  is  cruely  cursed  of 
oure  worldly  clerkis, — but  blissed  of  God,  whoos  byddyng  he 
fulfillij?.  And  J?us  \€\  cursen  hem  ]>at  God  blissej> ;  ]?erfore  J?ei 
ben  cursed  of  God,  and  aUe  ]?at  consenten  to  hem  in  ])is  poynt. 
But  in  alle  Goddis  lawe  redde  we  nevere,  ]?at  J?eves  schulden  have 
refute  in  ]?e  chirche.  Whi  don  oure  worldly  clerkis  J)is?  it 
seme}?  for  coveitise,  to  have  part  of  here  pelf.  It  seme]?  }?ei 
cursen  openly  hemself,  for  ]?ei  resceyven  ]?eves  wittyngly,  and 
alle  siche  ben  cursed  bi  here  owene  sentence.  And  in  })is  ]?ei 
disturblen  pees  of  J?e  rewme,  for  just  ponyschyng  of  mysdoeris 
schulde  make  goode  pees  in  ]?e  peple,  and  ]?ei  letten  ]?is  bi  here 
privylegie ;  and  also  ]?ei  letten  restitucion,  J?at  is  due  bi  Goddis 
biddyng. 

y  2 


The  abuses  of 
the  privilege 
of  sanctuary 
further  con- 
sidered* 


334 


WrCLIF'S  WORKS. 


The  curse 
which  the 
worldly  clergy 
pronounce 
against  all  who 
are  slack  in 
bringing  true 
preachers  to 
punishment 
embraces  the 
king  himself, 
and  his  officers 
of  justice,  in 
its  scope. 


Also  )?ei  cursen  alle  hem  ])at  ben  necligent  to  enprisone 
cursed  men;  but  here  ]?ei  cursen  hem  ]?at  God  blisse]?  many 
tymes,  for  oft  \ei  cursen  wrongfully  trewe  men  for  prechynge 
of  Jje  gospel,  and  treuj>is  suynge  Jjerof,  a^enst  open  synnes,  for 
J)is  prechyng  is  a^enst  here  lust,  and  schewi]?  here  foule  ypocrisie 
and  symonye.  And  God  blissej?  ]?es  trewe  prechours  and  alle 
J)at  faveren  hem  in  ])is;  |)anne  ]?es  worldly  clerkis  cursen  \q 
kyng  and  his  justices  and  officeris,  for  ]?ei  meyntenen  }>e  gospel 
and  trewe  prechours  Jjerof,  and  wolen  not  prisone  hem  for 
wrongful  comaundement  of  Anticrist  and  his  clerkis.  But 
where  ben  foulere  heretikis  ]?an  ben  J^es  worldly  clerkis?  J>us 
cursynge  trewe  men,  and  styrynge  \e  kyng  and  his  lege  men  to 
pursue  Jesus  Crist  in  his  membris,  and  exile  J>e  gospel  out  of 
oure  lond.  And  many  tymes  })ei  maken  J^e  kyng  and  lordis 
pursue  trewe  men  and  ]?e  gospel,  whanne  )?ei  wenen  to  pur- 
sue heretikis  hardid  in  here  errour,  and  to  distroie  [hem]  ^, 
and  meyntene  Goddis  worschip;  and  ])us  \q\  maken  \q  kyng 
and  grete  lordis  to  bicome  turmentours  of  Sathanas,  and  do 
more  malice  and  peyne  to  Goddis  servauntes  }?anne  ])e  devel 
dar  do  himself.  For  )?ou5  a  just  man  be  cursed  wrongfully,  fe 
fend  dar  not  noye  in  his  soule  no  weie,  ne  in  his  body,  for  drede 
of  God ;  but  whanne  ]?e  fend  dare  not  dere  a  just  man,  ]>anne 
worldly  clerkis  maken  )?e  kyng  and  lordis,  for  blynd  pite,  to 
turmente  his  body  as  he  were  a  strong  ]?ef,  and  caste  him  in  a 
depe  prisone,  to  make  oj^ere  men  aferd  to  stonde  wi])  Goddis 
part  a5enst  here  heresie.  And  ])us  \6.  bitraien  oure  kyng  and 
lordis,  and  robben  hem  of  ri^t  bileve  and  ri^tful  dom  and  werkis 
of  mercy,  and  stoppen  Goddis  word,  and  letten  verrey  pees  of 
Cristendom.  Lord!  where  ben  more  cursed  heretikis  ])an  J)es 
weiward  traitours  ?  J?at  ]?us  sleen  Crist  and  his  postlis  and  pro- 
phetis,  and  bitraien  jje  kyng  and  lordis  to  do  wrong  a^enst  God 
and  his  servauntis,  and  robben  Cristendom  of  feij?,  hope,  and 
charite.  Certis  I  wolde  \dX  lordis  wolden  wisely  prisone  hem 
J)at  ben  cursed  of  God,  for  brekyng  of  his  hestis,  but  ^if  jjei 
wolen  leve  here  false  swerynge  and  nedeles,  and  fraudes  ]?at  j?ei 
usen  eche  to  o)?ere;    for  j}is  curs  is  evere  netful,  and  mannis 

^  supplied  conjecturally. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS, 


3^5 


curs  is  \>e  wrongful,  panne  J?e  kyng  schulde  fynde  how  worldly 
clerkis,  Jjat  lyven  in  pride,  glotonye,  and  lecherie,  and  don  not 
here  office,  3evynge  ensaumple  of  holy  lif  and  trewe  prechyng 
of  holy  writt,  ben  comen  in  bi  symonye,  ben  cursed  heretikis, 
and  he  schulde  prisone  hem  faste,  but  ^if  ]?ei  wolden  amende 
here  defautis  bi  |?e  lawe  of  God.  And  ]?is  prisonyng  moten  jjes 
clerkis  graunte  just,  but  ^if  Jjei  setten^  more  prise  bi  mannis 
wrongful  curs  ]?an  bi  J>e  ri^tful  curs  of  God  Almy^tty.  And  J)is 
were  open  heresie  and  blasphem.ye ;  and  siche  blasphemes  bi 
{>e  olde  lawe  of  God  schulden  be  stoned  to  de]?  bi  J^e  comyn 
peple;  and  in  ]>e  lawe  of  grace  alle  men  schulden  scharply 
blame  here  synne,  and  but  3if  ]?ei  wolde  leve  it,  holde  hem  as 
pupplicanis  or  he]?en  men,  and  not  comune  wij>  hem,  as  Crist 
tau^t  and  his  postHs. 

Cap.  XXIV. 

Alle  j>at  don  sacrilegie,  Jjat  taken  holy  l?ing  oute  of  holy  place, 
or  unholy  out  of  holy  place,  or  holy  ]>mg  out  of  unholy  place, 
ben  grevously  cursed  in  ]?e  chirche.  Here  men  wondren  of  ])is 
sentence,  for  comynly  alle  prestis  beren  holy  ]?ing  out  of  }>e 
chirche,  as  dymes  and  ofFryngis,  ]?at  ]>ei  clepen  holy,  and 
spenden  hem  sumtyme  ful  evele ;  and  siche  ben  cursed  bi  ]?is 
sentence.  And  ^if  ]?ei  seyn  ]>at  ]?ei  have  leve  }>erto,  seie  J?at  God 
3eveJ)  no  leve  whanne  l?ei  don  not  here  office  ]?erfore.  And 
prestis  spenden  hem  evele  in  worldly  vanyte,  glotonye,  and 
lecherie,  and  }>anne  algatis  ben  J^ei  ri^tfully  cursed  of  God  on 
double  manere;  oon,  for  ]>ei  don  not  here  office  ])at  Crist 
chargi]?  so  moche, — anoj^er,  for  ]?ei  wasten  ]>us  pore  mennus 
goodis,  a^enst  Goddis  lawe  and  mannis.  pe  secunde  tyme  men 
wondren  of  J^is  sentence ;  for  3if  alle  ben  cursed  l?at  take  unholy 
]?ing  out  of  holy  place,  ])an  eche  man  J^at  do]?  out  of  ^  dedly 
synne  of  his  soule,  halewid  in  baptym,  is  cursed ;  and  namely 
3if  he  do  ony  venyal  synne  oute  of  his  soule  Jjat  is  in  charite, 
for  J?an  he  do]>  unholy,  ]?at  is  synne,  out  of  his  soule,  ])at  is  holy 
place;  and  Jjanne  Crist  and  alle  his  seyntis  mosten  be  most 
cursed  of  alle  men,  for  Jjei  moste  did  ]?is  unholy  fing  out  of 

^  corrected;  senten,  X.  ^  dele  of;  the  meaning  is,  'driveth  deadly 

sin  out  of  his  souj.' 


Absurd  con- 
sequences 
which  flow 
from  the  curse 
pronounced  by 
the  worldly 
cler^  against 
sacrilege. 


326 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


The  study  of 
the  king's 
statutes, 
especially  of 
Maffiia  Carta, 
is  more  useful 
for  the  clergy 
than  that  o? 
the  Roman, 
or  a  large 
portion  of  the 
Canon  Law. 


mennus  soulis,  and  autoriseden  it.  And  ^if  l?ei  seyn  })at  ])ei 
understonden  only  of  worldly  goodis,  seie  J)at  smoke  of  er]?ely 
muk  blyndij)  hem  so  moche  )>at  })ei  taken  non  hede  to  God  and 
vertues,  and  where  )?ei  blaberen  trewe  or  fals. 

pe  )?ridde  tyme  men  wondren  most,  si]>  charite  only  schulde 
make  men  to  curse  for  synne  don  a^enst  Goddis  hestis.  Whi 
oure  clerkis  cursen  not  hem  J?at  taken  lordis  goodis  of  here 
maneres  and  places,  and  pore  mennus  goodis  out  of  here 
houses  and  feldis  ?  si]>  J?is  is  many  tymes  more  synne,  and  dis- 
turbli}?  more  pees  of  \q  lond.  It  seme]?  pes  clerkis  loven  not 
here  nei^eboris  as  hemself,  and  ])at  ))ei  pursuen  not  }>e  synne  in 
here  curs,  but  only  here  owene  wynnyng ;  and  herefore  })ei  for- 
feten  a^enst  alle  Jje  maundementis  of  God ;  for  J?ei  loven  neij?er 
God  ne  here  nei^bore  as  ])ei  schulden,  and  ]?anne  utterly  J>ei  ben 
cursed  of  God  and  alle  his  seyntis. 

Also  oure  prelatis  cursen  alle  hem  pat  don  a^enst  pe  Grete 
Chartre  ^  and  pe  Chartre  of  forest.  And  alle  pis  is  lawe  cyvyl  ^, 
and  l?e  pope  forbedip  prestis  to  here  lawe  cyvyl,  and  puttip  on 
hem  grete  peyne  ^if  pei  don  it.  And  pei  may  not  knowe  pes 
poyntis  but  ^if  pei  heren  hem;  pan  pei  ben  nedid  to  falle 
blyndly  in  pis  sentence,  perfore  it  were  more  profit  hope  to 
body  and  soule  pat  oure  curatis  lerneden  and  tau^ten  many  of 
pe  kyngis  statutis,  pan  lawe  of  pe  emperour.  For  oure  peple  is 
bounden  to  pe  kyngis  statutis,  and  not  to  pe  emperours  lawe, 
but  in  as  moche  as  it  is  enclosid  in  Goddis  hestis.  panne  moche 
tresour  and  moche  tyme  of  many  hundrid  clerkis,  in  unyversite 
and  opere  placis,  is  foule  wastid  aboute  bookis  of  pe  emperours 
lawe,  and  studie  aboute  hem.  And  ^if  oure  clerkis  studien  pes 
holds  of  pe  emperours  lawe,  for  reson  pat  l?ei  fynden  in  hem. 
Lord !  where  pes  blynde  foolis  schulden  not  fynde  more  reson 
in  pat  lawe  pat  God,  autor  of  reson,  made  himself,  for  most 
profit  of  men,  bofe  to  body  and  soule  1  And  ^if  men  seyn,  pat 
studie  aboute  pe  emperours  lawe  wipdrawip  men  from  studie 
and  knowyng  of  holy  v/ritt,  and  for  to  encresse  more  pe  studie 
of  holy  writt  pe  pope  wole  pat  prestis  here  not  ne  studie  lawe 
cyvel,  certis  pis  is  ful  sop,  and  pe  popis  entent  is  good  in  pis. 


^  corrected :   charite^  X. 


^  corrected  ;  crxiel,  X. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


3^7 


But  j?is  lettyng  of  studie  and  knowyng  of  holy  writt  is  more  don 
bi  j)e  popis  lawe  ]?an  bi  J?e  emperours,  for  it  is  lengere,  and 
more  stondil>  in  singuler  wille  of  \t  pope  and  his  cardynalis  ])an 
in  reson,  oJ?erewise  ]?an  doi)?  ]?e  emperours  lawe.  And  mo 
clerkis  drawen  to  Jje  popis  lawe,  and  Jjerby  leven  holy  writt,  for 
wynnynge  of  worldly  muk  and  veyn  worschip  of  j>is  world;  and  })e 
pope  forjjerij?  hem  in  J^es  poyntis,  and  hindri])  men  of  dyvynyte, 
and  techij)  alle  men  to  don  j>e  same  bi  his  ensaumple.  perfore 
J?e  Cardynal  Odo  a  sei)?,  |?at  ]?e  popis  law  and  jje  emperours  ben 
)?e  tweyne  calvys  of  gold  J^at  lettiden  Goddis  peple  worschipe 
him  in  Jerusalem ;  so  J?es  twey  lawis  drawen  men  fro  studie  and 
knowyng  of  holy  writt,  and  dewe  worschipynge  of  God. .  For 
evere  as  a  man  owiJ>  to  worschipe  God  bifore  alle  fingis,  so 
owij>  eche  man,  and  namely  a  prest,  to  studie  and  knowe  holy 
writt  bifore  alle  o]?ere  lawis.  perfore  prestis  biheten  to  God  J^at 
)?ei  schullen  evere  ])enke  of  Goddis  lawe ;  and  Jesus  seij?  in  J)e 
gospel,  3if  ony  man  love  him,  he  schal  kepe  his  words;  and 
God  comaundid  in  j?e  olde  lawe  ]?at  ])e  kyng  schulde  studie  in 
bokis  of  his  lawe,  and  J)at  J>is  bok  schulde  not  passe  fro  his  eien. 
perfore  Seynt  Gregory  witnessi}?,  ])at  evere  as  a  man  love]?  a 
kyng,  so  he  love]>  his  lawe.  It  semej?  ]?at  curatis  schulden 
raj?ere  lerne  and  teche  j^e  kyngis  statutis,  and  namely  J?e  Grete 
Chartre,  ))an  fe  emperours  lawe  or  myche  part  of  J?e  popis.  For 
men  in  oure  rewme  ben  bounden  to  obeche  to  ])e  kyng  and  his 
ri^tful  lawes,  and  not  so  to  )?e  emperours;  and  })ei  my^tten 
wonder  wel  be  savyd,  ]?ou5  many  lawes  of  \q  pope  hadden 
nevere  be  spoken,  in  J)is  world  ne  ]?e  tojjere. 

Cap.  XXV. 

Alle  ])0  ]?at  comunen  wi]?  cursed  men  ben  cursed  bi  oure 
prelatis,  namely  ^if  }>ei  don  ]?is  wittyngly.  Here  it  semi]?  }>at 
God  is  cursed  bi  ]>is  sentence,  for  no  cursed  man  may  be  in  ])is 


^  The  constitutions  of  Cardinal 
Otlio,  framed  at  a  '  Concilium  Pan- 
Anglicum'  held  in  London  in  the 
year  1236,  are  printed  as  an  Ap- 
pendix to  Lyndwood's  Provinciale 
(ed.  Oxford,  1769).  But  I  can  dis- 
cover no   passage   in   them   at   all 


resembling  that  quoted  in  the  text, 
which  indeed  would  be  a  strange 
admission  for  a  cardinal  to  make; 
nor  can  I  discover  any  other  work 
by  a  Cardinal  Otho  or  Odo,  which 
the  writer  can  be  referring  to. 


The  carse 
pronounced 
on  those  who 
hold  commu- 
nion with  per- 
sons excom- 
municate may- 
be turned 
aj^ainst  the 
clergy  them- 
selves, 


328 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


whose  curses, 
if  they  are  bad 
men,  are  not  to 
be  feared. 


lif  but  5if  God  wittyngly  comune  wij?  hym,  and  ^eve  him  beyng 
and  sustenaunce  to  his  lif,  where  he  be  wrongly  cursed  or 
ri^tfully.  And  ^it  he  is  redy  to  ^eve  him  grace  and  for^evenesse 
of  his  synnes  ^if  he  ax  it  wor])ily ;  and  God  ^eve)?  him  grace 
bifore  j?at  he  axe  it,  ^e,  in  herte.  And  sij)  oure  goode  God  may 
not  be  cursed,  ))is  sentence  seme))  to  large.  And  ^if  men  ben 
wrongfully  cursed,  )?erfore  wrongfully  pursued, — Jjei  ]?at  comynen 
wi]>  hem,  and  helpen  hem,  and  don  werkis  of  mercy  to  hem, 
ben  blissed  of  God.  For  Crist  seij?  in  j^e  gospel,  Blissed  be  {^e 
mercyful,  for  ])ei  schuUen  have  mercy.  And  jjou^  men  ben 
nevere  so  opynly  cursid,  ^it  men  may  lawefuUy  comynen  wijj 
hem,  for  to  drawe  hem  into  good  lif,  and  not  to  coumforte  hem 
in  here  synne;  and  ])us  bo])e  God  and  goode  men  may  lawe- 
fully  comynen  m\  cursed  men  wittyngly,  in  wrongful  curs  and 
ri3tful.  But  late  worldly  prestis  answere  here,  where  a  man  ])at 
owe])  dette  to  a  cursed  man  may  wittyngly  comune  wij)  hym, 
and  paie  him  his  dette ;  and  it  semej)  bi  J)is  sentence,  cried  in 
)?e  chirche,  Jjat  ^if  he  do  he  is  cursed,  for  wyttyngly  he  comunej? 
wij)  a  cursed  man.  panne,  bi  here  owene  dom,  si])  curatis  and 
prelatis  ])at  breken  openly  Goddis  hestis  ben  ri3tfully  cursed  of 
God,  sugetis  schulden  not  comyne  wiJ)  hem,  resscevynge  here 
sacramentis,  ne  ti])e  ne  offre  to  hem  ony  goodis,  for  ])an  Jjei 
comynen  wyttyngly  wij)  cursed  men,  j)at  ])ei  schulden  not  do 
for  alle  j)is  worlde,  bi  here  owene  sentence. 

Also,  sij)  siche  curatis  don  not  here  office  in  good  lyvyng  and 
trewe  techyng,  and  comen  not  into  here  benefices  bi  ])e  dore, 
])at  is,  Crist,  but  symonye,  pride,  and  coveitise,  ])ei  ben  jievys, 
as  Crist  seij)  in  Jje  gospel,  and  cursed,  for  ])ei  wi])drawen  ri^ttis 
of  holy  Chirche.  panne  here  sugetis  ben  ressettours  of  Jjevys, 
and  meyntenors  of  hem  in  here  synne,  and  so  cursed  bi  here 
owene  sentence,  and  for  consent  to  synne,  as  Seynt  Poul  seij). 
And  ^if  lawieris  seyn  jjat  j)is  were  soj)  ^if  men  weren  j)us  cursed 
bi  sentence  ^ovyn  openly  of  prelatis,  certis  myche  more  ])is 
peyne  rennej)  whan  God  curse])  justly  for  brekyng  of  his  hestis. 
And  ])e  comynte  of  prelatis  cursen  in  comyn  lawe  for  symonye 
and  wi])dra^\7ng  of  holy  Chirche  ri^ttis,  and  not  o  singuler 
prelat  for  his  owene  pride  and  coveitise ;  for  ellis  j)es  lawieris 
moten  sette  more  priss  bi  a  wrongful  curs  of  a  worldly  prest. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS, 


329 


sumtyme  cursed  of  God,  and  in  cas  a  dampned  fend,  J)an  bi  J?e 
moste  ri^tful  curs  fat  God  can  ^eve ;  but  J?is  were  al  on  and  to 
drede  a  worldly  cursed  wrecche,  and  in  cas  a  fend  of  helle,  more 
]>an  God  Almy5tty  and  alia  Ms  sugetis,  and  magnyfie  siche  a 
frend  more  })an  grete  God  of  hevene  and  erj)e,  and  alle  crea- 
turis.  perfore  \i%  peyne  mot  renne  for  just  cursyng  of  God, 
and  not  everemore  for  cursyng  of  worldly  clerkis,  for  \€\  don 
ofte  wrong. 

Cap.  XXVI. 

Alle  mensleeris  and  brenneris  of  houses  and  corves  ben 
cursed  opynly  in  parische  chirches.  Here  men  of  armes,  ]>at 
sleen  and  brennen  in  wronge  werris,  ben  openly  cursed  boJ)e  of 
God  and  man ;  and  alle  counseilours  to  wrongful  werris  ben  in 
]?e  same  peril,  wij?  alle  prechours  fat  stiren  men  and  herten  hem 
in  Jjes  werris,  and  alle  penytaunceris  j?at  tellen  not  to  hem  fe 
treufe,  but  assoilen  over  li^tly,  for  money  or  worldly  favour. 
And  it  semej?  fat  alle  prelatis  in  oure  lond  fat  consenten  to  f es 
werris,  ^e,  f  0U3  f  ei  ben  ri^tful,  ben  irreguler  bi  here  owene  lawe. 
For  sif  he  is  irreguler  fat  writif  a  lettre  of  dom  wherof  o  f ef  is 
dampned  to  def ,  or  sittif  in  place  as  associed  wif  f  e  domesman, 
moche  more  f es  worldly  prelatis  fat  sitten  in  Perlement,  and 
conseilen  fat  oure  gentelmen  schullen  goo  out  of  oure  lond  to 
werre  vnf  Cristene  men,  where  many  f  ousand  ben  slayn  a,  ben 
irreguler  bi  Goddis  lawe  and  mannis.  For  be  many  resons  fes 
worldly  prelatis  don  werse  in  f is  cas  fan  ^if  f ei  killeden  sudenly 
many  men  bi  here  owene  hondis.  And  siffe  pope  and  ofere 
clerkis,  lesse  and  more,  my^tten  soone  fordo  fes  werris  and 
make  pees  in  Cristendom,  and  leven  fis  grete  dede  of  charite 
for  worldly  wynnynge  or  frendischipe  or  bodily  desese,  it  semef 
fat  f ei  ben  irreguler,  and  cause  of  alle  fis  werre.  And  eche 
man  avyse  hymself  wel,  fat  f 0U3  men  han  nevere  so  grete  ri^t 
bi  worldly  title,  ^it  f  e  werre  is  wrongful  bifore  God,  but  ^if  it  be 
don  principaly  for  charite,  to  distroie  synne  of  men,  and  not  for 
coveitise  of  here  goodis,  ne  pride,  ne  enemyte  of  hem ;  for  no 


*  The  writer  evidently  refers  to 
the  expedition  to  Flanders  in  1383, 
which,   from  the  language   used  a 


few  Imes  below,  would  seem  to  be 
still  in  progress,  or  at  any  rate  only 
just  over. 


The  curse 
against  man- 
slayers  falls 
upon  all 
soldiers  that 
engag^e  in 
wrongful  wars, 
and  upon  all 
preachers  that 
incite  them 
thereto. 


33° 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


If  Christ  were 
obeyed,  wars 
would  cease ; 
but  the  pope 
sedulously 
encourages 
war. 


The  wicked- 
ness and  evil 
effects  of  bad 
examples  set 
by  those  in 
power  and 
authority  to 
their  subjects. 


The  pope  falls 
manifestly 
under  the 
curse  pro- 
nounced 


man  schulde  do  ony  of  ])es  ]>re  for  ony  good  in  ]?is  world,  for 
|>us  he  leesij?  ^  charite. 

And  sij)  Crist  in  ])e  gospel  graunti}?  a  hundridfold  and  ever- 
lastynge  lif  in  hevene  to  eche  man  )?at  forsaki]?  for  his  love  hous 
or  lond,  or  ony  worldly  honour,  whi  wole  not  ])es  prechours 
preche  opynly  ]?is  gospel,  J^at  men  my^tten  leve  werris  and 
suffre  persecucion  paciently,  as  Crist  tau^te  for  ]?e  beste  ?  Whi 
wole  not  Jje  proude  prest  of  Rome  graunte  ful  perdon  to  alle 
men  for  to  lyve  in  pees  and  charite  and  pacience,  as  he  do]>  to 
alle  men  for  to  %tte  and  slee  Cristene  men,  and  to  helpe  fierto  ? 
Certis  J)is  prest  wi]?  his  fals  prechours,  f>at  ben  princes  of  man- 
quelleris  and  werris,  ben  openly  contrarie  to  Crist  and  his 
postlis,  and  so  open  Anticristis,  maistris  of  Sathanas,  3it  wei- 
ward  prelatis  and  curatis,  ]?at  techen  not  Goddis  word  to  here 
sugetis,  but  sufFren  hem  be  stranglid  wi))  wolvys  of  helle,  ben 
cursed  mansleeris,  as  Crist,  bi  schewyng  of  Seynt  Gregory,  seij? 
in  many  placis  of  his  lawe ;  and  not  only  sleeris  of  bodies  in  })is 
world,  but  comynly  of  body  and  soule  bi  dej>  of  synne,  and 
everelastynge  de]?  of  boJ?e  in  helle  wijjouten  ende. 

Alle  worldly  and  ofere  sovereyns  ]?at  ^evyn  evyl  ensaumple  of 
open  synne  to  here  sugetis  and  nei^eboris,  distroien  and  brennen 
Goddis  hous  and  temple,  J^at  is  mannis  soule,  in  as  moche  as 
[is]  ^  in  hem.  And  oure  Savyour  Crist  principaly  cursej?  siche 
men  in  J>e  gospel ;  for  as  moche  as  mannis  soule  is  betre  Jjan 
er]?ely  muk,  so  moche  ben  ])es  gostly  distroieris  or  brenneris 
werse  })an  brenneris  of  worldly  houses.  For  sumtyme  in  sum 
cas  ]?ei  may  lawefully  brenne  placis  of  erjje,  but  nevere  Goddis 
housis,  ])at  is,  mannis  soule.  And  ^it  \q  more  J)at  a  worldly 
clerk  bi  evyl  ensaumple  sclaundrij?  Jjus  Cristene  soules,  ])e  more 
he  is  preised  and  benefised  among  grete  men  of  ]?is  world. 
And  certis  alle  J>is  meyne  is  hugely  cursed  of  God  for  J^is  meyn- 
tening  of  synne. 

Cap.  XXVII. 

Alle  comyn  mysdoeris  of  Cristene  peple  ben  expresly  cursed 
of  God  and  man.     Here  alle  men  owene  to  drede  sore,  and 


corrected;  lees,  X, 


supplied  conjecturally. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS, 


iZ^ 


eche  man  for  himself;  for  he  is  a  comyn  mydoere  ]>at  comynly 
doj)  grete  evyl,  and  opynly  and  longe  contynuej?  ]?erinne,  and 
cesse]?  not  for  drede  of  God  ne  schame  of  |?e  world;  and 
namely,  ^if  he  meyntene  o}}ere  men  in  ev}4.  Loke  now  wher 
})is  bischop  of  Rome  wib  his  court  do  ]?us  in  his  wengis,  boJ)e 
possessioneris  and  religious  and  mendynauntis.  First,  bi  his 
worldly  [lif]  ^  he  drawi]?  Jje  comynte  of  clerkis  from  holy  writt, 
and  so  distroie])  moche  ]?e  feij?  of  holy  writt ;  bo]?e  bi  his  worldly 
lif,  and  false  expounyng  of  Cristis  lif,  for  to  coloure  his  lif  and 
his  felowis,  )?at  suen  J)is  world  and  likyng  )?erof.  And  he  stiref> 
men  bi  grete  perdon  to  breke  opynly  Goddis  hestis,  and  he 
envenymej?  comynly  alle  Cristendom  wi]?  his  symonye,  and 
robbi}?  it  of  goode  men  and  vertues,  and  lettij)  treue  prestis  to 
holpe  men  to  heveneward  bi  prechyng  of  J^e  gospel.  And  he 
norische]?  most  men  in  synne  bi  his  exempcions,  privylegies, 
indulgencis,  and  general  perdon ;  and  maki]?  men  triste  more  in 
his  doyng  fan  in  God  Almy^tty  and  his  mercy.  And  certis  of 
his  comyn  ^  mysdoyng,  privey  and  apert,  kan  no  man  fully  telle 
but  God  himself. 

Also  tirauntis  ben  ofte  tymes  comyn  mysdoeris ;  for  seculer 
tiraimtis  robben  Jje  pore  peple,  and  namely  here  owene  ten- 
auntis  and  sugetis,  bi  extorsions,  bi  wrong  mercymentis,  and 
newe  customes  and  chargis,  t^at  \€\  hilden  pore  men  and  leven 
hem  half  quyk.  So  God  sei)?  bi  his  prophetis.  But  tirauntis  of 
.]?e  chirche,  as  hie  prestis  wij?  here  officeris  and  o]?ere  curatis,  ben 
worse  comyn  mysdoeris.  For  \€\  robben  here  sugetis  bi  grete  ex- 
torsions,  bi  suspendyng,  cursing,  and  enterdityng ;  and  pursue)?  to 
mannis  lawe  more  cruely  }>an  alle  ojjere  tirauntis.  And  \€\  maken 
sotil  delaies  whanne  men  ben  presentid  to  grete  chirchis,  to  make 
hem  longe  stonde  voide,  \2X  J?ei  may  have  ]?e  profitis  in  ])e  mene 
while ;  and  \€\  sillen  sacramentis,  as  ordris,  and  ojjere  spiritualte, 
as  halwyng  of  auteris,  of  chirchis,  and  chirche^erdis ;  and  com- 
pellen  men  to  bie  alle  ])is  wij?  hok  or  crok.  ^\l  \€\  taken  moche 
money  of  open  synful  men,  and  norischen  hem  in  open  synne 
for  annuel  rente,  [and]  ^  so  sillen  Cristene  soulis  to  Sathanas  for 


^  supplied  conjecturally. 
conjecturally. 


corrected ;  comyng,  X. 


supplied 


Tjnrannical  lay- 
men fall  under 
this  curse,  but 
still  more 
t3rraunical 
bishops  and 
priests, 


332 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


as  well  as  dis- 
honest lawyers. 


Job  xxix.  15. 


Friars,  monks, 
and  worldly 
priests  fall 
under  the 
curse  pro- 
nounced 
against  con- 
spirators, 


here  owene  muk.  And  what  trewe  prest  or  pore  man  speki]? 
openly  a^enst  J)is  cursed  marchaundise,  he  shal  be  sumoned, 
suspendid  ^  fro  prechyng  and  treu})e-seyng,  or  cursed,  prisoned, 
or  exilid. 

Many  men  of  lawe  ben  comyn  mysdoeris,  for  comynly  ]jei 
meynteynen  l?e  false  pert,  for  money  or  favour  or  drede  of 
men,  and  letten  j?e  treu}?e  bi  alle  here  witt  and  power,  and  bi 
here  suteltes  turnen  |)e  cat  in  ]?e  panne,  and  tarien  pore  men  in 
here  ri3t,  ]?at  it  is  betre  to  hem  for  to  leve  here  owene  good,  J>an 
to  calenge  it  bi  worldly  dom.  3it  J^e  kyng  and  oJ?ere  lordis,  wij> 
comyn  justicis,  semen  comyn  mysdoeris ;  for  J?ei  suflfren  wickid 
tyrauntis  oppresse  pore  men  bi  extorsions  and  o}>ere  wrongis, 
whanne  J?ei  may  li^tly  amende  it,  and  ben  so  sore  chargid  of 
God  to  helpe  pore  men,  and  be  to  hem  as  good  fadir  and 
modir,  and  eie  to  blynde  men,  and  on  hand  and  foot  to  ]?e 
crokid,  as  Job  was,  as  holy  writt  telli]?.  And  J)is  necligence  and 
consente  of  grete  lordis  maki]?  hem  ful  gilty  and  cursed  in  \q 
dom  of  God.  Also  alle  comyn  swereris  bi  Goddis  herte,  bonys, 
nailis,  and  sidis,  and  ofere  membris^  and  false  and  veyn 
swereris,  wij)  lecchours,  and  alle  ojjere  ]?at  comynly  don  a^enst 
ony  of  Goddis  hestis,  for  J^ei  ben  comyn  mysdoeris,  rennen  fully 
in  Jjis  sentence. 

Cap.  XXVIII. 

Alle  false  conspiratours  ben  cursed  of  God  and  man.  Con- 
spiratours  ben  \o  J?at  by  comyn  assent  don  wrong  or  ony  fals- 
nesse  to  here  nei^eboris.  Here  it  seme]?  openly  J?at  alle  freris, 
worldly  clerkis,  and  possessioneris,  ben  openly  cursed ;  for  Jjei 
conspiren  falsly  a^enst  J)e  gospel  and  Cristis  ^  pore  prestis ;  and 


^  corrected ;  snspendyng,  X. 

a  The  use  by  the  Host  in  the 
Canterbury  Tales  of  the  profane  oaths 
'  for  Goddis  bones,'  and  '  by  Goddis 
dignitee,'  elicits  a  remonstrance  from 
the  Parson; — 

'What  eileth  the  man,  so  sinfully  to  swere?' 

To  which  the  immediate  reply  of  the 
Host  is, — 


2  corrected ;  Crist,  X. 

' /  smell  a  loller  ift  the  -wind'* 

this  no  doubt  being  a  frequent  theme 
of  expostulation  and  censure  with 
the  Lollard  pamphleteers  and  itine- 
rating preachers,  with  whom  Eng- 
land swarmed  in  the  last  twenty 
years  of  the  century. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


333 


\€\  schullen  not  preche  wijjouten  leve  of  ])e  bischopis,  and  ]?ei 
wolen  not  sufFre  hem  to  preche  fully  ]je  treu])e  of  holy  writt,  and 
warne  Jje  peple  of  Anticristis  tirauntrie,  and  of  his  clerkis 
ypocrisie,  as  God  biddij^  hem  do.  And  whanne  \€\  comen  to 
];e  purpos  of  here  false  ypocrisie,  and  stoppen  trewe  men  fro 
prechyng  of  ]?e  gospel,  j?ei  maken  moche  joie  and  gladnesse ; 
and  here  ]?ei  schewen  opynly  J>at  \€\  serven  to  J)e  fend,  fadir  of 
falsnesse,  and  haten  Jesus  Crist,  lord  of  treuj?e  and  so]?fastnesse. 
Also  alle  newe  fraternytes  or  gildis  ^  maad  of  men  semen 
openly  to  renne  in  ]?is  curs.  For  \€\  conspiren  many  false 
errours  a^enst  ]?e  comyn  fraternyte  of  Crist,  ]>at  alle  Cristene  ^ 
men  token  in  here  cristendom,  and  a3enst  comyn  charite 
and  comyn  profit  of  Cristene  men.  And  J^erto  ]?ei  conspiren 
to  here  up  eche  o]?er,  ^e,  in  wrong,  and  oppresse  o]?ere 
men  in  here  ri3t  bi  here  witt  and  power.  And  alle  }?e  good- 
nes  ]?at  is  in  Jjes  glides  eche  man  owi]>  for  to  do  bi  comyn 
fraternyte  of  Cristendom,  bi  Goddis  comaundement.  And  \€\ 
bryngen  in  moche  pride  vanyte  and  wast,  cost,  and  triste  in 
mennus  helpe  more  ])an  in  Goddis;  and  J?us  fei  bryngen  in 
moche  evyl,  and  no  good,  more  J?an  God  comaunded  frist ;  but 
\€\  letten  moche  un}1;e  pees  and  charite  of  Cristene  peple,  and 
meyntenen  errour  of  wrong  and  gret  discencion,  and  moche 
symonye,  and  letten  pore  mennus  almes  and  liflode  ]>at  lyn  bed- 
rede  blynd  and  feble.  Also  men  of  sutel  craft,  as  fre  masons  and 
o]?ere,  semen  openly  cursed  bi  ]?is  sentence.  For  J^ei  conspiren 
togidere  ])at  no  man  of  here  craft  schal  take  lesse  on  ^  day  J?at 
\€\  setten,  Jjou^  he  schulde  bi  good  conscience  take  moche 
lesse,  and  J>at  noon  of  hem  schal  make  sade  trewe  werk  to 
lette  o]?ere  mennus  wynnyng  of  ))e  craft,  and  Jjat  non  of  hem 
schal  do  ou3t  but  only  hewe  stone,  Jjou^  he  my^t  profit  his 
maistir  twenti  pound  bi  o  dales  werk  bi  leggyng  on  a  wal, 
wijjouten  harm  er  penyng  himself.     See  hou  j)is  wickid  peple 

^  corrected ;  Criste,  X. 


a  For  the  fullest  and  most  accu- 
rate information  on  the  subject  of 
English  Guilds,  see  the  work  en- 
titled 'English  Gilds'  (Early  English 


Text  Society),  edited  by  the  late 
Mr.  Toulmin  Smith,  with  the  ex- 
cellent preliminary  essay  of  Dr. 
Brentano,  of  Aschaffenburg. 


as  well  as  fra- 
ternities or 
guilds. 


334 


WrCLIF'S  WORKS. 


and  merchants, 
grocers,  &c. 


Those  of  the 
clergy  who  will 
•not  preach  the 
gospel  nor  lead 
good  lives,  fall 
under  the 
curse  pro- 
,  nounced 
against  those 
that  withhold 
other  men's 
goods  un- 
reasonably, 


conspire]?  a^enst  treuj^e  and  charite,  and  comyn  profit  of  ])e 
lond,  and  ponyschi]?  hem  }?at  helpen  frely  here  nei^eboris. 

Also  it  seme])  ]>at  marchauntis  groceris  and  vitileris  rennen 
in  })e  same  curs  fully.  For  ])ei  conspiren  wickidly  togidre 
])at  noon  of  hem  schal  bie  over  a  certeyn  pris,  ])0U5  \t  ])ing 
])at  ])ei  bien  be  moche  more  \vor]?i,  and  ])ei  knowen  wel  ])is; 
and  ]5at  non  of  hem  schal  sille  betere  chepe  *  ]?an  ano]?er,  \o\x^ 
he  may  wel  for]?  it  so,  and  it  be  not  so  moche  wor]?  as  anoj^er 
mannis  chaffer;  J>us  he  schal  be  ponysched  sore  5if  he  do 
trewe  and  good  conscience.  Certis  alle  ])is  peple  conspiri]) 
cursedly  a^enst  treu]?e,  charite,  and  comyn  profit.  Summe 
trewe  men  seyn,  ]7at  summe  parische  prestis  conspiren  togidere 
to  selle  sacramentis  for  a  certeyn  pris,  and  to  lette  trewe  men 
to  preche  ])e  gospel,  for  drede  last  J^ei  tellen  out  here  cursed 
ypocrisie  and  symonye  and  heresie.  And  ^if  it  fare  ])us  wi]? 
hiere  penytaunceris,  bo|>e  of  bischopis  and  popis, — and  sum 
men  supposen  ])at  ])ei  don, — it  is  moche  \q  werse  on  alle  ordris, 
for  Jjanne  j^ei  ben  cursed  of  God  and  man,  and  maken  }>e  peple 
cursed  ]?erto. 

Cap.  XXIX. 

Alle  ]?at  wi])holden  unresonably  ony  goodis  axid  ]?ries  in  \q 
chirche,  fallen  into  \e  grete  sentence  of  curs,  pis  sentence 
of  curs  seme])  resonable  to  good  understondyng,  for  Seynt 
Austyn  seij?,  yd  ])0u  fynde  ou^t  of  o])ere  mennus  and  quitest 
it  not,  J)Ou  hast  ravyschid  ]>at  J>ing,  or  stolen,  or  taken  bi 
raveyne  t>.  pan  si])  Crist  himself  ha))  axid  solempnely,  bi  hie 
redyng  of  his  gospel  and  ofjere  placis  of  holy  writt,  generaly  in 
churchis,  ri^t  feij)  and  good  lyvyng  and  due  reverence  to  him, 
])ei  \2X  wi])holden  ])es  goodis  ben  justly  acursed  of  God  himself, 
])at  may  not  erre.  Also,  si])  God  himself,  and  bi  his  prestis- 
bo])e  ha])  axid  ])us  many  ])0usand  tymes  ])at  prelatis  and  curatis, 
more  and  lesse,  do  trewely  here  gostly  oflftce  in  trewe  techyng 


«-  '  Chepe '  meaning  to  buy, 
{Tiauffen,  cheapen,  &c.)  the  customer 
that  bought  any  article  in  the 
market  for  a  low  price,  got  it  *  good 
chepe,'  i.e.  made  a  good  bargain 
for   it.     Similarly,  to   sell   'betere 


chepe'  is  to  sell  at  a  better  bar- 
gain for  the  buyer,  or,  as  we  say, 
cheaper. 

"^  S.  Aug.  Sermo  clxxviii,  §  9. 
'  Quod  invenisti  et  non  reddidisti, 
rapuisti.' 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


335 


of  ]?e  gospel  and  his  comaimdementis,  wij?  open  ensaumple  of 
here  owene  good  lif,  to  be  myrrour  to  here  sugetis,  }?ei  J?at 
wi]>holden  ])es  goodis  ben  ri^tfuUy  cursed  of  God  and  alle  his 
seyntis.  And  sij?  God  and  trewe  prestis  han  axid  ])us  many 
tymes,  }?at  ciiratis  schulden  lyve  in  mekenesse  symplenesse  and 
sobernesse,  and  spende  al  |?at  levej?  over  here  resonable  sus- 
teynaunce  in  relevyng  of  pore  men,  ]?ei  J>at  wi))holden  ]?es  goodis 
of  holy  Chirche,  and  spend^n  hem  in  pride  glotonye  lecherie 
and  worldly  vanyte,  ben  openly  cursed  bi  j?is  sentence,  and 
many  ojjere  ful  trewe  and  resonable. 

Also,  sij>en  God  and  his  prestis  han  openly  axid  J)us  oft  tyme 
in  chirchis,  ]?at  prelatis  and  curatis  ben  not  bisy  in  lordis  courtis, 
in  worldly  officis,  but  be  bisi  on  here  gostly  oflSce,  and  resident 
at  hom  wi]p  here  scheep,  )?ei  }>at  wi]?holden  ]?es  curatis  in  here 
worldly  servyce,  for  here  gostly  office,  fallen  fully  in  ))is  ri^tful 
curs.  But  more  ))is  weiward  steffadris  of  mennus  soulis,  ]?at  for 
coveitise  of  moo  benefices,  and  gederyng  of  erj)ely  dritt,  pro- 
cur  en  ]?is,  and  ^yven  moche  money  to  be  ])us  in  worldly  office ; 
for  Jjei  procuren  faste  to  poisone  here  lordis,  hemself,  and  ]je 
peple,  wi]?  Goddis  curs  and  here  owene.  Oure  bischopis  ]?at 
pressen  to  be  chaunseler  a  and  tresorer  and  governours  of  alle 
worldly  officis  in  ]?e  rewme,  to  dredeful  sore  ^,  for  }»ei  may  not 
wel  togidre  do  her  gostly  office  and  worldly,  for  Crist  and  alle 
his  postlis,  wi}?  alle  here  witt,  kouden  not  and  wolden  not  enter- 
mete  wi]?  worldly  office,  but  fledden  it  as  venym.  And  certis 
ojjer  ]?es  bischopis  ben  wittier  and  my^ttier  ]?an  Jesus  Crist  and 
his  postlis,  or  ellis  \€\  ben  open  foolis  cursed  of  God  and  man. 
For  \€\  moten  nedis  be  traitours  of  God  and  his  peple  in  ))e 
sovereyn  medicyn  of  soulis  hel]?e,  )?e  while  \€\  ben  J?us  bisy 
aboute  worldly  occupacion.  And  alle  J?is  ]?ei  don  for  worldly 
pride  and  wynnyng,  and  for  }?at  \q  kyng  and  lordis  schulden 
have  no  power  to  brynge  hem  to  meke  and  gostly  lif  of  Crist 
and  his  postlis. 

Also,  sijj  God  and  his  prechours  han  ofte  axid  in  chirchis 

-^  something  seems  omitted. 

^  The  writer  seems  to  glance  years  under  Edward  III,  and  again 
principally  at  William  of  Wykeham,  for  a  short  time  under  Richard  II, 
who    was    chancellor    for    several      from  1389  to  1391. 


as  do  those 
•who  hinder 
priests  from 
residmg  in 
their  parishes. 


and  rich  men, 
who  waste  in 


33^ 


luxury  the 
superfluity  of 
their  goods 
which  ought  to 
be  given  to  the 
poor. 


General  won- 
der and  indig- 
nation at  the 
proneness  of 
churchmen  to 
shower  curses 
where  their 
worldly  in- 
terests are  at 
stake. 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 

solempnely,  J^at  alle  riche  men  do  treuely  and  wisely  [^eve^] 
))e  residue  of  here  goodis,  over  her  owene  sustenaunce  and 
ojjer  nedis,  in  werkis  of  mercy  to  pore  feble  lame  and  blynde, 
J>ei  ]>at  wi])holden  J)es  goodis  fro  ]?es  pore  men,  and  wasten  hem 
in  pompe  and  glotonye  and  o})ere  vanytees,  rennen  in  })is  sen- 
tence. Also,  sij5  prelatis  and  curatis  han  axid  so  ofte  dewe 
obedience  reverence  and  love,  and  unyte  of  her  sugetis  and 
parischenes,  freris  ]>at  wij^holden  J^es  sugetis  from  here  parisch 
chirches,  and  her  sacramentis  J^ere,  for  here  owene  coveitise 
and  pride,  fallen  fully  in  J?is  sentence.  For  ]?ei  wij?drawen  o]?ere 
mennus  ri^ttis  to  hemself  for  coveitise,  and  maken  discension, 
and  disturblen  pees  and  charite,  and  namely  whanne  J?ei  taken 
almes  of  riche  men,  ]>at  is  sustenaunce  of  pore  bedrede  men, 
to  hemself  bi  sutel  ypocrisie,  as  fals  beggyng  whanne  it  is  no 
nede,  and  maken  grete  festis  to  riche  men,  and  bilden  wast 
housen^,  and  namely  hie  kechenes  and  grete  chaumbris  for  lordis, 
a^enst  here  owene  reule  and  profession ;  and  to  pursue  trewe 
men  J)at  preche'n  ]?e  gospel  a^enst  comyn  synnes,  and  so  Crist 
himself,  a^enst  ]je  lawe  of  God  expressely.  pus  many  men 
rennen  in  ]?is  poynt  of  curs,  and  namely  o]?ere,  whoso  sekij? 
wel. 

Men  wondren  moche  whi  prelatis  and  curatis  cursen  so  faste, 
si]>  Seynt  Poul  and  Seynt  Petir  comaunden  men  to  blisse  and 
not  have  will  to  curse;  and  Jesus  Crist  blissed  his  enemys, 
and  hertely  preiede  for  hem,  ))e  while  he  was  nailed  on  ]?e  croos 
of  hem.  More  men  wondren  whi  \q\  cursen  so  faste  for  here 
owene  cause  and  wordly  muk,  and  not  for  reprofe  don  to  Crist 
and  his  majeste ;  si]?  men  schulden  be  pacient  in  here  owene 
wrongis  and  dispitis,  as  Crist  and  his  disciplis  weren,  and  not 
suffre  o  word  be  don  a5enst  Goddis  honour  and  mageste,  as  bi 
fals  and  veyn  ojjis,  and  ribaudrie  of  lecherie,  and  oj^ere  fil]?e. 
Most  men  wondren  whi  worldly  clerkis  cursen  so  faste  for 
brekyng  of  here  owene  statutis,  privylegies,  and  weiward 
customes,  more  j>an  for  open  brekyng  ^  of  Goddis  comaunde- 
mentis ;  sij?  no  man  is  cursed  of  God  but  only  for  brekyng  of 
his  hestis, — whatevere  worldly  wrecchis  blaberen, — and  no  man 

^  supplied  conjecturally.  ^  corrected ;  housyng,  X.  ^  cor- 

rected ;  hreken,  X. 

WYCLIF. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 

is  blissed  of  God  and  schal  come  to  hevene,  but  only  he  j?at 
kepi]?  Goddis  hestis,  and  namely  in  hour  of  his  de]?, — have  a 
man  nevere"  so  many  Jjousande  buUis  of  indulgence  or  perdon, 
and  letteris  of  fraternyte,  and  Jjousynde  massis  of  prestis 
m^onkis  and  freris. 

perfore  an  holsum  counseil  is  )>is,  }?at  prelatis  and  curatis  leve 
}>es  poyntes  of  sentence,  for  many  of  hem  be  as  false  as 
Sathanas,  and  teche  Goddis  hestis  and  Goddis  curs,  and  peynes 
of  helle  dewe  to  men  but  5 if  \€\  amende  hem  in  J)is  lif,  and 
what  blisse  men  schullen  have  for  kepyng  of  hem  ;  and  J)at  \€\ 
teche  trewely  Cristis  gospel  in  word  and  ensaumple  of  holy 
lif;  and  }>e  mercy  of  God,  and  hienesse  of  his  blissyng;  and 
blisse  to  alle  }>at  enden  in  ri3t  bileve,  and  hope  to  God,  and  ful 
charite  to  God  and  man.     God  graunte  us  fis  ende  :  Amen. 


337 


<=gC-|1©=>- 


W^ORKS.      VOL.  III. 


338 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


XXI 1 1. 

[THE   CHURCH  AND   HER 
MEMBERS.] 


[Two  good  texts  of  the  following  treatise  are  extant — one  at  the  end  of 
the  volume  Bodl.  788,  which  contains  the  Sermons;  the  other  in  the 
volume  of  Wyclif  tracts  at  Trin.  Coll.,  Dul^lin,  marked  C.  V.  6.  The 
Bodleian  MS.,  which  has  been  transcribed  for  the  present  edition,  appears, 
on  a  comparison  with  the  text  of  the  Dublin  MS.,  as  printed  by  Dr.  Todd 
in  his  Three  Treatises  by  John  Wyclyffe,  to  be  considerably  the  more  accu- 
rate of  the  two. 

The  treatise  is  ascribed  to  Wyclif  in  Bale's  catalogue  under  the  title 
'  De  Ecclesise  Dominio,'  inc.  '  Christi  ecclesia  est  ejus  sponsa.'  It  is 
impossible  to  say  whence  he  derived  this  title,  which  however  accu- 
rately enough  describes  the  work,  or  at  any  rate  all  the  early  portion 
of  it.  There  is  no  title,  but  only  a  descriptive  heading,  in  the  Bod- 
leian MS.  The  Dublin  MS.  gives  as  the  title  '  De  Ecclesia  et  Membris 
ejus.*  Perhaps  the  scribe  invented  this  title,  on  the  hint  given  him  by 
the  descriptive  heading  in  the  Bodleian  MS.  ; — ^perhaps  he  confounded 
the  present  work  with  the  long  Latin  treatise,  De  Ecclesia  et  Membris,  writ- 
ten by  Wyclif,  which  is  frequently  referred  to  by  Walden  in  his  Doctrinale, 
and  catalogued  by  Bale  with  the  incipit  '  Suppositis  dictis  de  fide  Catho- 
lic^.' That  Wyclif  was  the  author  of  the  present  treatise  I  see  little  reason  - 
to  doubt.  The  mere  fact  of  its  being  found  in  Bodl.  788  is  an  evidence  in 
its  favour,  since  all  the  remaining  contents  of  that  volume  are  unquestion- 
ably by  Wyclif.  The  style,  the  mention  of  '  Caymes  castelis  '  (p.  3-48,  note), 
the  language  held  respecting  the  Eucharist  in  Ch.  VI, — all  tend  to  identify 
Wyclif  as  the  writer. 

From  the  manner  in  which  the  expedition  to  Flanders  is  spoken  of  in 
Ch.  V,  as  an  event  of  the  recent  past,  I  should  infer  that  the  treatise  was 
written  in  the  early  part  of  the  year  1384.] 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 

Here  bigynnej?  a  tretice  ]?at  telli)?  ketowleche  sumwhat 
of  ])e  chieche  and  hir  membris. 

Ceistis  Chirche  in  his  Spouse,,  that  ha]?  J?ree  partis,  pe  first 
part  is  in  blis,  wi}>  Crist  heed  of  \t  Chirche,  and  contenej?  angels 
and  blessid  men  pat  now  ben  in  hevene.  pe  secounde  part  of 
|)is  Chirche  ben  seintis  in  purgatorie ;  and  fes  synnen  not  of 
^  })e  newe,  but  purgen  J^er  olde  synnes.  And  many  errours 
fallen  in  preiyng  for  })es  seintis ;  and  sij>  ]?ei  alle  been  deed  in 
bodi,  Cristis  wordis  may  be  taken  of  hem, — sue  we  Crist,  in 
oure  lif,  and  late  J^e  dede  birie  the  dede.  pe  J^ridde  part  of  the 
Chirche  ben  trewe  men  J>at  here  lyven,  }>at  schulen  be  aftir 
saved  in  hevene,  and  lyven  here  Cristen  mennis  liif.  pe  first 
part  is  clepid  over-comynge ;  J?e  myddil  is  clepid  slepyng ;  |?e 
}?ridde  is  clepid  fi^tinge  Chirche ;  and  alle  ])es  maken  o  Chirche. 
And  heed  of  J?is  Chirche  is  Crist,  bo])e  God  and  man ;  and-  )jis 
Chirche  is  modir  to  ech  man  ]?at  shal  be  saaf,  and  conteyne]? 
no  membre  but  oonli  men  ]?at  shal  be  saved.  For,  as  Crist 
vouchi]?-saaf  to  clepe  )?is  Chii'che  his  spouse,  so  he  clepij?  curside 
men  fendis,  as  was  Scarioth.  And  fer  be  it  fro  Cristene  men 
to  graunte  ]?at  Crist  haj?  weddid  }>e  fend ;  sith  Poul  seij?  in  oure 
bileve  ]?at  Crist  comounej?  not  wij)  Belial.  And  here  we  takun 
as  bileve  j)at  ech  member  of  holi  Churche  shal  be  saved  wij) 
Crist,  as  ech  membre  of  fe  fend  is  dampned ;  and  so  J?e  while 
we  fi^ten  here  and  witen  not  where  we  schal  be  saaf,  we  witen 
not  where  we  ben  membris  of  holi  Churche.  But  as  God  wole 
of  ))re  ]>ingis,  ))at  we  knowun  hem  not  in  certein,  so  he  wole  for 
greet  cause  })at  we  witen  not  where  we  ben  of  ])e  Chirche.  But 
as  ech  man  shal  hope  Jjat  he  schal  be  saaf  in  blisse,  so  he 
shulde  suppose  ])at  he  be  lyme  of  hoH  Chirche;  and  ))us  he 
shulde  love  holi  Chirche,  and  worschipe  it  as  his  modir. 

And  by  ))is  hope,  bine}>e  bileve,  shulden  be  two  synnes  fled  ; 
pride  of  men  and  coveitise,  bi  title  j^at  \€\  ben  men  of  holi 
Chirche.  For  no  pope  jjat  now  lyve]?  woot  where  he  be  of  J?e 
Chirche,  or  where  he  be  a  lym  of  the  fend,  to  be  dampned  wi]) 
Lucifer.  And  )?us  it  is  a  blynd  folic  Jjat  men  shulden  fi3te  for 
}je  pope  more  J^an  \€\  fi^ten  for  bileve ;  for  many  siche  fi5ten 


339 


Christ's  Church  | 
is  in  three 
parts: 

The  first  con- 
sists of  angvels 
and  saints  in 
heaven ;  the 
second  of 
saints  in  pur- 
gatory; the 
third  of  men 
that  shall  be 
saved,  here  on 
earth. 


Therefore  no 
man,  not  the 
Pope  himself, 
can  tell  while 
he  lives  whe- 
ther he  be  a 
member  of  the 
Church  or  not, 


34° 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


Sketch  of  the 
early  history  of 
the  Church  till 
Pope  Sylves- 


for  |)e  fend.  And  take  we  ])is  as  bileve,  or  treuj?e  }>at  is  next 
bileve,  fat  no  man  ])at  lyvej?  here  woot  whe})er  he  shal  be  saved 
or  dampned,  al  xif  he  hope  bynej?e  bileve  f>at  he  shal  be  saved 
in  heven.  ^\{  ony  man  be  tau^t  of  God  j^at  he  shal  be  saved 
in  hevene,  noon  or  fewe  men  ben  siche;  and  asaye  hem  bi 
hem  silf,  for  )?ei  schulden  have  noon  ^  evidence  to  seie  \2X  God 
ha])  told  hem  Jjis.  pe  first  bileve  J^at  we  schulden  have  is,  J?at  Crist 
is  God  and  man ;  and  how  he  haj?  him  bi  his  Goddhede,  and 
how  he  lyvede  here  by  his  manhede.  And  jjus  oure  hope  and 
bileve  ben  temperid  in  Cristen  men. 

Cap.  II. 

But  aftir  J)es  two  godliche  virtues,  we  taken  sumjjing  as 
bileve,  and  summing  bi  comune  croniclis ;  and  hopen  })at  charite 
move]?  us  here.  After  that  Crist  hadde  dwelt  here  long  ynow3 
wij>  his  apostlis,  aboute  J^ree  and  ])ritti  ^eer,  as  him  likide,  aftir- 
ward  he  was  kild  of  ])e  Jewes,  and  aftirward  })e  ])ridde  day  oure 
God  aroos  from  de]?  to  lyf.  And  aftir  ]?e  fourtijje  day  fro  ]>at 
he  was  schewid  to  his  disciplis,  Jesus  stiede  in  to  hevene,  and 
rengnede  ever  ]?ere  wi]?  his  Fadir.  And  so  J)e  first  part  of  \q 
Chirche  rengne])  }>us  in  hevene  with  Crist;  ])e  seeounde  part 
slepi}>  3it,  as  longe  as  Crist  liki]? ;  J?e  f>ridde  part  of  ])e  Chirche 
fi^tij)  here  aftir  Crist,  and  takij)  ensaumple  and  weie  of  him  to 
come  to  hevene  as  he  cam.  And  ever  more  ])e  HooH  Goost 
governej?  wi}>  hem  al  Cristis  Chirche ;  for  as  ]?es  ])ree  persones 
of  God  ben  o  God  and  not  manye,  so  alle  dedes  and  werkes 
of  ]pe  Trinite  mai  not  be  departid  from  o])ir.  For  as  al  ])at  ])e 
Fadir  wole,  ])e  Sone  wole,  and  ])is  Goost  wole,  — so  al  ]>at  o  per- 
sone  doi]),  ]?es  ))ree  persones  done.  Aftir  ]?at  Crist  was  stied 
in  to  hevene,  aboute  ten  dales,  as  he  hadde  ordeynid,  he  sente 
doun  ]?e  Holi  Goost,  and  movede  aposths  to  do  his  dedes ;  and 
}?ei  wenten  and  prechiden  faste  among  Jewis  and  hej^en  men. 
But  Jewis  a^enstonden  hem  faste,  and  he]?ene  men  token  him 
wij)  wille,  and  resceyveden  j?e  Holy  Goost,  and  bicamen  Cristene 
men.  And  ])us  apostlis  of  Crist  filliden  bi  Goddis  grace  ]?is 
world.  But  longe  aftir,  as  croniclis  seien,  \t  fend  hadde  envie 
herto ;  and  bi  Silvestre  preest  of  Rome  he  brou3te  in  a  newe 
1  omitted  :  CC. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS, 


341 


..gile,  and  moved  })e  emperour  of  Rome  to  d^Qs^e  Jjis  Chirche 
in  |>is  preest.  For,  as  the  fend  tau^te  })is  kyng,  J?is  dede 
cam  of  greet  almes ;  for  \€i  J^ou^ten  not  how  jje  Chirche  shulde 
sue  Crist  in  his  lawe.  But  trewe  men  supposen  here, 
]?at  bo])e  jjis  emperour  and  ])is  preest  weren  moved  of  God  bi 
tymes  to  trowe  J^at  ]?ei  sjnneden  in  )?is  dede.  But  bisie  we  us 
not  where  Jjei  ben  seintis,  and  how  ]?ei  were  J?us  moved  of 
God;  for  al  })is  is  bynejje  bileve,  and  men  mai  trowe  it  ^\i\€\ 
wolen. 

Whan  J)is  lif  was  J)us  changid,  J)e  name  of  this  preest  w^as 
changid ;  he  w^as  not  clepid  Cristis  apostle,  ne  hi^  disciple  of 
Crist,  but  he  was  clepid  the  pope,  and  heed  of  al  hooH  Chirche'; 
and  aftirward  camen  oJ?er  names  bi  feynyng  of  ypocritis;  as 
sum  men  seien,  ]?at  he  is  even  wij?  the  manheed  of  Crist,  and 
hierste  viker  of  Crist  to  do  in  er]?e  whatever  him  liki); ;  and 
summe  florishen  oj^ir  names,  and  seien  Jjat  he  is  moost  blissed 
fadir.  But  cause  herof  ben  beneficis  J>at  ])is  preest  ^yvej?  to 
men ;'  for  Symon  Magus  travailide  nevere  more  in  symonie  fan 
j?es  preestis  doon.  And  so  God  wolde  sufFre  no  lenger  J)e  fend 
to  regne  oonli  in  00  siche  preest,  but,  for  synne  J?at  \€\  hadden 
do,  made  devisioun  amongis  two,  so  J?at  men  my^ten  li3tlier  in 
Cristis  name  overcome  ])es  boj^e.  For  as  o  virtu  is  strengere 
if  it  be  gedrid,  j?an  if  it  be  scatrid,  so  o  malis  is  strenger  whanne 
it  is  gederid  in  o  persone,  and  it  is  of  lesse  streng)?e  whanne  it 
is  departid  in  manye ;  for  ]?anne  oon  helpi]>  a3en  ano])ir  to  con- 
founde  Anticrist. 

And  J?is  move]?  pore  preestis  to  speke  now  herteli  in  Jjis 
mater.  For  whanne  ])at  God  wole  helpe  his  Chirche,  and  men 
ben  slowe  and  wole  not  worche,  ])is  sloujje  is  to  be  dampned 
for  many  causis  in  idil  men.  And  myche  more  ben  \€\  damp- 
nable,  }>at  letten  Goddis  lawe  to  shyne.  pes  men  taken  noo 
witnes  of  adversaries  to  })is  pope,  and  ben  Jewis  and  Sarasynes, 
Grekis  and  Yngdis,  \\dj?  many  o}>ir;  but  J^ei  taken  ]?e  lyf  of 
Crist  as  bileve,  and  ])eron  grounden  hem ;  and  ]?us  j^ei  seien,  5if 
J?is  pope  contrarie]?  to  Cristis  lyf,  he  is  J?e  moste  fendis  viker 
and  Anticrist  }?at  is  here;  and  sich  Anticrist  and  noon  oJ?ir 
]5enken  many  J?at  Goddis  lawe  spekij?  of.  Bileve  tellij?  how  Joon 
seide,  Jjat  now  ben  many  Anticristis ;   but  ^if  oon  is  moost  of 


After  whom 
the  Papacy  was 
corrupted 
more  and 
more, 


so  that  the 
poor  priests 
now  speak  out 
boldly  jmd 
declare  the 
Pope  to  be 
Antichrist 


343 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


Christ,  not  the 
Pope,  is  the 
true  and  sole 
head  of  the 
Church. 


o])ir,  {)at  gile]?  man  bi  ypocrisie.  For  oon  mai  seie  l^at  he  aloone 
is  Cristis  viker  here  in  erj^e,  and  he  haj?  power  singuler  to  taxe 
gracis  as  him  likij),  for  so  dide  Petir,  aftir  Crist,  and  many  o]?ir 
after  Petir;  and  fus  ]?er  is  oon  emperour,  and  oon  heed  in  a 
comunnete.  But  here  |?enken  trewe  men  J^at  ]?e  fend  failli}> 
here,  and  goij?  unstable  bi  two  weies,  and  reversi}>  Goddis  lawe. 
First  shulde  ]?e  fend  grounde  J^at  |?is  pope  is  Petris  viker,  and 
so  viker  of  Crist,  in  ]?at  ]?at  he  sue]?  Crist.  For  bileve  techij) 
]?at  J?e  chesyng  maad  of  man  is  fals  signe,  and  incompleet  for 
to  make  Cristis  viker ;  but  workis  of  a  mannis  lyf  shulde  make 
a  man  sue  Crist.  And  |?us  Crist  biddij?  }?e  Jewes,  J?at  j?ei  shulden 
trowe  to  his  werkes ;  and  jjus  verry  Cristis  viker  shulde  be  por- 
erste  man  of  oJ?ir,  and  mekerst  of  opir  men,  and  moost  traveile 
in  Cristis  Chirche.  But  chesyng  of  cardinalis,  and  parting  of 
benefices,  and  takyng  of  newe  names,  ben  ful  fer  fro  ]?is  staat. 
pus  lyvede  Petir,  aftir  Crist ;  and  chalengide  no  siche  names, 
ne  to  be  heed  of  holi  Chirche,  but  how  mekely  he  my^te  serve 
it.  But  ech  apostle  in  his  cuntre  wrou^te  aftir  Cristis  lawe, 
and  noon  of  hem  hadde  aftir  nede  to  come  to  Petir  to  be  con- 
fermed.  But  oonhede  on  heed  of  holi  Chirche  is  Jesus  Crist 
here  wi})  us,  Jjat  is  ever  in  j^e  myddil  of  }>ree  ])at  ben  gedrid  in 
his  name.  And  |>at  man  is  out  of  resoun,  J^at  trowij?  ]?at  Cle- 
ment in  Petris  tyme  was  more  J?an  Joon  evaungelist,  or  any 
apostle  that  lyvede  wi]?  him.  And  ^if  we  trowen  to  croniclis 
here,  hou  Jjat  Clement  left  his  office  and  procuride  oJ?ir  to  helpe 
him,  as  Poul  helpide  Petir,  and  Petre  suffride  mekeli  })at  Poul 
snybbide  him  whanne  he  erride,  we  mai  see  opunli  how  |)es 
popis  fallen  fro  Petir,  and  myche  more  }>ei  fallen  fro  Crist  j^at 
my3te  not  erre  in  onyjjing.  Trowe  we  J>at  Crist  lefte  to  preche, 
and  seelde  officis  of  \t  Chirche,  or  wolde  juge  of  unknowun 
[)ing  to  him,  or  make  him  more  Jjan  he  was  ?  Alle  Jjes  ))ingis 
]?at  popis  doon  techen  }>at  J^ei  ben  Anticristis ;  for  Crist  my^te 
not  take  a  name,  but  ^if  it  were  mekenes  and  treuj?e. 

And  5if  j^ou  seie  fat  Cristis  Chirche  mut  have  an  heed  here 
in  erj?e,  soij?  it  is,  for  Crist  is  heed,  J^at  muste  be  here  wij?  his 
Chirche  unto  J)e  day  of  dome,  and  everywhere  bi  his  God- 
hede.  For  si])  vertue  of  a  kyng  mut  be  strecchid  by  al  his 
rewme,  myche  more  jje  vertue  of  Crist  is  comuned  wij)  al  his 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS, 


343 


children.  And  5if  pou  seie  ]?at  Crist  mut  nedis  have  sich  a 
viker  here  in  er]?e,  denye  ]?ou  Cristis  power,  and  make  J>is  fend 
above  Crist.  For  bileve  techij?  us,  )?at  noo  man  mai  grounde 
J)is  viker  oonly  on  Cristis  lawe,  but  on  presumpcioun  of  man ; 
and  sich  hyenesse  of  emperours  ha]?  destried  her  empire ;  and, 
^if  )?at  God  wole,  Jjes  popes  shal  destrie  hemsilf,  ^he,  here, — for 
no  drede  \€\  ben  distried  in  helle  bi  jugement  of  Crist.  And 
so  whatever  reasoun  men  maken  of  Crist,  of  Petir,  or  o)?er  good 
ground,  it  goij?  opinli  a5en  sich  a  pope  for  jje  grete  diversite ; 
and  so  whanne  ]?es  men  failen  resoun,  \€\  tristen  to  mannis 
helpe,  and  feynen  bi  ipocrisie  how  myche  good  \€\  don  a5en. 
But  God  cursij)  by  Jeremye  hem  that  affien  f>us  in  man. 

Cap.  III. 

Here  men  taken  sumwhat  soi]?,  and  doon  dremyng  to  ]>is 
treu]?e.  pei  seien  soJ)li,  l?at  Cristis  Chirche  is  his  hous  to  kepe 
his  meyne ; — and  summe  in  ])is  hous  ben  sones,  j?at  shulen  ever 
dwelle  in  hevene  and  take  her  fadris  heritage,  3he,  ^if  }?ei  tres- 
passen  for  a  tyme, — and  summe  ben  servauntis  in  ])is  hous, 
al  ^if  \t\  shulen  aftir  be  dampned.  And  so  it  is  greet  diversite 
to  be  in  ]?is  Chirche ;  and  of  }>is  Chirche  )?es  wordis  ben  so]?li 
seid,  and  notabli  to  mannis  kynde.  But  whanne  dremes  come 
aftir,  ]?ei  maken  a  fals  feyned  tale,  pei  seien, — whanne  Crist 
wente  to  hevene,  his  manhed  wente  in  pilgrymage,  and  made 
Petir,  wij)  al  fes  popis,  his  stewardis  to  reule  his  hous,  and  ^af 
hem  ful  power  herto  bifore  alle  oJ)ir  preestis  alyve.  Here  ]?is 
dreem  takun  amys  turnej?  up  so  doun  \t  Chirche.  For  Petir 
was  a  trewe  help  wi]?  Poul  and  Joon  and  o]>ir  apostlis;  but 
noon  of  jjes  servauntis  dremeden  Jjat  he  was  heed  of  hooli 
Chirche,  or  ];at  he  lovede  Crist  more  ))an  ony  of  his  bre]?ren 
dide.  It  is  licli  to  many  men  )?at  Petir  lovede  Crist  more  in  a 
maner  J^an  ony  of  ]?es  o\\x  apostlis,  but  he  was  tau^t  to  strive 
not  herfore ;  for  o]?ir  apostlis  in  oJ?ir  maner  loveden  more  Crist 
J7an  dide  Petir, — as  Poul  traveilide  more  in  ])e  Chirche, — and 
Joon  lovede  Crist  more  hevenliche.  For  Joones  love  was  in 
quiet  and  clene,  as  seintes  loven  in  heven.  Which  of  )?es  is 
more  hi3  now  is  but  foli  us  to  dreme.     Wei  we  witen  J?at  Crist 


The  theory  of 
the  hiffh  papal 
party  has  no 
foundation  in 
Scripture. 


> 


344 


Canonization 
no  proof  of 
holiness,  nor 
election  to  the 
Popedom  of 
election  to 
bliss. 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 

wole  taken,  of  what  state  ]jat  him  liki|j,  a  man,  aftir  ]>at  he  is 
worJ)i,  to  more  blis  or  more  joie ;  but  aftir  bileve  of  hooli  writt, 
])at  telli])  of  Petre  and  o)>ir  apostlis  J?at  \ei  ben  now  blessid  in 
hevene, — for  noon  fel  but  Scarioth,— taken  we  biside  bileve  of 
many  o)?ir,  J)at  \ti  ben  seintis,  as  of  Clement  and  Laurence, 
and  o))ir  J)at  J)e  Legended  spekij?  of.  And  of  summe  we  han 
more  evidence,  and  of  sum  lasse,  bine)?e  bileve. 

And  summe  ]?enken  a  greet  evidence,  Jjat  if  }?e  pope  canonise 
)>is  man,  )?anne  he  mut  nedis  be  seint  in  hevene.  But  trowe 
]jei  ]?is  men  ]?at  wolen.  Wei  Y  woot  ]?at  Jjese  popis  may  erre 
and  synne,  as  Petre  dide,  and  ^it  Petre  dremede  not  ]?us,  to 
shewe  )>at  men  ben  seintis  in  hevene.  But  it  mai  falle  ])at 
manie  men  Jjat  ben  canonisid  by  Jjes  popis  ben  depe  dampned 
in  helle,  for  ])ei  disseyven  and  ben  disseyved.  Afferme  we  not 
as  bileve,  ])at  5if  a  man  be  chosen  pope,  j^an  he  is  chosen  to 
blis,  as  he  is  here  clepid  blessederste  fadir.  And  many  trowen 
bi  ]?er  werkes  )?at  )?es  ben  depperst  dampned  in  helle.  For  J?ei 
chargen  hemsilf  as  ypocritis,  boJ?e  in  office  and  in  name ;  and 
so  fei  sitten  in  })e  firste  place  here,  and  at  Jjc  laste  day  of  dome 
))ei  schulen  be  in  ])e  laste  place,  j^at  is,  ]?e  depperste  place  of 
helle.  Holde  we  us  in  bondis  of  bileve,  }>at  stondij)  in  general 
wordis  and  in  condicionel  wordis,  and  juge  we  not  here  foliH. 
But  we  mai  seie  bi  supposal,  }>at  we  gesse  ]?at  it  is  so;  and 
whoever  ha]?  more  evidence,  his  part  shulde  sunner  be  sup- 
posid.  But  here  ben  ]?ree  grete  heresies  ]?at  disseyven  many 
men.  First,  men  supposen  l^at  ech  pope  is  ]?e  moost  blessid 
fadir;  but  ]?is  speche  lasti]?  but  a  while,  til  ))at  ]?e  pope  mai 
avaunce  men.  But  heere  we  seien  so))ly,  })at  })es  men  ])at  clepen 
hem  blessid,  disseiven  hem  and  flateren  hem,  for  J?ei  hopen  to 
have  wynnyng  of  hem.  For  whe]?ir  is  j?is  pope  moost  blessid 
in  J)is  liif  or  aftir  ]?is  lyf  .f*  He  is  not  blessid  in  J)is  lif,  for  blis 
fallif>  to  ]?e  to)?ir  lyf,  and  ))is  lif  is  ful  of  sorowe  and  synne,  fat 
suffrij?  not  blis  wi]>  it.  And  ^if  men  speken  largeli,  many  men 
ben  here  more  blessid  jjan  Jje  pope;  for  hyenes  of  })is  state 
maki))  not  bi  himsilf  man  blessid,  for  ellis  ech  pope  were  blissed, 
al  ^if  he  were  falsly  chosen  of  fendis ;  and  Scarioth  shulde  be 
blissed,  for  he  was  chosen  of  Crist  himself.  And  it  is  no  nede 
a  The  Legenda  A  jirea  of  Jacobus  de  Voragine. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


345 


biiity  is  a 
heresy, 


to  argue  here  for  to  disprove  )?is  foli,  for  it  is  more  fals  in  him-  ' 
silf  j?an  ou^t  ))at  men  shulen  bringe  herof.  | 

pe  to]?ir  heresie,  \2x  come)?  of  |)is,  disceyve]?  many  simple  |  '^^^^^f?;}-^'!^"^ 
men ;  J?at  ^if  )?e  pope  determine  ou^t,  j-anne  it  is  soij?  and  to 
bileve.  But  Lord!  where  ech  pope  be  more  and  beter  wi|) 
God  Jjan  was  Petre  ?  But  he  erride  ofte,  and  synnede  myche ;. 
3he,  aftir  he  hadde  take  J?e  Holi  Goost.  Lord!  wher  Crist 
clepide  hym  Sathanas,  and  bad  him  go  aftir  him,  and  ^it  ]?er 
was  no  cause  of  his  errour,  wherfore  Crist  clepide  him  Jjus  ? 
And  so  whanne  Petre  denyede  Crist,  and  swore  fals  for  a  wom- 
mans  vois,  he  erride  in  ]?is  foul  synne ;  and  j^erfore  he  wepte 
aftir.  Also,  aftir  takyng  of  J?e  Holi  Goost,  Petre  erride,  as 
Poul  sei)),  whanne  he  wolde  not  dele  with  Gentiles  for  tendir- 
nesse  of  ]?e  Jewis.  Lord !  wher  men  of  worse  liif  mai  sunner 
erre  in  }>er  jugement !  And  ever  ]?e  moo  J)at  ben  of  siche,  ever 
J)e  sunner  mai  \€\  erre ;  for  Scarioth  made  oj^ir  aposdis  to  erre 
in  companye  of  Crist,  and  it  were  to  fals  a  feynyng,  to  seie  ))at 
holi  Chirche  hangi]?  on  })es,  for  J?is  feyner  can  not  teche  J?at  ony 
of  Jjes  is*,  of  }>e  Chirche.  And  of  J>is  comen  many  heresies, 
.  as  of  assoilingis  and  indulgencis,  and  cm*singis,  wij>  feyned  par- 
dons, ])at  make  many  men  have  conscience  and  trowe  more  to 
j?e  pope  in  sich  a  cause  J?an  \€\  trowe  to  fe  Gospel.  And  men 
moten  erre  here  in  bileve,  and  take  ofte  fals  as  bileve.  pis 
heresie  schulden  men  flee,  for  fals  mainteynyng  makij?  heretikes, 
and  to  assente  wi)>  suche  falseheed  bringij?  in  ofte  heresies ;  and 
Crist  wole  not  assente  wij)  })es,  for  \€\  mai  not  be  soi}>. 


Cap.  IV. 

Se  we  ferjier  how  ]>is  stiward  may  erre  in  ordenaunce  of  the 
Chirche ;  and  bigynne  we  at  |?e  freris,  fe  which  ben  brou^t 
last  in.  It  is  licly  jjat  Cristis  preestis,  Jjat  stooden  til  ]?at  monkes 
comen,  turneden  to  myche  fro  Cristis  lawe,  and  monkes  lyve- 
den  ]>an  wel  beter.  But  )?es  monkes  stoden  awhile,  and  turne- 
den souner  to  coveitise ;  and  aftir  monkes  camen  Jjes  chanouns ; 
and  after  chanouns  camen  freris.  And  so  greet  defaute  was  in 
prestis  bifore,  \2X  ]?es  newe  ordris  camen  in.  But  as  )jes  newe 
ordris  changen  in  clo})is,  in  bokis  ^.  wi}>  o]?er  ritis,  so  \€\  varien 
^  So  in  CO ;  hecMs,  A. 


with  other 
opinions  con- 
nected with  it. 


Monks,  canons, 
and  friars  have 
been  succes- 
sively brouf^ht 
in,  only  to  the 
burden  of  the 
Church. 


346 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


The  clergy  are 
ever  absorbing 
more  wealth, 
and  more  land. 


in  Goddis  office  fro  fat  l>at  Crist  bad  his  preestis  do.  So,  ^if 
apostlis  weren  now  alyve,  and  sawen  {;us  preestis  serve  in  Jje 
Chirche,  ])ei  wolden  not  clepe  hem  Cristis  officeris,  but  officeris 
of  Anticrist.  Suppose  we  J?at  ]?es  newe  ordris,  stondinge  alle 
}?es  olde  ordris,  ben  chargious  to  j?e  Chirche  in  worldli  goodis 
j?at  ))ei  dispenden.  For  noumbre  of  preestis  brou^t  in  bi  Crist 
was  sufficient  for  Cristis  hous,  and  for  )?e  same  hous  ben  now 
moo  and  worse;  and  ]>is  hous  is  lesse  by  hem.  Who  mai 
denye  J?at  ne  \is  noumbre  of  ]?es  officeris  is  now  to  myche } 
And  so  }>is  stiward  ha]?  chargid  ]?is  hous  wi})  newe  rehetours  a, 
to  harm  of  it.  And  sij?  Poul  techi]?  in  bileve,  Jtat  J?ei  shulden 
not  be  chargious  to  )?e  Chirche,  and  j)at  ])ei  have  no  power  but 
to  profite,  not  to  harme,  it  semej?  bi  good  resoun  ]?at  ])is  stiward 
passi]?  his  power,  and  failij?  in  governaunce  of  J^e  Chirche,  a^en 
fe  reule  ]?at  Crist  ha]>  tau3t ;  and  so  he  is  not  Cristis  stiward, 
but  stiward  of  Anticrist.  What  man  can  not  se  J^at  a  stiward 
of  an  erfely  lord,  [)>at]  ^  whanne  many  servauntis  done  amys, 
holdi]?  stille,  and  bryngi]?  in  newe  ]?at  done  werse  bi  litil  tyme, 
faili})  foule  in  his  office?  And  so  servauntis  upon  servantis 
weren  charious  to  J)is  hous;  and  ^if  ))er  firste- office  was  good, 
and  ]?is  is  now  al  o]?er,  j^e  changynge  of  ]3es  newe  rehetours 
shulde  do  harm  to  J>is  hous.  And  ]?us  it  stondij?  in  J?e  Chirche 
of  J?es  newe  servauntis  l?at  ben  brou^t  in. 

And  newe  lawes  ben  maad  to  hem,  and  newe  customes  ])at 
}>ei  bryngen  in,  by  whiche  ]?ei  spuylen  on  newe  J^e  puple,  but 
fruyt  of  l^er  profit  faili]?.  And  si|>  Petre  hadde  not  ])is  power,  ne 
Poul,  ne  ony  o})ir  apostle,  }?is  stiward  of  Anticrist  mut  nede 
come  in  bi  J?e  fend.     O !  si]?  in  \q  olde  lawe  weren  preestis  and 


a  Several  explanations  have  been 
proposed  of  this  word,  the  general 
sense  of  which  clearly  is  '  servants,' 
'  menials.'  But  since  rehete  and  re- 
hetinge,  in  the  sense  of  '  refresh,'  are 
of  frequent  occurrence  in  Chaucer, 
the  proposal  of  Dr.  Todd  to  con- 
sider rehetours  a  noun  of  the  agent 
formed  from  rehete,  and  to  derive  it 
from  the  old  French  word  rehaiter, 
rehetier,  seems  to  me  preferable  to 


the  ingenious  solutions  proposed  by- 
writers  in  '  Notes  and  Queries.'  Haii 
meant  enjoyment,  hatter  to  enjoy  one- 
self ;  therefore  rehetours  might  mean 
lazy  apolaustic  fellows,  idlers,  super- 
numeraries with  little  or  no  work  to 
do, — a  class  which  in  those  days  of 
'  maintenance '  infested,  as  we  know, 
the  great  country  houses  and  castles 
of  the  nobility.  See  Todd's  Three 
Treatises  by  Wycliffe,     Dublin,  1857. 


^  supplied  conjecturally. 


CONTROVERSIAL   TRACTS. 


347 


dekenes  mjche  chargid  in  berynge  of  }?e  tabernacle,  in  sleying 
of  beestis,  and  o)?ir  ritis,  and  3it  ]?e  kynrede  of  Levi  sufficide  to 
al  j)es  officis,  myche  more  in  tyme  of  grace,  whanne  Goddis 
service  is  lifter !  And  so,  sij?  {?e  tenfe  part  of  J^e  fruyt  sufficide 
for  al  pes  cierkes,  how  shulde  not  ]5is  suffice  now  for  fewer 
clerkis  and  lesse  of  spensis.  We  mai  not  pynche  at  ]?is  lawe, 
j)at  God  himsilf  ordeynede  first,  but  3if  we  putten  blasphemye 
on  God  J)at  he  ordeynede  folily.  And  herfore  Cristis  apostlis, 
and  o}>ere  disciplis  longe  aftir  hem,  were  not  bisie  aboute  dymes, 
but  helden  hem  paied  on  a  litil,  }>at  Jje  puple  ^af  hem  redily. 
And  so  housing  and  clo)?ing  Jjat  Poul  sei]?  shulde  be  ynow^. 
But  now  men  seien  ]?at  preestis  ben  moost  gredy  purchasours 
in  er])e,  and  han  to  hem  J?e  fourj^e  part  |)at  shulde  be  in  Jjer 
bre]?eren  hondis ;  and  J)is  \€\  seien  is  mortified,  and  patrimonie 
of  Crist  ]3at  was  done  on  ]?e  cros.  And  to  defende  J)is  patri- 
monie ben  manye  newe  lawes  ordeyned,  and  cursing  for  sacri- 
legie  in  whomever  pat  revej>  pis  rente.  And,  for  prestis  han 
ynou3  of  suche  goodis  mortified,  perfore  pis  styward  chafferip 
wip  appropryng  of  chirchis ;  and  so  pe  puple  dwellip  untau^t, 
and  unlerned  in  goostli  helpe.  Who  shulde  be  blamyd  herfore 
but  pis  stiward,  pat  doip  pis  wipouten  leeve  of  pe  lord,  but 
opynli  a^ens  his  biddynge  ?  ^\i  ony  man  shal  be  dampned,  pis 
styward  shal  be  depperste  dampned ;  and  alg^s  for  he  feynep 
power,  and  newe  lawes  pat  God  made  never.  And  ^it  pis  blas- 
pheme gabbip  upon  God,  and  seip  pat  al  pis  is  Goddis  werk  ; 
but  in  pe  Olde  Testament  shulden  siche  blasfemes  be  stoned 
to  deep.  And  pus  bringing  in  of  newe  ordres,  wip  service  pat 
pe  pope  confermep,  techen  pat  he  is  traitour  to  God,  and 
turnep  pe  Chirche  up  so  doun. 

Lord!  where  he  were  not  chargid  at  pe  fulle,  as  apostlis 
weren }  but  ^if  he  took  more  charge  upon  him  bi  his  newe 
foundun  ordenaunce,  certis  pe  apostilis  dursten  not  do  pis,  and 
5it  pei  hadden  more  grace  of  God,  and  traveiliden  more  bisiii  to 
growyng  and  profiting  of  pe  Chirche.  And  no  drede  al  pat  pe 
pope  hap  over,  more  pan  hadden  apostilis  of  Crist,  he  shal 
streitly  rekene  perfore,  sip  Crist  is  Lord  of  alle  lordis.  And  so 
it  semep  pat  pe  pope  is  more  holden  to  Crist  pan  was  Petre,  bi 
as  myche  as  he  hap  more  of  staat  and  worldly  goodis.     But 


The  more  the 
Pope  arrogates 
to  himself,  tlie 
heavier  reckon- 
ing he  ^vill  have 
to  render. 


348 


WYCLIF'S  WORKS. 


The  misdeeds 
of  friars, 


sum  men  seien,  )>at  state  in  helle,  and  punisching  for  J)is  J^efte, 
moten  maken  asee]?  herfore,  si]>  good  service  faili))  here.  And 
so  ))e  pope  sem'e]?  wood,  and  blyndid  by  ]?e  fend,  whanne  he 
takij?  more  charge  upon  him  |)an  he  nedi}?  for  to  have,  or  here 
or  in  J)e  tojjer  world,  for  ony  state  \2X  God  ha])  orde)^ned.  And 
t>us  it  seme])  \2X  he  dispeire]?  of  comyng  of  j^e  day  of  dome, 
as  3if  he  caste  nevere  to  rekene  wi}?  God  ])at  muste  be  heierste 
Juge.  And  so,  ^if  men  avise  hem  wel,  but  ^if  }?ei  han  o]>ir 
title  })an  ben  bullis  of  Jje  pope,  or  graunt  of  him,  \€\  shulen  be 
dampned.  And  ))is  title  of  Crist  oure  God  were  ynow3  to 
Cristene  men,  as  it  was  in  Petris  tyme,  al3if  ]>e  pope  shewide 
not  })us  his  power  bi  fals  bullis  of  Petre  and  Poule,  J?at  semen  to 
be  a^ens  Cristis  lordschip.  pus  mai  men  see,  fat  })is  styward 
doi))  more  J^an  he  ha]?  leeve  to  do ;  and  ]?es  newe  ordris, 
groundid  on  him,  and  not  on  grauntyng  of  Cristis  lawe,  ben 
a  flok  of  ])e  fendis  children,  but  ^if  \€\  leeven  ]>is  mannis  title. 

Cap.  V. 

And  here  men  noten  many  harmes  |)at  freris  don  in  ]?e 
Chirche,  pei  spuylen  })e  puple  many  weies  by  ipocrisie  and 
oJ)er  leesingis,  and  bi  ])is  spuylyng  \€\  bilden -Caymes.  Ca,stdis_^,; 
to  harme  of  cuntreis.  pei  stelen  pore  mennis  children,  ]?at  is 
werse  jjan  stele  an  oxe ;  and  \€\  stelen  gladlich  eires, — ^Y  leeve 
to  speke  of  stelyng  of  wymmen,— and  ])us  ]?ei  maken  londis 
bareyne  for  wi])drawyng  of  werkmen,  not  al  oonli  in  defaute  of 
cornes,  but  in  beestis  and  o]?er  good.  For  \€\  reversen  Goddis 
ordenaunce  in  [?re  partis  of  J)e  Chirche ;  ]?ei  maken  men  to  trowe 
fals  of  hem,  and  letten  almes  to  be  ^ovun  bi  Goddis  lawe ;  and 
f>us  \€\  letten  bi  gabbingis  office  and  lif  of  trewe  prestis,  for  J^ei 
letten  hem  for  to  preche,  and  speciali  Cristis  gospel,  pei 
moven  londis  to  bateilis,  and  pesible  persones  to  plete;  \€\ 
maken  many  divorsis,  and  many  matrimonies,  unleveful,  bojje 


a  Caymes  Castelis.']  Dr.  Todd,  in 
a  note  on  this  phrase,  quotes  a  pas- 
sage in  lib.  iv.  cap.  33  of  the  Tri- 
alogus,  in  which  Wyclif  explains  that 
he  calls  the  monasteries  of  the  friars 
'  Caym's   castles,'  because  the  four 


letters  of  the  word  *  Caym  '  (which 
Wyclif  imagined  to  be  the  right  way 
of  speUing  Cain),  designate  respec- 
tively the  Carmelites,  the  Augusti- 
nians,  the  Jacobites  (or  Dominicans), 
and  the  Minorites  (Franciscans). 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS, 


349 


bi  lesingis  maad  to  parties,  and  bi  pryvelegies  of  )?e  court.  Y 
leeve  to  speke  of  ^ting  j?at  \€\  done  in  o  lond  and  o}>ir,  and  of 
o})ir  bodili  harmes  \2X  tungis  suffisen  not  to  telle.  For  as  myche 
as  ]?ei  dispenden,  as  myche  and  more  fei  barmen  rewmes ; — as 
\€\  ban,  in  J)is  laste  journe  J>at  Englisbemen  maden  into  Flandres% 
spuylid  om*e  rewme  of  men  and  money  more  }>an  Jje  freris  ban 
wij?  bem.  And  no  drede  to  Englisbemen,  }>at  ne  \€\  ban  pro- 
curid  ]>is  iourney,  bo})e  in  precbing,  and  in  gedering,  and  in 
traveiling  of  l?er  owne  persone.  And  freris  }>at  semen  un- 
coupable  bere,  moten  algatis  graunte  j?er  assent ;  for  oo  maner 
of  consent  is,  wbanne  a  man  is  stille  and  telli})  not.  And  ^if 
freris  forsaken  ))is  now,  and  seien  }jat  Jjei  assentiden  not  berto, 
\€\  usen  })er  olde  crafte  of  gabbing,  and  encresen  barm  algatis. 
But  as  spiritual  )>ing  is  betere  j^an  bodili  J>ing  J>at  we  mai  see,  so 
spiritual  barm  is  more  ]?an  bodili  barm  j^at  \€\  don.  First 
wban  ]?ei  maken  freris,  )?at  ben  worsid  bi  }?is  makyng,  j^ei  don 
bem  a  goostH  barm,  and  al  mankynde  wberof  \€\  ben.  And  if 
}?ou  seist  ]?at  noone  freris  ben,  but  ^if  \€\  ben  );e  betere  to  God, 
for  bolynesse  of  ]?er  companye  maki|?  many  goode  J;at  ellis 
wolde  be  shrewis,  stryve  we  not  wber  ])is  mai  falle,  but  graunte 
we  on  J?e  to]?er  side,  J?at  many  wolden  be  lesse  yvel  out  of  ])es 
ordris  }>an  in  bem.  And  si]?  J?ei  witen  not  wbo  is  beterid  by 
entryng  into  ]?es  ordris,  \€\  doon  as  a  blynd  man  castij)  bis  staf, 
to  brynge  ony  to  f^er  ordre.  Crist  seij)  ]?at  Pbarisees  ben  to 
blame  for  J^is  dede,  and  Scariotb  was  }>e  worse  for  beyng  in  J)is 
boli  cumpanye ;  for  ellis  be  badde  not  jjus  traied  Crist,  and  be 
mooste  unkynde  traitour.  And  si|?  coventis  of  freris  ben 
sbrewis,  for  jje  more  part  or  mocbe,  no  woundir  ^if  ]?ei  en- 
venyme  men  ]?at  comen  }>us  unto  bem.  For  \t\  moven  men  to 
olde  errours  ]?at  j?ei  ban  bolde  among  bem,  as  Jjei  tellen  to  greet 
avaunt  fat  \€\  ben  cbarious  to  ]?e  puple  in  ])er  sinful  begging. 
And  ^it  \€\  blasfemen  in  Crist,  and  seien  ]?at  be  beggide  fus,  to 
mainteyne  );er  owne  synne.  Sucbe  blasfemyes  ben  foundun 
and  contynnued  in  j?es  sectis,  J?at  unne)?es  \€\  ben  ever  purgid 
fro  service  J^at  ]?ei  ben  brou^t  in. 

As  Crist  tecbijj  in  bis  gospel,  bow  })at  men  sbulde  snybbe  fer 

*  See  the  prefatory  notice 


who  are  afraid 
to  reprove  vice, 


35° 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


and  set  their 
own  rule  above 
the  law  of  God. 


brej?eren  bi  J?re  tymes,  and  aftirward  forsake  }ex  companye  as 
venym,  J^es  sectis  ban  fordone  ]?is  gospel ;  for  neij^er  ])ei  doren 
))us  snybbe  j)er  breferen,  ne  forsake  hem  at  })e  fourJ?e  tyme ;  for 
5if  ]jei  done  })ei  shulen  be  deed  or  emprisonyd  longe  tyme,  or 
ellis  hastili  be  kild.  And  whanne  synne  rengnej?  among  grete 
men,  and  }ei  dreden  of  worldli  harm,  }ti  doren  not  snybbe  men 
of  J?is  synne,  lest  }?er  ordre  leese  worldli  helpe.  But  where  is 
more  heresie,  })an  to  love  })is  ordre  more  ]?an  God,  or  to  do 
yvelis  for  hope  of  good,  ])at  Poul  forfendij?  men  to  do  ? 

Also  ])es  sectis  inpungnen  l^e  gospel,  and  also  ])e  olde  lawe, 
for  j?ei  chargen  more  ])er  owne  statute,  al^if  it  be  a3ens  Goddis 
lawe,  ]?an  ])ei  done  J^e  lawe  of  j^e  gospel;  and  }>us  ]?ei  loven  more 
fer  ordre  J?an  Crist.  As,  ^if  it  were  nevere  so  myche  nede  to 
go  out  and  prech®-  Goddis  lawe,  to  defende  our  modir  holi 
Chirche,  ^it  fer  ordre  lettijj  >es,  but  3if  Jjei  han  |?er  priours  leeve, 
al^if  God  bidde  to  do  ))is.  And  comunly  ]?es  pryvat  prioures 
letten  J^er  felowes  here  to  go  out;  and  so,  be  \ti  never  so  riche, 
)?ei  shulen  not  helpe  her  fleishli  eldris ;  for  alle  ]?er  goodis  ben 
J?e  housis,  sij?  J^ei  han  nou^t  propre  but  synne.  And  j>is  errour 
reprove}?  Crist  in  Phariseis,  Jjat  si^en  )?e  gnat,  and  swolowen  \q 
camele,  for  ])ei  chargen  lesse  more  harm.  Also  }>es  Phariseis 
chargen  moche)?er  fastingis  and  o)?ir  ]?ingis  ]?at  Jjei  han  founden, 
but  keping  of  Goddis  mandementis  ]?ei  charge  not  half  so 
myche.  As,  he  shulde  be  holde  apostata  })at  lefte  his  abite  for 
a  day,  but  for  leevyng  of  dedis  of  charite  shulde  he  no])ing  be 
blamed.  And  j)us  J)ei  blasfemen  in  God,  and  seien,  whoso  die]? 
in  ]?er  abite  shal  nevere  go  to  helle,  for  holynes  })at  is  ))erinne ; 
and  so,  a^ens  Cristis  sentence,  ]?ei  sewen  an  old  cloute  in  newe 
cloi)?.  For  ]?er  ordre,  }?ei  seien,  is  gedired  of  ]?e  olde  lawe  and 
]?e  newe ;  and  ^it  \d  han  founden  herto  newe  Jjingis  ]?at  ]?ei 
kepen  as  gospel;  and  l?us  fei  chargen  ])er  owne  fasting,  and 
ojjer  ritis  \2X  }>ei  kepen,  more  j^an  biddingis  of  Crist,  for  j)ei  ben 
no  newe  mandementis  to  hem.  Sich  hid  synnes  among  freris 
done  more  harm  to  Cristene  men  )?an  ben  ]?e  bodili  harmes 
which  ]?e  world  chargi}?  more.  And  J?us  errours  in  }?e  world 
ben  li^tli  mayntened  bi  freris,  for  wynnyng  of  worldli  good  or 
worldU  worschip  Jjat  ]?ei  coveiten,  as  lettris  of  fraternite  ^  And 
^  Some  word  appears  to  have  dropped  out. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


^h^ 


dowyng  of  oj?ir  preestis,  al^if  it  be  a^ens  hemsilf,  is  stiflli  sus- 
teyned  bi  freris.  And  so  men  suffisen  not  to  telle  unsensible 
errours  jjat  ]?ei  susteynen ;  and  ^it  for  privilegie  of  J^e  pope  noon 
ojjer  man  dar  blame  hem,  for  J^ei  ben  exempt  fro  Goddis  lawe 
bi  privvlegies  bat  bei  ban  getun.  But  Petre  was  not  ]3us  exempt 
fro  sharp  snybbing  of  Poul.  And  heiling,  ]>at  Joon  forfendide, 
haj)  noo  vertue  among  ]?es  freris  ^ ;  for  jsei  saluten  ofte  fendis, 
more  }>an  \€\  doon  Cristis  children. 

Cap.  VI. 

Lord  1  where  J?e  pope  ]?inke  good  to  conferme  siche  newe 
ordris  !  Certis  synne  of  siche  children  turne]?  into  heed  of  \tT 
fadir,  as  Helias  sones  maden  Jjer  fadir  to  be  punishid  sharply 
of  God.  And  generalli,  whoso  synne|)  for  avantage  of  himsilf, 
his  synne  maki}?  disavauntage  of  }>at  J>at  he  wenej?  turne  to  good. 
As,  })es  two  popis  han  now  no  more  enemyes,  ne  more  hid,  )>an 
ben  Jjes  freris ;  for  summe  holden  wij?  ))e  o  pope  and  many  and 
grete  wiJ?  }?e  toJ)ir ;  and  \€\  enformen  ]?er  countreis  to  holde  stifli 
wij?  per  pope.  And  no  drede,  ^if  cuntreis  turne  fro  Jje  oo  pope 
to  ]?e  toljir,  pe  freris  wolden  turne  also,  for  J?ei  obeishen  to  ))e 
puple.  And  J?us  love  ungroundid  in  God,  but  oonli  in  temporal 
goodis,  mut  nedis  faile  and  do  harm,  for  al  siche  love  is  sinful. 

SiJ?  ]?es  sectis  ben  so  harmful  to  oure  modir  hooH  Chirche,  and, 
as  bileve  techi])  us,  J^e  Chirche  may  be  purgid  of  J?is,  it  were 
sumwhat  for  to  speke  of  ])is  purging  of  ]?e  Chirche.  For  al^if  it 
shal  not  fulli  be  turned  in  ])is  lyf,  but  first  in  hevene,  and  ^  ^it  it 
may  be  purgid  in  part,  and  in  J)is  purginge  stondij)  mennis 
mede.  And  no  man  is  excusid  here  of  consenting  to  f>is  synne, 
but  ^if  he  helpe  on  sum  maner ;  for  ech  man  mai  helpe  sum- 
what. Sum  men  shulden  helpe  bi  resoun  J?at  is  taken  of  Goddis 
lawe,  and  summe  by  worldli  power,  as  er]?ely  lordis  J?at  God 
ha})  ordeyned,  and  alle  men  bi  good  liif  and  good  preieris  to 
God,  for  in  him  liggij?  ]?e  helpe  here  a^ens  ))e  cautelis  of  ))e  fend. 


dele  and. 


Yet  the  Pope 
sustains  them 
in  everything-. 


2  John la 


The  friars  are 
divided  be- 
tween the  two 
Popes. 


All  men  ought 
to  help  to 
deliver  the 
Church  from 
them. 


a  The  meaning  is,  that  St.  John's 
prohibition   to   say  God  speed    to 


those  who  bring  not  the  true  doc- 
trine is  disregarded  among  the  friars. 


SS'i 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


Rom.  i.  14. 


One  easy  way 
is  this ;  to 
detect  and 
expose  their 
heretical  belief 
about  the 
sacred  host. 


And  ]jus  popis,  bischopis,  and  freris,  shulden  helpe  here  to 
purge  hemsilf ;  for  bileve  techi})  us  ]?at  ech  man  is  endettid  to 
God,  as  ech  man  is  endettid  to  o\\y,  to  helpe  him  algatis  goostli 
and  bodili.  Dette  is  not  to  charge,  but  ^if  it  turne  to  goostli 
help;  and  ]?us  spekij?  Crist  in  ]?e  gospel  of  dette  in  |)e-Pater 
Noster,  and  also. in  o  parable,  bi  which  he  move]?  men  to 
mercy.  And  Jjus  sei]>  Poul,  j^at  he  is  dettour  to  ech  man,  but 
bi  ordre.  And  fus  prelatis  shulden  helpe  j?e  Chirche,  as  ))e 
freris  shulden  helpe  hemsilf.  But  more  part  of  f-is  world  erre}? 
here,  and  clepi]?  harm  helpe ;  but  lawe  of  Crist  shulde  reule 
men  here,  to  v/ite  how  men  shulden  come  to  bUs. 

Men  speken  here  of  a  li^t  helpe  to  which  men  ben  comunli 
holden,  |)at  men  shulden  on  J?is  maner  comune  wi])  freris,  and 
ellis  not.  First,  to  seie  j?at  fei  putten  not  on  freris  J?at  j^ei  ben 
heretikes,  for  J»anne  men  wolden  not  dele  wi])  hem,  ne  nurishe 
hem  in  worldli  goodis ;  but  men  han  hem  suspect  of  heresie  for 
many  causis.  First,  for  J^ei  varien  J?us  in  bileve  of  J^e  sacrid 
oost.  And  ]?us  jjei  schulden  telle  at  J?e  bigynnynge  what  J^ing 
\ei  trowun  ]?at  it  is,— whe)?ir  it  be  Goddis  bodi  or  not.  And 
here  )?ei  mai  not  be  excusid ;  for  mynystrel  or  jo^elour,  tumbler 
and  harlot,  wole  not  take  of  fe  puple  bifore  ))at  ]?ei  han  shewid 
]?er  craft ;  and  si]?  freris  crafte  stondij?  in  J^is,  to  teche  )?e  puple 
]5er  bileve,  and  \t  puple  trowi]?  comunli  )?at  J)is  oost  is  Goddis 
bodi,  here  freris  shulden  bigynne,  and  telle  men  where  ))is  be 
soij?.  And  ^if  ])ei  seien  j>at  ]?is  oost  in  no  maner  is  Goddis  bodi, 
flee  Jjes  freris  as  heretikes,  for  Crist  and  his  Chirche  seien  ])e 
contrarie.  Jif  ]3ei  seien  ]>at  it  is  Goddis  bodi,  and  manye  freres 
seien  ]?e  contrarie,  |)is  word  techi]?  not  Jjat  ne  j?ei  gabben  in 
comune  bileve  of  J^e  Chirche ;  and  Jjerfore  men  shulden  abide 
witnes  of  \tx  comune  seel,  and  bifore  dele  not  wij?  hem,  but 
have  hem  suspect  of  heresie.  5^^  I'^i  seien  ]?at  |>is  oost  is  an 
accident  wijjouten  suget,  as  colour  and  figure,  and  Jjus  it  is  not 
Goddis  bodi,  wel  we  witen  J^at  olde  bileve,  groundid  in  }>e  wordis 
of  Crist,  seij?  Jjat  it  is  Goddis  bodi,  as  ])e  pope  sumtyme  seide. 
And  it  is  not  ynow3  J>at  freris  erren  in  colour  and  figure  of  J)er 
abitis,  to  prove  J?at  j)is  sacrid  oost  is  colour  and  figure  of  breed. 
And  j?is  defamynge  shulde  })e  pope  seke  out  wij?  greet  traveile;  for 
]?es  sectis  han  sciaundrid  him,  as  he  andhise  hadden  errid  in  bileve. 

WYCLIF. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


353 


And  it  is  not  yno^^  to  seie  ]>at  J?er  is  Goddis  bodi,  for  beter  ]>ing 
]?an  Cristis  bodi  is  everywhere  for  |?e  godhede ;  and  men  axen 
not  what  is  J?ere,  but  what  is  J)at  ]?at  men  worshipen  so.  And 
5it  freris  seien,  }>at  J^ei  trowun  here  as  holi  Chirche  doij?  in  }>is 
mater.  So  seien  Jevvds  and  Sarasynes.  But,  frere,  telle  me  how 
Y  shulde  trowe.  And  ^if  ]?ei  seien  }?is  mater  is  sutil,  and  men 
mai  not  undirstonde  it,  wel  we  witen  ]?at  God  bindi]?  not  men 
to  bileve  ony  j?ing  which  ]?ei  mai  not  undirstonde, — as  we  seien 
of  ]?e  Trinite.  And  ^if  \€\  seien  ])at  ]?is  sacrament  is  Goddis 
bodi,  as  it  is  in  hevene,  jjes  freris  speken  as  idiotis.  For  we 
axen  of  ]?is  sacrid  oost  ])at  men  seen  bodili  brekun  and  etun 
comunli,  and  it  is  moved  as  o]?er  oostis.  And  ))us,  whatever  a 
frere  sei)?,  trewe  men  shulden  leeve  hym  here  as  suspect  of 
heresie,  bifore  he  have  wel  put  J)is  of. 

Aftir  J)is  my^te  a  man  axe,  si]?  God  tolde  of  newe  sectis  ]?at 
shulen  come  into  J^e  Chirche,  to  charge  and  harm  of  Jje  Chirche, 
how  groundij?  ))is  frere  his  ordre,  and  in  what  tyme  it  bigan. 
And  sij?  o  frere  contrarie]?  anofer  in  ]?is  mater,  and  nou^t  is 
proved,  men  shulden  avoide  ]?is  frere  til  he  hadde  here  tau^t  ])e 
treujje.  pis  strif  is  mater  of  gabbing  and  of  synnyng  among 
manie ;  and  j?us  for  profit  of  ]?e  Chirche  shulden  freris  worche 
to  quenche  ]?is  strif.  Carmes  seien  \2X  'pei  weren  bifore  ]?e 
tyme  \2X  Crist  was  born  ^  Austyns  seien  J^at  \€\  weren  many 
hundrid  wynters  bifore  o]?er  freris.  Prechouris  and  Menours 
seyn  ]?e  reverse.  But  noon  groundi))  here  his  word,  as  noon  of 
Jjes  newe  ordris  groundij?  J?at  he  cam  m  bi  Crist ;  and  but  ]?is 
grounding  be  in  dede,  dremes  and  confermyngis  ben  nou^t. 
On  J)is  maner  shulden  trewe  men  seke  wisely  jje  so}?e,  and  purge 
cure  modir  of  apostemes  fat  ben  harmful  in  ])e  Chirche.  To 
])is  shulde  j)e  pope  helpe,  for  to  ]?is  dette  weren  apostlis  bounden, 


»  The  Carmelites  pretended  that 
their  Order  was  founded  by  the  pro- 
phet Elijah,  when  he  retired  to 
Mount  Carmel  to  escape  the  wrath 
of  Ahab.  But  the  wide  extension 
and  notoriety  of  the  Order  date  from 
the  time  of  St.  Simon  Stock,  an 
Englishman  of  the  thirteenth  cen- 
tury, concerning  whose  marvellous 
vision  consult  Alban  Butler's  Lives 

WOEKS.      VOL.   III. 


of  the  Saints,  May  i6.  The  Augusti- 
nian  friars,  or  the  Hermits  of  St. 
Austin,  claim  to  have  been  founded 
and  placed  under  a  special  rule  by 
the  gi-eat  Bishop  of  Hippo.  The 
Friars  Preachers  (Dominicans)  and 
the  Friars  Minors  (Franciscans) 
were,  as  all  the  world  knows,  founded 
near  the  beginning  of  the  thirteenth 
century  by  SS.  Dominic  and  Francis. 


Another  is  to 
show,  that  not 
one  of  the  new 
Orders  was 
founded  by 
Christ. 


354 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


Men  should 
reject  the 
extravagant 
tenets  current 
about  papal 
absolution  and 
indulgences. 


Peter  had  no 
power  above 
other  apostles. 


and  not  to  lordschippes  of  moneie,  but  in  as  myche  as  it  helpide 
herto.  And  si]?  it  letti}?  comunli,  popis  shulden  flee  ]?is,  as  dide 
apostlis;  for  ellis  J?ei  seiden  wi]?  o}?er  foolis,  }?at  helpe  were 
harm,  and  good  were  yvel. 


Cap.  VII. 

Aftir  ]?is  shulden  men  wite  of  J?e  popis  power  in  assoilinge,  in 
graunting  of  indulgencis  and  oj^er  privylegies,  wi}>  cursing.  For 
ri^t  as  pe  popis  clerkis  feynen  J^at  ])ei  done  miraclis  whanne 
evere  })ei  syngen^,  moo  and  more  woundirful  Jjan  ever  dide 
Crist  or  his  apostlis,  so  in  asoiling  and  cursing  Jjei  feynen  hem 
unknowun  power ;  and  in  fablis  of  ])is  power  ]?ei  blasfemen  and 
harme  })e  Chirche.  And  J^us  come]?  in  errour  into  }?e  Chirche, 
as  it  doi]?  of  J^e  sacrid  oost;  for  noon  mai  comprehende  J^is 
power,  si]>  it  is  wi})Outen  noumbre,  sij>  Crist  ^af  J)is  to  Petre,  and 
oJ>ir  popis  Jjat  camen  aftir. 

Here  Cristene  men  bileven  ]?at  Petre  and  Poul  and  ojjir 
apostlis  token  power  of  Crist,  but  not  but  for  to  edifie  ])e 
Chirche.  And  Jjus  alle  prestis  ]?at  ben  Cristis  kny^tis  han 
power  of  him  to  ]?is  eende.  Which  of  hem  ha}?  moost  power, 
is  ful  veyne  for  us  to  trete ;  but  we  supposen  of  preestis  dedis, 
]?at  he  ]?at  proiiti]?  more  to  ]?e  Chirche  ha]?  more  power  of  Crist, 
and  ellis  ]?ei  ben  ydil  wi]?  j)er  power.  And  ]?us  bi  power  }?at 
Crist  ^af  Petre  mai  no  man  prove  };at  ]?is  preest,  })e  which  is 
Bishop  of  Rome,  haj?  more  power  J?an  o]>er  preestis.  For  si]? 
oure  bileve  sei}?,  )?at  ]?er  is  noo  power  but  of  God,  chesinge  of 
}?es  cardinalis  ^yve]?  not  sich  power  to  ]?e  pope.  And  it  sue]? 
not  ]?at  God  mut  ^yve,  whan  ]?es  cardinalis  han  ]?us  chosen,  but 
apostlis  dedis  ]?at  popis.  doone  shulden  here  witnes  of  ]?er 
power;  si]?  fleyinge  to  hevene  ofassoilid  spiritis,  and  comyng 
a^en,  here}?  no  witnesse.  And  wordis  ]?at  Crist  sei]?  in  ]?e  gos- 
pel ben  to  li3th  undirstonden.  Crist  sei]?  to  his  apostlis;  Y  am 
wi]?  30U  alle  daies  unto  J?e  ende  of  ]?e  world ;  but  what  maken 
])es  wordis  for  J^is  pope  ?  pes  wordis  techen  generali,  J?at  Crist 
shal  be  wi]?  his  iymes  \2X  he  ha]?  ordeyned  to  blis  ri^t  to  ]?e  dai 

^  That  is,  sing  tiie  mass. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


355 


of  dome ;  but  how  shulden  men  wite  \2X  J?is  pope  is  ony  of  hem 
]?at  Crist  spekij)  to  ?  Certis  J)is  pope  woot  not  himsilf,  and  ha]? 
litil  mater  to  hope  it;  for  in  goode  werkis  and  suynge  of  Crist 
shulde  j)is  pope  grounde  his  hope.  But  ^it  in  ano]?ir  word  ])at 
Crist  seide  unto  Petir,  groundi]?  j)is  pope  his  power,  'pat  it  is  so 
myche  over  o]?ir ;  Crist  bihi^te  to  Petre,  Jjat  whatever  he  bindij? 
in  er]?e  it  shal  be  bounden  in  hevene,  and  so  of  ])is  assoiling. 
But  ])is  resoun  is  ful  of  folie  for  many  causis,  whoso  takij?  hede. 
So]?ly  Crist  seide  })us  to  Petre,  and  so  he  seide  to  o])er  apostlis ; 
whi  shulde  Petre  have  power  bi  J^is  more  J>an  oj^ir  apostUs  of 
Crist  ?  Also  men  shulden  wite  here,  ]?at  j^es  wordis  Jjat  Crist 
seide  to  Petir  ben  nojjing  for  ])is  pope  but  ^if  he  sue  Crist  and 
Petir  in  lyf.  And  suppose  J?at  al  ]?is  be  soij) ;  ^it  eche  preest  of 
ony  apostle  shulde  have  power  to  do  good  to  fe  Chirche,  but 
not  so  myche  as  here  is  dremed.  For  ellis  Petre  synnede 
many  weies ;  for  Petre  uside  not  ])is  power ;  who  shulde  excuse 
hem  of  ]?is  synne? 

Also  men  shulden  undirstonde  what  it  is  to  bynde  man  above 
er])e.  And  men  moten  nedis  seie  here,  ])at  J?anne  a  preest 
bindi})  man  above  erj^e,  whanne  he  bindi}>  man  after  God,  and 
not  for  fleish  ne  coveitise.  And  so  }>is  pope  shulde  teche  men 
]?at  he  bindi}?  ]?us  above  erj^e,  and  neij^er  in  \^  erpe,  ne  undir  j?e 
er]?e,  but  evene  after  ]?e  kdes  above ;  but  ]?is  wole  he  nevere 
teche  bifore  j^at  Gabriel  blowe  his  horn.  And  ^if  he  teche  ]?at 
]?e  Chirche  above  byndij?  })us,  or  assoilij?,  at  ])e  instaunce  of 
hym,  5it  he  prove]?  not  his  grete  power.  And  })us  grounding  of 
Goddis  lawe  failli]?  shamefuUi  here,  J?at  ^if  Crist  seide  to  Petre, 
whatever  he  bonde  above  ]?e  er]?e  is  bounden  in  hevene,  ]?anne 
it  sue]?  of  J?is  pope,  what  J)ing  he  feynej?  him  for  to  binden,  it  is 
so  bounden  of  God.  But  certis  ]?e  lewiderst  man  in  ]?is  world 
my^te  shame  of  siche  a  resoun.  Fer]?ermore,  ^if  we  ^yven  J?is 
pope  siche  power  as  he  feyne}?,  ^if  men  taken  hede  to  hise 
dedis,  he  shulde  shame  of  sich  power.  For  lawe  of  charite 
wolde  teche,  }?at  ^if  he  hadde  siche  power,  he  shulde  assoile  alle 
hise  sugetis  fro  peyne  and  fro  trespas;  for  ]?anne  he  brou^te 
alle  men  to  heven,  and  suffride  no  man  go  to  helle.  And  si]? 
charite  stondi]?  in  3iftis  of  God  to  ]?is  eende,  he  were  to  slowe  in 
Goddis  service,  and  disuside  ]?e  ^iftis  of  God,  but  3if  he  dide 


Absurdities 
which  flow 
from  assuming 
the  uncon- 
ditional validity 
of  papal  bind- 
ings and 
loosings. 


ib^ 


WrCZIF'S  WORKS. 


Abuses  in  the 
exercise  of 
patronage  by 
the  Popes. 


here  )?at  he  my3te,  and  were  merciful  to  men.  And  ^if  )?ou  seist 
\2X  nei})er  Crist  ne  Petir  dide  J)us  to  alle  men,  certis  Jjei  hadde 
not  sich  power  as  ])is  pope  feyne]?  in  him ;  and  ]>us  Crist  my^te 
not  assoile  men,  but  after  \2X  he  saw  his  Fadir  vouchsafe. 
Lord  1  sij>  Crist  assoilide  not  ])us,  ne  Petre,  ne  ony  o]?er  apostle, 
and  )?is  pope  see]?  not  in  God  J>at  he  wole  \2X  it  be  so,  what 
spirit  shulde  move  ]?is  pope  to  feyne  sich  asoilinge  bofe  fro 
peyne  and  fro  synne,  and  aftir  chaffare  ]?us  ])erwi])?  Si]>  he 
toke  freely  ])is  power,  Crist  biddi]?  })at  he  shulde  freli  ^yve  it; 
but  now  he  assoili]?  never  ])us,  but  for  frendship  or  wynnynge ; 
and  he  taki}?  noon  hede  to  God,  wher  God  wole  J?at  it  be  so, 
and  where  ])is  man  lyve  an  yvel  lyf  and  be  ordeyned  to  be 
dampned.  And  certis  noo  pope  o}>er  ]?an  Crist  can  telle  how 
nedeful  ^  J?is  dede  is,  or  how  unmedeful  is  ano]?er ;  how  shulde 
he  Jeanne  assoile  J?us  ?  For  he  mai  not  asoile  here  of  a  litel 
bodili  peyne,  as  my^ten  Petir  and  ojjer  seintis ;  how  shulde  he 
assoile  soulis  of  j?e  peyne  of  purgatorie  ?  Prove  he  his  power 
by  J)is  l^se,  and  suspende  assoiling  of  moneie.  And  sij?  jjes 
popis  ben  not  assoilid  ))us  of  peyne  and  trespas,  for  })anne  ]?e 
popis  weren  alle  seintis,  and  confermed  by  ])er  state,  it  were  to 
seke  ojjer  signes,  bi  which  ]>es  popis  shulden  be  blessid,  for  jjei 
fallen  in  charite,  bi  principHs  ]?at  hemsilf  seien. 

Cap.  VIII. 

It  were  for  to  wite  over  ])is,  how  popis  5yven  jjes  beneficis, 
and  confermen  and  acursen  men  whanne  hem  liki]>  and  mys- 
likij?  men.  And  no  drede,  sij?  }?ei  knowun  not  whanne  God- 
hede  doi))  ];us,  l?ei  shulden  not  difyne  here  but  ^if  God  shewide 
hem  \\% ;  for  it  is  peril  to  gabbe  on  God,  and  in  matir  of  mennis 
heljje.  And  so  it  is  a  greet  peril  to  feyne  siche  power,  but  if 
it  be  groundid.  And  sij?  J?es  popis  ben  not  hardy '  as  blynde 
Bayard,  )?ei  moten  seie  ])at  ]?ei  speken  ofte  wij?  God,  ]?at  techij? 
hem^jjat  it  mut  be  {>us,  and  so  Jjes  popis  mai  not  erre.  But 
who  herde  ever  more  blasphemye?  si]?  J?ei  cunnen  not  telle 
J)ingis  to  come,  touching  \tx  state  and  )?er  desire ;  for  o  pope 
a^ens  ano]?ir  tellij?  opinli  })er  errour  here. 


Queiy,  medefiil. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


357 


But,  for  5yvyng  of  benefices  maki]?  hem  bo}?e  greet  and 
stronge,  it  were  to  wite  of  ))is  power,  and  of  }>e  lawes  fat  ]?ei 
usen.  And  si]?  Crist  uside  not  this  power,  but  forsoke  in  juge- 
ment  lesse  y vel » ;  as  J^is  power  were  in  vein  ^if  jje  Chirche  were 
undo^vid,  it  is  knowen  to  trewe  men  }>at  }>is  is  not  groundid  of 
Crist ;  but  \^  pope,  as  he  blasfeme)),  and  sei]?  j>is  dowyng  is  fe 
patrymonie  of  Crist,  so  he  feyne]?  newe  lawes  to  teche  to  parte 
]?es  benefices.  And  ])is  lawe  ha]>  he  maad,  ]?at  ^if  two  men  ben 
of  o  date,  whoever  presenti]?  first,  shal  be  avaunsid  bifore.  And 
so  he  ha])  ordeyned  many  lawes, — how  J^at  men  shulen  oones 
be  schryven,  and  oones  ])e  ^eer  be  comuned  of  her  propre 
preest,  whomever  he  wole  ordeyne.  Bi  ])es  two  unfamous 
lawes  mai  men  wite  whiche  ben  o}?ir,  for  ])er  is  noo  lawe  but 
Goddis,  or  lawe  groundid  in  Goddis  lawe.  First  it  seme  J?,  }?at 
]>is  partyng  of  benefices  is  opyn  folie.  For  whanne  }?e  pope 
avansi})  a  shrewe,  he  autorisi]?  his  shrewidnesse,  and  speciali 
whanne  ]?er  ben  betere,  ])at  wolden  take  siche  an  ofiice  ;  and 
J)e  pope  ha]?  noo  witt,  ne  bidding  of  God,  to  take  him  ]?is. 
And  |?us  ofte,  for  preiynge  and  moneie,  he  avaunsi]?  lymes  of 
]?e  fend ;  for  al  J?es  ben  his  children ;  and  he  shal  answere  for 
]?es  soulis  ]?at  his  children  leesen  to  helle,  and  for  o]?ir  shrewid- 
nessis  }?at  j?ei  done.  Lord!  when  J?e  popis  synne  were  not 
ynow3  to  him,  al  5if  he  gete  noon  on  oJ?er  side  ?  as,  ^if  he 
bou^te  not  for  ]?e  firste  fruytis,  or  o]?ir  frendshipe  of  ]?e  world, 
synnes  of  o]?ir  truauntis  ]?at  he  avaunsi]?,  and  envenymi]?  myche 
folk. 

0]?ir  wordis  ]?at  here  ben  spoken  excusen  him  not  bifore 
God,  ]?at  ]?e  pope  mai  do  no  symonie,  for  alle  beneficis  ben  hise. 
For  ^if  he  were  clene  for  a  tyme,  alle  weren  hise  bi  title  of 
grace ;  ^it  for  ]?is  averouse  pride  shulde  he  leese  al  ]?es  J>ingis. 
And  no  drede  J?is  lawe  of  ]?e  pope  is  opinli  a^ens  treu]?e,  and 
so  a^ens  Jesus  Crist,  ]?at  is  bo]?e  God  and  man.  It  falli]?  ofte 
bi  ])is  lawe,  ]?at  a  tryaunt  and  a  fendis  lyme  is  put  bifore  a  lyme 


a  Christ  would  not  exercise  secu- 
lar authority  as  the  Popes  do ;  but 
even  shunned,  when  he  refiised  to 
arbitrate  between  the  two  brothers 
respecting  their  inheritance  (Luke 


xii.  14),  a  responsibility  which  in- 
volved 'less  evil'  than  the  wide- 
reaching  jurisdiction  now  claimed 
by  the  Popes. 


The  rules  of 
the  canon  law 
about  patron- 
ajre  have  no 
divine  sanction. 


Other  abuses 
of  patronag-e. 


358 


Evils  of  en- 
forced private 
confession. 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 

of  Crist.  For  ofte  jjes  coveitouse  triauntis  gone  bifore  goode 
simple  men;  ]>us  bi  vertue  of  siche  lawis  ben  ofte  \q  fendis 
lemes  maad  maistris,  for  to  lede  symple  men,  but  whidirward 
but  to  helle  ?  And  J?us,  bi  vertue  of  mannis  lawe,  man  shul 
go  to  be  confermed  of  a  fend,  J)at  techi}>  men  how  J^ei  shulen 
worche  a^ens  Crist.  For  many  prelatis  by  coveitise  and 
symonie  ben  ofte  fendis,  and  J?ei  serven  \er  maistir,  to  wi]?- 
drawe  men  fro  Cristis  lawe.  And  no  woundir  3if  men  gone 
)?ikke  to  helle  bi  fe  leding  of  suche  prelatis. 

And  as  anentis  J^e  secounde  lawe,  of  shrifte,  ]?at  ]?e  pope  ha]? 
made,  no  drede'  it  doi]?  myche  harm,  al  ^if  it  do  to  summe 
proj&te;  and  it  fordoi]>  Cristis  privylege,  fat  where  Cristene 
men  shulden  be  free,  now  ])ei  ben  nedid  to  hire  a  preest,  and 
jjus  be  suget  to  J^e  fend.  For  aftir  ])at  })is  prelate  ordeyne]?  ben 
sugettis  nedid  for  to  do ;  and  J^us  freres  and  religious  wymmen 
mai  soone  assente  to  leccherie.  Lord !  in  tyme  of  Jesus  Crist, 
whanne  \q  Chirche  fiorisiiide  myche,  were  men  not  bounden  to 
shryve  hem  ))us,  as  Crist,  Baptist,  and  apostUs.  Lord !  where 
]?e  pope  ha]>  ordeyned  })at  Cristis  weie  suffici}?  not  now,  so  ]?at 
mennis  doing  bi  scole  of  Crist  be  dampned  wiJ?outen  oJ>ir  synne, 
for  ])at  ]?e  pope  ha]?  ordeyned  him  partener  to  for^eve  synnes 
wi]?  Crist  ?  And  in  caas  ]?at  men  ben  martris  in  Cristis  cause, 
[})ei  ^]  shulden  be  dampned,  for  J)ei  shulden  rowne  wij?  a  preest, 
and  for  worse  leeve  j^e  betere.  Shrifte  to  God  is  put  bihynde, 
and  shrifte  more  shameful  also ;  but  privy  shrifte  newe  founden 
is  autorisid,  as  nedeful  to  soulis  heele. 


We  will  de- 
clare our 
meaning 
plainly,  which 
is,  that  all 
church  endow- 
ment should 
cease,  and  the 
Pope  and 
clergy  practise 
the  poverty  of 
Christ 


Cap.  IX. 

It  my^te  seme  to  many  men  ]?at  myche  of  ]?is  is  hid  speche, 
and  men  shulden  speke  opinli  to  j^e  world,  as  Crist  dide,  for  to 
telle  more  clereli  what  is  oure  last  entent.  For  ^if  it  were  a 
trewe  sentence,  God  my3te  move  men  hereafter,  bo]?e  lordis  and 
clerkis,  to  drawe  to  J?is  sentence.  And  herfore  we  wolen  seie 
opinli  |?e  sentence  fat  we  conseyven ;  and  ^if  God  wole  vouche- 
saaf,  it  mai  aftir  be  declarid  more.  Oure  ground  is  comune 
bileve,  fat  Crist  is  bof e  God  and  man,  and  so  he  is  fe  beste 


supplied  conjecturally. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


359 


man,  ^e  wyserst  man,  and  moost  vertuous,  jjat  ever  was  or  ever 
shal  be.  And  he  is  heed  of  pe  Chirche ;  and  he  ordeynede 
a  lawe  to  men,  and  confermede  it  ^yi]>  his  lyf,  for  to  reule  holi 
Chirche,  and  teche  how  ]?at  men  shulde  lyve;  and  al  })is  mut 
passe  al  ojjir,  si)j  ]>e  auctor  is  J^e  beste.  And  grutche  we  not 
]?at  many  men  j^enken  ful  hevy  wij>  Jjis  sentence,  for  so  ]?ei  diden 
in  Cristis  tyme,  bofe  wij?  his  lyf  and  wij?  his  lawe.  Of  l)is 
ground  we  gessen  fer]?ere,  how  us  J?inkij)  }>at  men  shulden  do. 
But  we  graunten  at  )?e  firste,  })at  if  ony  man  wole  shewe  us  ]?at 
we  speken  a^ens  Goddis  lawe,  or  a5en  good  resoun,  we  wolen 
mekeli  leeve  of,  and  holde  Goddis  part  bi  oure  my^te.  For  we 
ben  wifholden  wi}>  treu]?e,  and  \\d}>  Goddis  grace  shulen  ever 
last  ]?erinne.  Us  Jjinki]?  ]>at  ]>e  Chirche  shulde  here  holde  ]>e 
ordenaunce  of  Crist ;  and  ever  {?e  streiter  ]?at  it  helde  J?at,  evere 
Jje  betir  it  were  to  it.  And  J?us  bastard  braunchis  shulde  be 
kutt  fro  ]?is  tree ;  and  ])us  ]>e  pope,  wi\>  his  cardinalis,  and  alle 
preestis  J>at  been  dowid,  shulden  leeve  ]?is  dowing  and  worldli 
glorie  ))at  ]>ei  han,  and  nei}?er  lyve  ne  do  ou^t,  but  ^if  it  were 
groundid  in  Cristis  lawe ;  for  Jjat  lawe  is  charite,  and  groundij? 
al  ])ing  ])at  is  medeful.  ^if  ]?at  God  wolde  fouche-safe  to  ^yve 
]?es  preestis  of  his  grace,  j?at  )?ei  w olden  mekeli  leeve  fis,  and 
lyve  in  Cristis  poverte,  ]>e  miracle  were  ]?e  more,  and  more 
wolde  profile  to  J>e  Chirche. 

Aftirward  men  ]?enken  ]>at  al  )jes  newe  sectis  or  ordris,  bojje 
possessioneres  and  beggeris,  shulden  ceese  bi  Cristis  lawe.  And 
5if  J?ei  wolden  leeve  ]>&s  for  charite,  and  lyve  purely  aftir  Crist, 
Jjer  merit  were  J?e  more,  and  J?ei  my^ten  encreese  ]>e  Chirche ; 
and  ^if  J?ei  wolden  not  do  J?us,  ]?ei  shulden  be  honestli  con- 
streyned.  Both  worldi  goodis  and  comunyng  shulde  be  wiseli 
drawun  fro  hem,  and  kny^tis,  wij?  lordis  of  ]>e  world,  shulden 
be  confortid  bi  Cristis  lawe  to  stonde  and  defende  J>is  sentence, 
as  ]>ei  diden  aftir  Cristis  de}? ;  and  trewe  prestis  shulden  telle  ^e 
comunes  how  ])ei  shulde  kepe  charite,  and  obeishe  upon  resoun, 
as  Poul  techil>  hem  to  do.  And  God  my^te  move  summe  of 
]?es  ordres  to  leeve  J?er  ritis,  and  take  Cristes  lawe,  for  J?ei  hiden 
now  ypocrisie,  and  ben  ydil  fro  many  goode  dedes.  Lord  1 
what  stiward  were  he  })at  wolde  ordeyne  newe  rehetors  to  ete 
mennes  mete  and  do  hem  harm,  a^ens  Cristis  ordenaunce  ? 


and  that 
monks  and 
mendicant 
friars  should 
be  suppressed, 


360 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


and  parish 
priests  be 
maintained, 
not  by  tithes, 
but  by  free- 
will offerings. 


Objections 
of  the  defend- 
ers of  the 
papacy  re- 
butted. 


pe  J?ridde  point,  of  curatis,  us  ]?inki}j  shulde  stonde  J?us.  pei 
shulden  lyve  on  ]?e  puple  in  good  mesure  as  Poul  biddij?;  but 
Jje  puple  shulde  not  be  artid  to  ^yve  hem  dymes  ne  o]>er  almes ; 
but  J?er  goode  wishes  shulden  move  to  ^yve  hem  freeli  j?at  were 
nede,  for  ]?us  lyvede  Crist  with  his  apostlis.  What  preest  shulde 
not  be  paied  herof?  And  ])us  shulde  ]?e  Chirche  drawe  to 
acord  bi  Crist,  J)at  ledi])  j^e  daunce  of  love.  5^^  ^\^^  ^^^  wolden 
be  preestis,  lyve  ])ei  ]?erafter,  and  shewe  J>ei  bi  dede  ])at  Crist 
ha])  made  hem  preestis,  for  J?is  passij)  lettris  of  bishopis.  And 
])us  ])e  puple  my^te  wi}>drawe  j^er  almes  fro  wickide  preestis, 
and  fe  pride  of  preestis  shulde  be  stoppid,  bi  which  J?ei  en- 
venymyn  Jje  puple.  5^^  I'is  be  not  doone  anoon,  ^it  it  my^te 
drawe  to  J>e  good ;  for  Cristis  lyf  was  J?e  beste,  })at  shulde  en- 
saumple  alle  oJ?ir. 

Here  men  arguen  many  weies  a3ens  ))is  sentence  }>at  here  is 
seid,  and  speciali  for  j^e  pope,  ])at  ]>anne  were  holi  Chirche  for- 
done, si]?  Petre  was  pope  and  many  oj^er  seintis,  and  who 
shulde  contrarie  J)is  ?  But  here  han  men  seid  ofte,  {>at  it  were 
good  to  obeishe  to  Petre,  and^  ])at  sich  a  captein  were  in  ]>e 
Chirche ;  but  name  of  \e  pope  hidi]?  venym.  Men  seien  ))at 
it  cam  first  yn  bi  folic  of  ]?e  emperour,  ])at  reiside  him  an 
enemy  boJ>e  to  God  and  to  ])e  world.  And  ^if  ]?ou  aleggist 
seintis  lyves,  noon  of  hem  is  to  praise  but  in  as  myche  as  it 
acordij)  to  Cristis  lyf  and  his  lawe ;  and  si})  Cristis  lawe  is  more 
opyn,  slepe  ]7e  fablis,  and  rengne  his  lawe.  It  is  no  nede  here 
to  dreme,  how  holi  eende  ]?es  men  maden,  for  men  mai  trowe 
it  whoso  wole,  and  many  ben  seintis  wij^outen  ])is  troujje.  Al 
ojjer  office  of  ]?e  pope  my5te  be  done  mekely,  as  myche  as  it 
wolde  turne  to  worshipe  of  Crist  and  profite  of  J)e  Chirche,  by 
a  trewe  preest,  as  was  bi  apostlis,  al  ^if  J^es  bullis  of  leed  slep- 
ten.  It  is  iicly  ]>at  Petre  suede  more  Crist  in  brennyng  love 
])an  diden  o})er  apostlis  fat  weren  wi]?  Crist  in  Petris  tyme,  and 
so  Petre  was  more  servisable,  more  meke,  and  more  pore ;  for 
fervour  of  love  of  Petre  made  him  in  J)is  more  love  Crist.  But 
aftir  ]?at  ]?e  Chirche  was  dowid,  no  man  hati})  ])is  more  ]>an  ]?e 
pope ;  and  ]?us  he  is  not  Cristis  viker  but  ra])ir  Anticrist  him- 

^  and  is  used  for  an.  in  the  sense  of '  if.' 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


361 


silf.  3if  he  wolde  be  meke  and  pore  and  servisable,  as  Petre 
was,  and  take  no  more  werk  upon  him  ]?an  J)at  he  my^te  wel 
do  in  dede,  J?anne  he  my^te  be  Petris  vicker,  bi  grace  of  Crist 
heed  of  Petre. 

As  anentis  ]jes  newe  ordris,  \€\  semen  alle  Anticristis  proc- 
tours,  to  putte  awey  Cristis  ordenaunce,  and  magnefie  ]?er  newe 
sectis ;  and  ]?us  hem  nedij?  to  have  an  heed  oJ)ir  J>an  Crist  to 
susteyne  hem.  For  Crist  tolde  not  bi  siche  habitis,  ne  siche 
ritis  of  Phariseis,  but  bi  werkes  of  charite,  bi  preching  among 
)>e  puple.  ' 

Cap.  X. 

Now  were  it  for  to  speke  last  of  censures,  ]?at  J)e  fend  blowi)?, 
as  ben  suspendingis,  enterditingis,  cursingis,  and  reisingis  of 
croiserie.  But  first  Cristene  men  shulde  byleve,  J?at  alle  suche 
feyned  censures  don  noon  harm  a  Cristene  man,  but  ^if  he  do 
harm  first  to  himsilf.  Bi  hem  may  his  bodi  be  sleyn,  and  he 
be  pursued  many  weies;  but  Crist  sei}),  \2X  mai  not  lie, — 
Blessid  be  ^e  whanne  men  cursen  50U,  and  whanne  men  pur- 
suen  50U,  and  seien  al  maner  of  yvel  a3ens  30U,  for  me  and  my 
lawe.  As  Cristis  apostlis  weren  confortid,  holde  J>ou  ]?e  in 
Cristis  lawe,  and  sue  Jjou  him  in  maner  of  lyf,  and  drede  ]?ou 
not  alle  Jje  censures  )?at  Anticrist  can  blowe  a^ens  fee ;  but  as  he 
mene)?  to  harm  })ee,  he  doi})  }?ee  good  mangree  his.  And  as  ]?e 
assoiling  serve]?  of  nou3t,  but  as  it  acordij>  wij?  Cristis  keies,  so 
fe  cursyng  noiej?  not,  but  as  Crist  above  cursi]?.  And  herfore 
Crist  tolde  but  litil  bi  cursingis  of  ])e  hie  bishopis,  but  confortide 
his  disciplis  of  J?es  cursingis  and  J?es  pursujmgis.  For  )?ei  putti- 
den  men  out  of  chirche,  and  pursueden  hem  in  Cristis  tyme, 
but  apostlis  wolden  not  leeve  to  preche  for  al  J?is  pursuynge. 
And  o  confort  is  here ;  ]?at  a  man  mai  serve  God  in  clene  wille 
)?at  he  ha)?,  as  longe  as  he  ha]?  lyf,  and  ^if  his  wille  lasti}?,  aftir, 
whanne  Anticrist  haj?  slayn  his  bodi,  in  more  blisse  J)an  bifore,  as 
oure  bileve  techi]?  us.  And  }?us  drede  we  hem  not  for  cen- 
sures J?at  ]?ei  feynen,  but  drede  we  ever  oure  God,  lest  we  syn- 
nen  a^ens  him.  And  so  double  drede  falli]?  in  sich  cursingis  of 
Anticrist.  Oon,  lest  we  ben  not  wor]>i  to  have  grace  to  cleve 
to  God  and  stonde  stif  in  his  mandementis, — and  J?anne  God 


True  men 
should  brave 
censures,  ban- 
nings,  amd 
other  perse- 
cutions. 


36a 


WrCLIF'S  WORKS. 


Suspension 
and  interdict 
do  no  harm  but 
to  fools. 


To  fight  for 
the  Pope,  for 
the  sake  of  the 
indulgences 
that  he  pro- 
mises, is  folly. 


ciirsij?  us ;  and  J?us  cursing  is  to  drede,  for  cursing  of  God  for 
oure  synnes.  Also  men  shulden  be  in  charite,  and  loven  J^es 
men  ])at  cursen  }jus  ;  and  so  men  shulden  drede  ))er  curs,  lest 
it  harme  hemsilf  and  fe  puple.  For  ^if  j^ei  cursen  undiscretly,  as 
)jei  don  ever  whanne  ]?ei  cursen  not  for  love  of  ]?e  Chirche,  or 
for  love  of  o]?er  men  to  whom  ]?ei  leien  J?is  medecine,  }>anne  j?ei 
cursen  hemsilf  first,  al  ^if  ]?ei  knowun  not  ])is  foly.  And  bi  sich 
blyndenesse  in  cursing  many  curseris  emblemyshen  hemsilf, 
and  jjerwij)  fe  comune  peple.  Such  cursing  is  to  drede;  such 
drede  passi])  mannis  lawe,  and  come}>  to  lawe  of  charite,  and 
axij?  not  curseris  assoilinge,  but  Goddis  purging,  ^if  it  wole  be. 

As  anentis  suspendinge  and  enterdityng  J)at  ben  feyned,  we 
trowen  J^at  }>ei  doon  myche  good,  and  noon  harm  but  to  foolis. 
For  ^if  ]?ei  wolden  suspende  hemsilf  fro  alle  ])ingis  but  Goddis 
lawe,  it  were  a  graciouse  suspendinge,  for  hem  and  for  ofer 
men ;  for  Jeanne  Goddis  lawe  my3te  freeli  renne  bi  \e  lymytis 
}>at  Crist  ha]?  ordeyned.  And  he  is  a  cursid  man  jmt  leevej?  to 
do  Jjat  God  biddi]?,  and  for  sich  feynynge  of  censuris, — 5he,  ^if 
de]>  sue  aftir. 

As  anentis  croiserie,  summe  of  Cristis  Chirche  ben  enformed 
how  Jjei  shulden  not  trowe  to  }?e  pope  for  ony  bullis  )>at  he 
sendi]?,  but  ^if  ]?ei  ben  groundid  in  Goddis  lawe.  And  J?is 
grounding  shulden  men  take  wi]?  reverence,  and  leeve  ])is  leed. 
For  men  shulde  take  as  bileve  )?at  ]?ei  shulden  nei]?er  trowe  to 
Crist  ne  Petre^,  but  in  as  myche  as  ]?ei  grounden  bi  Goddis 
lawe  ]5at  men  shulden  trowe  Jjus.  For  Crist  lettij)  fuUi  in  his 
lawe,  how  men  shulden  trowe  to  him  and  hise;  and  ]?us  no 
fing  untouchid  in  ]?is  lawe  shulde  be  dun  or  axid  to  do.  But 
who  shulde  axe  more  ]?an  Crist,  or  more  obeishe  to  ]?e  pope 
Jjan  to  Crist .?  And  we  ben  certein  J)at  Crist  may  not  axe  o]?ir 
obedience ;  whi  shulde  ])e  pope  ?  Men  shulden  bi  hooli  lif  of 
Crist  trowe  ]?at  his  lawe  is  compleet,  and  axe  noon  o])ir  ground 
of  }?is  lawe,  for  Crist  is  ])e  firste  and  }>e  laste.  And  so,  5if  fe 
pope  assoiie  men  a  pena  or  a  culpa,  or  whatever  pardone  he 
grauntij?  for  ]?ing  })at  is  not  charite,  forsake  it  as  Jje  fendis  bid- 
ding, )?at  is  contrarie  to  love  of  Crist.     Wei  I  woot  ])e  fend 

'^  There  must  surely  be  an  error  of  the  scribe  here. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


363 


mai  feyne  more  pardone  }?an  God  wole  graunte  to  ech  man  J>at 
wole  slee  his  broJ>ir ;  but  God  ^  forbode  ]>at  we  trowun  J)is,  as 
])e  pope  may  graunte  to  day,  and  to  morowe  perseyve  his  folye, 
and  revoke  J>e  formere  errour.  But  who  shulde  bileve  siche 
bullis  ?  for  wel  we  witen  bi  Goddis  lawe,  ]5at  God  5yveJ?  j)e  pope 
no  power,  but  for  to  edifie  his  Chirche,  bi  charite  fat  God  haj? 
toold.  Crist  was  J^e  beste  herd,  and  so  he  puttide  his  lyf  for 
his  sheep ;  and  fe  pope  mai  not  opinlier  telle  J?at  he  is  Anti- 
crist  or  a  fend,  fan  for  to  putte  many  mennis  lyves  for  fis 
oflice  ]?at  he  presume]?.  For  Cristis  lyf  was  myche  betere  J?an 
al  j)is  of&ce  or  J?es  popis.  How  shulde  men  ii^te  for  a  persone, 
fat  fei  witen  not  where  he  be  a  fend,  or  tau^t  of  God  to  do 
f us  ?  Sif  f ei  ben  certein  of  medeful  dedis,  certis  fat  man  were 
a  fool  fat  wolde  take  f is  uncerteine  weie,  and  leeve  f e  certeyn 
witt  and  feyf  for  wordis  ungroundid  in  Goddis  lawe.  And 
many  f enken  fat  f es  prelatis  fat  ben  upon  Cristis  side  shulden 
have  joie  of  f  is  sentence ;  for  it  is  for  alle  good  men.  And  if 
ony  can  disprove  it,  men  wolen  revoke  it,  and  treuf  e  shal  shyne, 
and  it  shal  have  moo  witnessis,  and  f is  is  more  to  Goddis 
worship. 

But  here  men  dreden  blasphemye,  and  ofir  cautelis  of  fe 
fend;  fat  men  gon  not  bi  resoun  ne  bi  Goddis  lawe  in  fis 
mater,  but  putte  f  e  pope  here  heierste  juge,  as  ^if  he  were  god 
in  erf e.  And  he,  wif  his  part  fat  lovef  f e  world,  quenche  men 
fat  speken  fis,  and  axen  noon  of er  proof  f erof  And  sif  f e  fend 
haf  f e  strenger  part  here  fan  f e  part  of  treuf e  fat  is  wif  Crist, 
Crist  wole  suifre,  for  formere  synne,  f  e  fendis  side  have  maistrie 
5it.  But  in  o  bileve  men  resten,  fat  day  shal  come  of  f e  laste 
jugement,  whanne  fe  fendis  side  shal  lia^ke,  and  treuf e  shal 
shyne  wifouten  lettyng;  and  fat  day  abiden  men,  bi  reule  of 
lawe  fat  Crist  haf  ^ovun. 

Wel  we  witen  fat  fe  synne  and  distmrblyng  of  f e  Chirche 
stondif  myche  in  defaute  of  love  of  Crist  and  his  lawe.  And 
fus  bringinge  in  of  sectis,  and  of  lawes  fat  Crist  made  not, 
quenchif  f e  love  of  Crist  and  of  his  religioun  here.  And  fus 
men  shulden  stonde  in  fe  mesure  fat  Crist  haf  ^ovun  of  fes 


The  Pope's 
party  is  now 
the  stronger, 
but  we  must 
look  to  the  end. 


Let  new  sects 
and  new  laws 
be  abandoned 


corrected;  Goddis,  A. 


3^4 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


as  inconsistent 
with  the  pure 
love  of  God. 


two,  boJ>e  of  sectis  and  of  lawis ;  for  bringinge  in  of  J?es  doij) 
harm.  And  so  marke  ])is  as  greet  synne,  whanne  men  passen 
in  o]3er  of  j)es,  al5if  Jje  fende  coloure  it,  and  medle  good  wij)  ])e 
yvel;  for  J?us  dide  Machamete  in  his  lawe,  and  }?e  fend  doijj 
J?us  comunly ;  and  confermyng  of  men  is  nought  but  ^if  God 
conferm  bifore.  And  sij)  J)is  point  is  perelous,  men  shulden 
be  seker  ]?at  God  conferme}).  And  )?us  ])is  reule  faili))  now  to 
weie  love  aftir  t>at  it  shulde  be,  so  J>at  love  Jjat  shulde  be  more 
were  more  chargid  in  mannis  soule.  And  Jjus,  siJ?  men  shulden 
love  more  Cristis  ordenaunce  and  his  boundis  J?an  ony  ])at 
comen  after,  and  Crist  ha})  ordeyned  ^  at  fe  fuUe,  men  shulden 
leeve  |)es  novelries  as  contrarie  to  Cristis  ordenaunce,  and  love 
J?e  mesure  })at  Crist  ha]?  ^ovun,  for  so  diden  Cristis  apostlis. 

And  wite  we  wel  ))at  alle  ])es  autours  of  ]?es  novelries  done 
harm  to  hemsilf  and  to  \q  Chirche,  and  to  ]?er  nei^boris.  Also 
whi  shulden  not  love  of  Crist  move  men  to  holde  his  boundis  ? 
And  J)us  it  seme]?  to  many  men,  }?at  Jjes  newe  ordris  and  J^er 
fautours  fallen  over  myche  in  charite,  for  in  love  of  Crist  and 
his  Chirche,  si]?  Cristis  religion  were  algatis  beter,  perfitere, 
sekere,  and  li^tere.  For  Crist  autour  passi]?  in  ]?es;  and  we 
shulden  drede  Poulis  sentence,  ])at  who  ]?at  love})  not  Jesus 
Crist,  he  is  cursid  of  God ;  and  ))is  cursing  is  moost  to  drede. 
And  generaly,  worst  ])ing  is  more  costly  and  more  hevy ;  and 
})us  it  letti])  feble  weie-goeres,  to  be  taried  wi))  sich  ])ing.  And 
errour  in  weiyng  of  ])is  love  maki])  many  fals  weddingis ;  as 
men  ben  weddid  wi]?  })er  habitis,  and  }?er  custumes,  and  {)er 
singular  maners,  as  ^if  \e\  weren  Cristis  comaundementis ; 
and  3it  \t\  ben  ful  feble  in  kynde.  And  men  blasfemen  in  })is 
point,  for  ]?ei  putten  a  reule  of  love  to  ordeyne  an  yvel  ])ing. 
to  be  more  loved,  a^en  J)e  ordenaunce  of  God.  And  ])is  is 
opin  blasfemy,  si})  God  appropri])  unto  him  to  weie  ])ingis,  how 
})ei  shulden  be  loved,  and  to  make  hem  o])er  betere  or  worse. 
And  })us  auctours  of  accidentis  hyen  hem  above  Crist,  as  5if 
})ei  wolden  maken  a  newe  world,  and  change  goodnesse  of  })ingis. 
But  ]?es  goddis  varien ;  as  oon  love]?  o  maner,  and  ano})ir  love]? 
ano})ir,  and  hati])  ])e  maner  of  his  bro})^;    and  J^is  techi]?  wel 

^  corrected;  ordeyne]),  A. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


i^S 


ynow3  J)at  alle  fes  ben  false  goddis.  And  Jjus  J)e  crafte  of  love 
of  ]?ingis  is  moost  nedeful  to  al  o\tx ;  for  no  man  mai  come 
to  blis  but  bi  vertue  of  \h  crafte ;  and  no  man  mai  synne  but 
for  errour  in  )?is  crafte,  as  blessid  men  doone  Goddis  orde- 
naunce,  and  dampned  men  loven  ])e  contrarie.  And  alle  fes 
newe  ordris  ben  dividid  in  Jjer  love,  as  oon  lovej?  oon  and 
ano]>er  anofer,  and  so  hatij?  his  contrarie.  But  Crist,  whanne 
he  lovede  hoolliche  his  Chirche,  wolde  not  make  it  faire  wij) 
Jjese  ordris;  and  eche  man  is  holden  to  love  liche  after  ]?at 
Crist  love)?,  and  to  hate  ])at  he  hati]?,  and  J)anne  is  his  hierste 
vertue  stablid. 


•'=<t><S>-* 


366 


WrCLIF'S  WORKS, 


XXIV. 

[FIFTY  HERESIES  AND  ERRORS - 
OF  FRIARS.] 

[Three  MSS.  of  the  present  tract  are  known  to  exist, — one  in  the  Bod- 
leian, another  in  the  Corpus  volume  at  Cambridge,  and  the  third  at  Trinity 
College,  DubHn.  It  was  printed  by  Thomas  James,  Bodley's  librarian,  in 
the  year  1608,  with  as  much  accuracy  as  could  be  expected  in  that  age, 
when  scholarly  criticism  was  all  reserved  for  the  classics.  Dr.  Vaughan, 
who  has  given  the  entire  tract  in  his  Tracts  and  Treatises  of  Wycliffe  (Lon- 
don 1845),  has  contented  himself  with  reprinting  the  text  of  Dr.  James. 
The  text  here  given  is  based  upon  Bodl.  647,  with  which  the  Corpus  MS. 
has  been  collated. 

Bale  mentions  this  treatise  in  his  Catalogtie  of  the  Reformer's  works, 
under  the  title  *  De  Fratrum  Nequitiis.*  Other  external  evidence  of  author- 
ship there  is  none.  The"  date  of  its  composition  was  probably  the  last  half 
of  the  year  1384  (see  the  note  to  ch.  xxiv).  So  far  it  would  be  quite  pos- 
sible to  assign  it  to  Wyclif ;  but  it  is  perhaps  equally  probable  that  it  was 
written  by  one  of  his  disciples.  The  language  used  in  ch.  xxii  rather  points 
to  some  ex-friar  as  the  author,  such  e.  g.  as  Peter  Patteshull,  who,  having 
been  originally  an  Augustinian  friar,  abandoned  his  Order,  and  joining  the 
Lollards  in  London,  '  learned  that  he  had  done  well  in  deserting  a  private 
religion,  and  betaking  himself  to  the  public  or  general  life '  of  Christians 
(Walsingham,  sub  anno  1387). 

It  seems  probable  that  the  form^of  the  treatise  was  suggested  by  the  pro- 
ceedings of  the  Council  of  London,  which  extracted  from  the  writings  of 
Wyclif  twenty-four  conclusions  for  condemnation,  ten  as  heretical,  and 
fourteen  as  eiToneous.  In  reply,  the  writer  of  our  treatise  charges  the 
friars,  the  most  active  opponents  of  the  Lollard  movement,  with  holding 
more  than  twice  as  many  '  heresies  and  errours '  (ch.  1)  as  Wyclif  had  been 
charged  with.  The  unmeaning  title  '  Objections  of  Freres,'  given  to  this 
tract  in  Dr.  Shirley's  Catalog7ie,  and  also  by  Lewis,  has  no  other  authority 
than  a  marguial  note,  in  a  hand  of  the  seventeenth  century,  found  in  the 
Corpus  MS.] 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


3^7 


Cap.  I. 
FiEST,  freris  seyn  J)at  hor  religioun,  founden  of  synM 
men,  is  more  perfite  })en  J^at  religion  or  ordir  \o  whiche 
Crist  hymself  made,  jjat  is  bothe  God  and  mon.  Ffor  J^ei 
sey  |?at  iche  bischop  and  prest  may  lav/fully  leeve  hor  first 
dignyte,  and  after  be  a  frere ;  bot  when  he  is  oones  a  frere, 
he  may  in  no  maner  leeve  ])at  and  lyve  as  a  bischop  or  a 
prest,  by  j^e  fourme  of  \o  gospel.  Bot  ]>is  heresie  seis  j^at  Crist 
lacked  witte  my^t  or  charite,  to  teche  apostlis  and  his  disciplis 
J>o  beste  religion.  Bot  what  mon  may  suffer  )?is  foule  heresie  to 
be  putte  on  Jesus  Crist  ?  Cristen  men  sey  ]?at  \o  religion  and 
ordir  J>at  Crist  made  for  his  disciplis  and  prestes,  is  moste  per- 
fite, moste  esy,  and  moste  siker.  Moste  perfite  for  J)is  resoun, — 
for  J)0  patroune  or  founder  )>erof  is  moste  perfite,  for  he  is 
verrey  God  and  verrey  mon,  }?at  of  moste  witte  and  moste 
charite  gaf  ]?is  religion  to  his  der-worjje  frendis.  Also  \o  reule 
])erof  is  moste  perfite,  sith  \o  gospel  in  his  fredome,  wi])0uten 
error  of  mon,  is  reule  of  {)is  religion.  Also  knyghtis  of  J)is  religion 
ben  moste  holy  and  moste  perfite, — ffor  Jesus  Crist  and  his 
apostils  ben  chef  knyghtis  Jjerof ;  and  aftir  horn  holy  martiris 
and  confessors.  Hit  is  moste  esy  and  light,  for  Crist  hymself 
seys  \2X  his  50k  is  soffte,  and  his  charge  is  light,  si]?  hit  stondes 
al  in  luf  and  fredome  of  hit,  and  biddes  noj^ing  bot  resonable 
]?ing,  and  profitable  for  ]?o  keper  J^erof.  Hit  is  moste  siker,  for 
hit  is  confermed  of  God,  and  not  of  synful  men ;  and  no  mon 
may  distrie  hit,  or  dispense  J?erageyns ;  bot  if  \o  pope  or  any 
mon  shchal  be  saved,  he  mot  be  confermed  jjerby,  and  ellis  he 
schal  be  dampned. 

Bot  men  sey  ]?at  o]?er  newe  ordiris  and  reulis  ben  noe3t  worth, 
bot  if  ]?ei  ben  confermed  of  \o  pope,  and  oj)ir  synful  men ;  and 
])en  ]?ei  ben  not  worth,  bot  if  J?ei  ben  confermed  of  J)0  devel,  in 
caas  \o  pope  schal  be  dampned,  for  ]?en  he  is  a  devel,  as  ]?o 
gospel  seis  of  Judas.  And  ]3us  men  seyn  ]?at  Cristis  religioun 
in  his  owne  clennesse  and  fredome  is  more  perfite  J)en  any 
synful  monnis  religioun,  by  als  myche  as  Crist  is  more  perfite 
]?en  is  any  synful  mon.  And  if  newe  religiouns  seyn  }>at  J^ei 
kepen  al  )?at  Cristis  religioun  biddes^  }>ei  sparen  \o  sothe.  For 
J?ei  lacken  }>o  fredome  and  mesure  of  Cristis  religioun,  and  ben 


The  religion  of 
Christ  more 
perfect  than 
the  so-called 
religion  of  the 
friars. 


The  confirma- 
tion of  which 
by  the  Pope 
avails  nothing-. 


368 


WrCLIF'S  WORKS. 


Friars  -who 
,  leave  their 
'  convents  in 

order  to  preacli 

freely,  are 

persecuted* 


bounden  to  errours  of  synful  men,  and  Jjerby  ben  letted  to  pro- 
fite  to  Cristen  mennis  soulis,  and  not  sufFred  to  teche  frely  Gods 
lawe,  ne  kepe  hit  in  homself.  Ffor  by  J)0  first  and  moste  com- 
aundement  of  God,  ]?ei  ben  holden  to  love  God  of  al  hor  hert, 
of  al  hor  lif,  of  al  hor  mynde,  and  of  alle  hor  strengthes,  and 
hor  neghtbors  as  homself.  Bot  who  may  do  more  ])en  ]?is? 
])en  may  no  mon  kepe  more  ))en  Cristis  religion  biddes.  And 
so,  if  ]?is  new  religion  of  freris  be  more  perfit  ])en  Cristis  re- 
ligion, ]?en  if  freris  kepen  wil  hor  religion,  J)ei  ben  more  perfit 
J?en  Cristis  apostils ;  and  ellis  ]?ei  ben  apostataas.  And  if  men 
ben  apostataas,  ]?ei  leeven  ]?o  better  ordir,  and  taken  ano]?er 
lesse  perfite.  And  J)0  ordir  of  Crist  in  his  clennesse  and  fre- 
dome  is  moste  perfite,  and  so  hit  semes  ]?at  alle  j?ese  freris  ben 
apostataas. 

Cap.  IL 

Also  freris  seyn  prively  J?at  hit  is  apostasie  and  heresie  for  a 
prest  to  lyve  as  Crist  ordeyned  a  prest  to  lyve,  by  forme  of  ]?o 
gospel.  Ffor  if  jjer  be  any  frere  ]jat  is  a  prest,  cunnynge  in 
Gods  lawe,  and  able  to  travel  to  sowe  Gods  wordis  amonge  })0 
puple,  if  he  do  ]jis  offis  frely,  goynge  fro  cuntre  to  cuntre  where 
he  may  moste  profite,  and  ceesse  not  for  prioure  ne  any  ojjir 
satrap,  and  charge  not  singuler  habite,  and  begge  not,  bot  be 
payed  with  comyne  mete  and  drinke,  as  Crist  and  his  apostils 
were,  j^ei  wil  poursue  hym  as  apostata,  and  drawe  hym  to 
prisoun,  and  sey  }>at  he  is  cursed  for  j?is  dede.  Ffor  J>is  fre 
goynge  aboute  and  fre  prechinge  is  leeveful  to  suche  a  frere, 
sith  hit  is  ensaumplid  and  comanndid  of  Crist,  and  not  to  be 
cloosid  in  a  cloyster,  as  hit  were  Caymes  Castel  a.  And  so  freris 
schulden  be  nedid  to  leeve  ]?is  lyvynge  of  cloyster,  and  feyned 
obedience  by  singuler  professioun,  and  to  dwelle  amonge  \o 
puple,  to  whom  ]?ei  may  moste  profite  gostly.  For  charite  nedid 
Crist  and  Baptist  to  cum  oute  of  desert  to  teche  ]?o  gospel  to  ^o 
puple,  til  ]?ei  were  deed;  J^erfore  myche  more  charite  schulde 
dryve  freris  to  cum  out  amonge  ]?o  puple,  and  leeve  Caymes 
Castels  })at  ben  so  nedeles  and  chargeouse  to  \o  puple,  sith  J)ei 


See  note  on  p.  348. 


WYCLIF. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


569 


connot  occupye  homself  so  wil  in  suche  solitarie  lif  and  con- 
templacioun,  as  couthen  Crist  and  Jon  Baptist.  And  to  )?is 
same  ende  Crist  ordeyned  alle  his  apostils  and  disciplis  to  lyve 
an  open  gode  lif,  in  mekenesse  and  willeful  povert  and  discrete 
penaunce,  to  teche  bisily  his  gospel  to  \o  puple,  and  not  be 
closid  in  grete  cloystres  and  coystily,  as  Caymes  Castels.  And 
hit  semes  an  open  doynge  of  Anticrist  to  suffer  not  prestis  to 
frely  do  J^is  oflfis  of  Crist,  bot  nede  horn,  upon  peyne  of  prison- 
ynge,  to  be  reulid  in  j>is  after  j)0  wille  of  a  symple  ydiot,  and,  in 
caas,  a  dampned  devel  of  helle.  And  so  |>er  seemes  no  meene 
to  holde  j?ese  sectis  togedir,  bot  if  hit  be  Jjis  blasphemye,  to 
prisoune  a  mon  for  als  myche  as  he  dos  aftir  \o  wille  of  God. 
And  J?us  J>is  new  professioune  is  harmeful  for  mony  skilles,  for 
hit  is  not  ensaumplid  of  Crist,  ne  any  of  his  apostlis,  and  he 
tau^t  us  al  ]?at  was  nedeful  and  profitable. 

Also  j?is  profession  serves  of  noght  bot  if  hit  be  to  make 
foolis  do  more  after  \o  erroures  of  synful  men,  ])en  after  \o 
maundement  of  God.  Ffor  by  vertue  of  Cristis  teching,  iche 
mon  is  holden  to  do  after  iche  o]?er,  in  als  myche  as  he  techis 
Cristis  comaundement  or  counseil;  and  more  may  no  mon 
bynde  ano]?er.  Also  Crist  gaf  his  disciples  power  of  iche  werk 
\2X  turnes  to  profite  of  hor  soulis,  and  helpe  of  o]?er  men ;  and 
]?is  fredome  is  letted  by  ]?is  profession  made  to  synful  men,  and, 
in  caas,  to  fendis  of  helle.  Bot  here  men  wil  not  distrie  freris, 
•ne  slee  hom,  ne  curse  hom,  bot  distrie  hor  errours  and  save  \o 
persones,  and  brynge  hom  to  Jjat  lyvynge  ])at  Crist  ordeyned 
prestes  to  lyve  inne,  for  j^at  is  algatis  \o  best,  to  \o  moste  wor- 
schip  of  God,  to  moste  profite  of  holy  Chirche,  and  to  freris 
also.  Bot  what  mon  schulde  not  helpe  herto,  upon  al  his 
power,  witte,  and  wille  ? 

Cap.  III. 

Also  freris  seyn,  if  a  mon  be  oones  professid  to  hor 
religioun,  he  may  nevere  leeve  hit  and  be  saved,  l?of  he 
be  nevere  so  unable  j^erto,  for  al  tyme  of  his  lif.  And  so 
\€\  wil  nede  hym  to  Xy^^  in  suche  a  staate  everemore,  to 
whiche  God  makes  hym  evere  unable,  and  so  nede  hym 
to  be  dampned.     Alas!    oute   on   suche   heresie,  J?at  monnis 

WOBKS.      VOL.  III.  B  b 


The  obedience 
to  which  their 
rule  binds 
them  is 
pernicious. 


The  iniquitj' 
of  compeUing 
a  friar  to 
remain  in  his 
Order,  though 
his  conscience 
bids  him  leave 


37° 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


and  of  for- 
bidding him 
to  preach 
publicly 
though  God 
may  be  strongly 
moving  hun 
to  do  so. 


Friars  live  by 
begging,  which 
is  clean  against 
Holy  Scripture, 


ordynaunce  is  holden  strenger  Jjen  is  ]jo  ordynaunce  of  God ! 
Ffor  if  a  mon  enter  into  J)0  new  religioun,  ageyns  monnis 
ordynaunce,  he  may  lawefully  forsake  hit;  bot  if  he  enter 
ageyns  Gods  ordynaunce,  when  God  makes  hym  unable  })erto, 
he  schal  not  be  sufFred  by  Anticristis  power  to  leeve  hit.  And 
if  J?is  resoun  were  wel  declarid,  si)?  no  mon  wot  which e  mon  is 
able  to  ]>is  new  religion  a  by  Gods  dome,  and  whiche  is  not  able, 
no  mon  schulde  be  constreyned  to  holde  forth  ])is  new  sect. 
And  }?us  ])is  new  religioun  may  not  laste  bot  if  hit  be  by  ]?is 
blasphemye,  to  constreyne  a  mon  unable  by  Gods  dome  to 
holde  ]?is  new  sect,  and  suffer  him  not  to  cum  to  fredome  of 
Cristis  ordir. 

Cap.  IV. 
Also  freris  seyn,  if  a  mon  be  professid  to  hor  holy  ordir, 
he  schal  not  preche  frely  and  generaly  fo  gospel  to  Cristen 
men  withouten  license  of  his  sovereyne  for  virtue  of  obe- 
dience, be  his  sovereyne  nevere  so  cursid  mon  of  lif,  and 
xmconnynge  of  Gods  lawe,  and  enemye  to  Cristen  monnis 
soule,  and,  in  caas,  a  foule  devel  of  helle, — fof  J>is  mon  pro- 
fessid have  resseyved  of  God  nevere  so  myche  connynge  of 
Gods  lawe,  and  power  and  wille  to  wurche  after  J»is  connynge. 
And  so  J>is  mon  schal  nedis  be  dampned  for  mysspendynge  of 
Gods  tresoure ;  fFor  sij?  Gods  lawe  seis  fat  he  is  oute  of  charite 
})at  helpis  not  his  bro]?er  with  bodily  almes,  if  he  may,  in  his 
nede,  myche  more  is  he  oute  of  charite  ]?at  helpis  not  his 
broj^ers  soule  wi]?  techinge  of  Gods  lawe,  when  he  sees  hym 
renne  to  helle,  ^he,  by  ignoraunce.  And  J>us  to  magnyfie  and 
mayntene  hor  roten  sectis,  J?ei  neden  men  by  ypocrisie,  fals 
techinge,  and  stronge  peynes  to  breke  Gods  heestis  and  leese 
charite.  Oute  on  fis  fals  heresie  and  tirauntrye  of  Anticrist, 
J)at  men  ben  nedid  strongly  to  kepe  more  his  lawes,  and  obeeche 
more  to  hom,  Jjen  to  Cristis  comaundements  evere  rightful ! 

Cap.  V. 

Also  freris  seyn  and  mayntenen,  Jjat  begginge  is  leveful,  ]?o 
whiche  is  dampned  by  God,  bothe  in  ]>o  Olde  Testament  and 
in  })0  New.    For  in  Jjo  fyve3t  boke  of  holy  writt,  God  seis  to  his 
^  So  in  X  J  W  has  the  words  transposed. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 

puple,  Algatis  a  nedy  mon  and  begger  schal  not  be  amonge 
5owe  a.  Also  j)0  Holy  Gost  tau^te  Salomon  to  preye  J?ese  two 
]?inges  of  God : — God,  make  vanite  and  leesinge  wordis  fer  fro 
me,  and  gif  not  to  me  beggyng,  or  beggyngnesse^,  and  richesse^, 
bot  gif  oneliche  }?inges  ]>at  ben  nedqful  for  my  lyvelode  in 
avauntre,  lest  I,  fulfilde,  be  drawen  to  renaye,  and  sey,  Who  is 
Lord  ?  as  who  sey,  I  knowe  no  Lord ;  and  lest  I  be  compellid 
or  made  of  force  by  nedynesse  to  Steele,  and  to  forswere  J?o 
name  of  my  God.  Also  \q  Wise  mon  seis,  Hit  is  a  wicked  or 
weyward  lif  to  seke  herberow  fro  hous  to  hous ;  and  he  schal 
not  do  tristiliche,  fere  he  schal  be  hereberowd,  and  he  schal 
not  open  his  mouthe.  Also  Crist  biddes  his  apostils  and  his 
disciplis,  ]?at  \€\  schul  not  here  a  sachel  ne  scrippe,  bot  loke 
what  meyne^  is  hable  to  here  J?e  gospel,  and  eete  and  diinke 
j?erinne,  and  passe  not  Jiennes,  and  not  passe  fro  hous  to  hous. 
Also  Seynt  Poule  laborid  or  travelid  wi})  his  hondis,  for  hym 
and  for  men  ];at  weren  wij?  hym,  and  coveytid  nou|3er  golde  ne 
silver  ne  clothes  of  men  Jjat  he  tau3te,  to  gif  ojjer  teechers 
ensaumple  to  do  \o  same  in  tyme  of  nede.  And  Seynt  Petre 
fischid  after  Cristis  resurreccioun.  Also  Seynt  Poule  biddes  j?at 
men  fat  wil  lyve  in  ydelnesse  and  curiouste,  and  not  travel, 
schulde  not  eete. 

Also  Seynt  Clement  ordeyned  fat  Cristen  men  schulden  not 
begg  opunly.  And,  for  to  putt  awey  fis  beggynge,  Seynt  Aus- 
tyne  makes  twoo  bokes,  hou  munkis  owen  to  travel  wif  her 
hondis  for  her  lyvelode  l>.  And  fo  same  techis  Benett  to  his 
munkis,  and  Seynt  Bemarde ;  and  so  does  Fraunceys  to  freris. 
And  Jerom  seis  fat  munkis  schulden  travel  wif  hor  hondis,  not 
onely  for  nede,  bot  raf  er  to  exclude  ydelnesse  and  vanyte.  Ffor 
in  state  of  innocense  God  ordeyned  mon  to  travel,  and  aftir- 
'ward  in  fo  state  of  synne  God  gaf  fis  labour  to  mon  to  his 


^  heggynnessBt  X. 

a  The  reference  is  to  Deuteronomy 
XV.  4,  where  the  WycUffite  versions, 
following  the  Vulgate,  translate  as 
in  the  text.  The  authorized  version, 
following  the  Hehrew,  gives  quite 
another  meaning :  *  Save  when  there 


So  in  X ;  W  omits  and  richesse. 

shall  be  no  poor  among  you,'  or, 
as  it  is  better  given  in  the  marginal 
reading, '  To  the  end  that  there  may 
be  no  poor  among  you.' 

^  S.  Aug.  De  Opere  Monachoriim. 


371 


Prov.  XXX.  8. 


Ecclus.xxix.31. 


2  Thess.  iii.  10. 


and  at  variance 
with  the  teach- 
ing of  saints 
and  fathers. 


B  b  2 


372 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


Friars  thus 
intercept  alms 
which  should 
go  to  the  really- 
needy  and 
suffering. 


The  abandon- 
ment of  the 
habit  is  treated 
as  a  heinous 
sin. 


penaunse.  pen  sith  iche  open  beggynge  is  ]?us  scharply 
dampned  in  holy  writt,  hit  is  a  foule  erroure  to  mayntene  hit ; 
hot  hit  is  more  erroure  to  sey  })at  Crist  was  suche  a  begger,  for 
jjen  he  moste  have  ben  contrarie  to  his  owne  lawe ;  bot  hit  is 
moste  erroure  to  contynue  in  })is  dampned  beggynge,  arid  robbe 
}>us,  ageyns  charite,  \o  pore  puple,  and  make  horn  to  byleve  jjat 
Crist  was  suche  a  begger,  and  J?at  ]?is  beggynge  is  wil  done. 

Cap.  VL 

Also  freris  seyn  in  dede,  ]?at  hit  is  medeful  to  leeve  ]?o  com- 
aundement  of  Crist,  of  gyvyngo  of  almes  to  pore  feble  men,  to 
T^ore  CToked  men  to  ^^ore  bh'^nde  men,  and  to  bedraden  ^  men, 
and  gif  J?is  almes  to  ypocritis,  ]?at  feynen  hom  holy  and  nedy 
when  \ti  ben  strong  in  body  and  haven  over  myche  richesse, 
bothe  in  grete  waste  housis,  in  preciouse  clothis,  in  grete  feestis, 
and  mony  jewels  and  tresoure.  And  j)us  j>ei  sleen  pore  men 
with  hor  fals  beggynge;  si]?  ]?ei  take  falsely  fro  hom  hor  worldly 
godis,  by  whiche  j?ei  schulden  susteyne  hor  bodily  lif,  and  de- 
ceyven  riche  men  in  hor  almes,  and  mayntenen  or  counforten 
hom  to  lyve  in  falsenesse,  ageyns  Jesus  Crist.  For  si)?  J?er 
weren  pore  men  ynowe  to  take  mennis  almes,  byfore  Jjat  freris 
comen  in,  and  fo  erthe  is  nowe  more  bareyn  Jjen  hit  was,  ou]?er 
freris  or  pore  men  moten  wante  of  J?is  almes.  Bot  freris  by 
sotil  ypocrisie  geten  to  homself,  and  letten  \q  pore  men  to  have 
J>is  almes. 

Cap.  VII. 

Also  freris  chargen  more  brekyng  of  hor  owne  tradiciouns 
])en  brekyng  of  ]?o  comaundementis  of  God.  Ffor  a  frere  schal 
more  be  punysched  for  brekyng  of  one  of  hom,  ]?en  for  brek- 
yng of  Gods  heestis,  for  brekyng  of  Gods  heestis  is  not  charged 
of  hom.  And  in  {)is  )?ei  schewen  hou  Jjei  loven  hor  owne  wor- 
schip  more  J>en  Gods;  and  ];us  fei  taken  to  homself  J>o  worschip 
]?at  is  appropred  to  God ;  and  so  ben  blasphemes  and  heretikis. 
And  so  }jei  chargen  more  hor  bodily  habite  )?en  charite  and 

^  beddere,  X. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


373 


o)?er  vertues.  Ffor  if  a  frere  leefe  his  bodily  habite,  to  ]?o 
whiche  he  is  not  bounden  by  Gods  lawe,  he  is  holden  apostata 
and  scharply  pursued,  sumtyme  to  prisoun,  and  sumtyme  to  \o 
deth,  Jjof  he  serve  better  God  wi)?oute  his  habite  )?en  j^erinne. 
Bot  bof  he  trespas  ageyns  charite  by  impacience  and  fals  lees- 
ingis,  or  pride  or  coveitise,  hit  is  litil  or  no^t  charged,  bot  ra)?er 
preysed,  if  hit  bringe  horn  worldly  ^  mukke. 

Cap.  VIII. 

Also  freris  feynen  horn,  as  ypocritis,  to  kepe  straytly  \o  gospel 
and  povert  of  Crist  and  his  apostils ;  and  ^itt  J?ei  moste  con- 
trarien  to  Crist  and  his  apostils  in  ypocrisie,  pride,  and  coveitise. 
Ffor  j?ei  schewen  more  holynesse  in  bodily  habite  and  o]?er 
signes  ]?en  did  Crist  and  his  apostils;  and  for  hor  synguler 
habite  or  holynesse  Jjei  presumen  to  be  even  wi}>  prelatis  and 
lordis,  and  more  worthy  }?en  o}»er  clerkis;  and  in  covetise  J?ei 
con  nevere  make  an  ende,  bot  by  beggynge,  byqueethyng  ^,  by 
birying,  by  salaries  and  trentals,  and  by  schryvyngis,  by  absolu- 
ciouns,  and  o}>er  fals  meenes,  cryen  evere  after  worldly  godis, 
where  Crist  usid  none  of  alle  ]}ese.  And  ]>us  for  J?is  stynkynge 
covetise  J^ei  worschippen  J?o  fend  as  hor  God. 

Cap.  IX. 

Also  freris  drawen  childre  fro  Cristis  religioun  into  hor 
private  ordir  by  ypocrisie,  leesingis,  and  steelynge.  Ffor  J^ei 
tellen  ])at  hor  ordir  is  more  holy  Jjen  any  ojjer,  and  ]?at  )?ei  schul 
have  hier  degree  in  blis  ]?en  oJ?er  men  ]?at  ben  not  j^erinne; 
and  seyn  ]}at  men  of  hor  ordir  schul  nevere  cum  to  helle,  bot 
schul  deme  ojjer  men  wi})  Crist  at  domesday.  And  so  fei 
steelen  childir  fro  fadir  and  modir,  sumtyme  soche  as  ben 
unable  to  \o  ordir,  and  sumtyme  soche  as  schulden  susteyne 
hor  fadir  and  modir  by  comaundement  of  God ;  and  ]?us  \€\ 
ben  blasphemes,  takyng  upon  hom  ful  counseil  in  doutouse 
]?inges,  J)at  ben  not  expressely  comaundid  ne  forbeden  in  holy 
writt,  sith  siche  conseil  is  approprid  to  \o  Holy  Gost.     And 


Pretending-  to 
follow  Chnst 
strictly,  they 
are  the  most 
covetous  of 
men. 


By  false  pro- 
fessions friars 
induce  parents 
to  eive  up  their 
children  to 
them. 


^  So  in  X ;  W  has  wordly. 


que\>i7ige.,  X. 


374 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


They  meddle 
in  parish  work, 
and  so  cause 
ill-will  between 
priests  and 
their  parishion- 
ers. 


})us  J?ei  ben  herfore  cursid  of  God,  as  \o  Pharisees  were  cursid 
of  Crist,  to  whom  he  seis  J?tis ; — Woo  be  to  ^owe,  Scribis  and 
Pharisees,  (l?at  ben,  writers  of  lawe  and  men  of  synguler  reli- 
gioun)  J?at  cumpassen  aboute  ]?o  water  and  \o  londe  to  make  a 
mon  of  50ure  religioun;  and  when  he  is  made  of  ^oure  reli- 
gioun,  5e  maken  hym  double  more  a  childe  of  helle.  And 
si])  he  Jjat  steelis  an  oxe  or  a  kow  is  dampnable  by  Gods  lawe, 
and  monnis  also,  myche  more  he  {>at  steelis  a  monnis  childe, 
J)at  is  bettere  J^en  alle  erthely  godis,  and  di*awes  hym  to  J)0  lesse 
perfit  ordir.  And  fof  J?is  synguler  ordir  were  more  perfite  ]?en 
Cristis,  5itt  he  wot  nevere  whejjer  hit  be  to  dampnacioun  of  ])0 
childe,  for  he  wot  not  to  what  state  God  hafs  ^  ordeyned  hym, 
and  so  blyndly  bei  done  ageyns  Cristis  ordynaunse. 

Cap.  X. 

Also  freris  for  pride  and  covetise  drawen  fro  curatis  hor  office 
and  sacramentis,  in  whoche  lyen  wynnynge  or  wurschip,  and  so 
maken  dissencioun  bitwix  curatis  and  hor  gostly  childer.  Freris 
drawen  to  horn  confessioun  and  birying  of  riche  men  by  mony 
sotil  meenes,  and  messe  pens,  and  trentals  a,  bot  ])ei  wil  not  cum 
to  pore  mennis  dirige  ^,  ne  resseyve  horn  to  be  biryed  amonge 
horn.  And  J^ei  cryen  faste  ))at  j^ei  haf  more  power  in  confes- 
sioun ])en  o]?er  curatis ;  for  fei  may  schryve  alle  fat  comen  to 
hom,  bot  curatis  may  no  ferj^er  j^en  her  owne  parischens.  Bot 
cm'atis  seyn,  J^at  sith  })ei  schul  answere  byfore  God  for  \o  soulis 


1  ba]>,  X. 


a  See  p.  299,  note. 

b  '  pore  mennis  dirige.'  In  the 
office  for  the  dead,  according  to  the 
use  of  Sanim,  at  the  vigils  (which 
were  recited  daily  unless  hindered 
by  the  occurrence  of  the  greater  fes- 
tivals) nine  psalms  were  ordered  to 
be  sung,  followed,  when  the  body 
was  present,  by  nine  different  anti- 
phons ;  but  when  the  body  was  not 
present,  by  one  and  the  same  anti- 
phon,  which  was  either  Placebo^  the 
9th  verse  of  Ps.  116  (114,  Vulg.),  or 
else  Dirige,  part  of  he  8th  verse  of 
the  5th  psalm  (Dirige  in  conspeetu 
tuo  vitam   meam).      These  vigils, 


celebrated  always  on  the  day  before 
the  masses  for  the  dead  or  for  the 
repose  of  souls,  and  connected  with 
those  masses,  must  have  made  the 
word  Dirige,  loudly  repeated  nine 
times  after  each  psalm  at  the  be- 
ginning of  the  antiphon,  so  familiar 
to  the  ears  of  our  forefathers,  that 
one  cannot  wonder  at  the  employ- 
ment of  the  word  to  express  funeral 
obsequies  generally.  See  the  Sarum 
Breviary  (Paris,  1554)  and  Mr.  Way's 
note  on  Dyryge  in  the  Camden  So- 
ciety's edition  of  the  Protnptorium 
Parvulonim, 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


375 


of  hor  sogettis,  \€\  wil  knowe  hor  lif ;  and  freris  seyn  hit  is  no 
nede,  for  jjei  haf  more  power  j)en  J>o  curat ;  and  J?us  discencioun 
and  hate  is  made  bytwix  curatis  and  hor  childer.  And  pride  and 
covetise  of  freris  is  cause  of  al  ]?is,  and  mony  oJ?er  syimes.  And 
])us,  for  bei  maken  discorde  amonge  Cristen  men,  \€\  ben  hatid 
and  cursid  of  God  Almyghty. 

Cap.  XL 

Also  freris  comen  in  under  \o  name  of  seyntis,  and  forsaken 
\o  seyntis  reule  and  lyve,  and  putten  hor  owne  errors  to  ]?o 
seyntis,  and  sclaundren  both  horn  and  God.  For  if  men  speken 
of  Fraunceys,  he  usid  and  tau^te  myche  mekenesse,  povert,  and 
penaunce,  and  Menoures  now  usen  J?o  contrarei.  For  ]?ei  maken 
statutis  of  hor  owne  wille,  and  horn  J?ei  kepen  faste,  and  maken 
men  to  wene  ]>at  Fraunceis  made  hom.  Bot  Prechours  seyn 
]?at  Dominyk  foundid  hom,  and  J^en  he  kept  Austyns  reule,  sith 
he  was  a  chanoun  bifore ;  for  ellis  he  was  apostata  if  Austyns 
reule  were  gode.  Bot  Austyn  wolde  algatis  sue  \o  apostils 
lyvyng,  and  Prechoures  done  even  \o  contrarie.  And  frere 
Austyns  founden  hom  on  Austyn  \o  grete  doctor ;  bot  his  reule 
spekes  no^t  of  freris ;  and  so  J?ei  ben  groundid  on  leesingis,  for 
jjei  have  no  patroim  seynt.  And  of  \o  Carmes  knowen  men 
nou]?er  founder  ne  reule.  And  so  Jjo  freris  Jjat  haf  founders 
done  ageyns  her  founders  teching  and  Cristis  also ;  and  colouren 
hor  owne  wicked  lawes  under  name  of  ])ese  seyntis ;  and  so  ben 
groundid  on  leesingis,  and  sclaundren  hor  patrouns  and  Crist 
also.  And  oj^er  freris,  ]?at  have  no  patrouns,  lyven  aftir  hom- 
self,  and  putten  hor  erroures  on  seyntis,  and  so  sclandren  hom 
and  Crist.  And  so  ypocrisie  regnes,  and  synne  is  mayntened 
by  coloure  of  holynesse. 

Cap.  XII. 

Also  freris  pursuen  treue  prestis,  and  letten  hom  to  preche 
\o  gospel,  notwitstondynge  ])at  Crist  enjoyned  presthed  and 
preching  of  \o  gospel.  And  so  J?ei  departen  ]?at  j?ing  \2X  God 
joyned  togedir;  and  so,  als  myche  as  in  hom  is,  j?ei  fordone 
Gods  ordynaunce.  And  so  J^ei  barmen  Cristen  men  more 
cruely  |)en  Jjo  Soudon  of  Sara^enes,  for  J^ei  ben  neer  and  more 


They  talk  of 
the  sanctity  of 
their  founders, 
yet  break  their 
precepts. 


They  thwart 
and  persecute 
true  priests. 


376 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


Luxury  and 
arrogance  of 
the  capped 
friars ;  covet- 
ousness  of  the 
Liraitors. 


The  friars 
flatter  the 
people,  and  let 
them  live  on  in 
their  sins. 


malicious.  For  sith  Crist  charges  alle  his  prestis  to  preche 
treuly  ])0  gospel,  and  ]}ei  pursuen  horn  for  ])is  dede,  ^he,  to  ]?o 
fyer,  jjei  wil  slee  prestis  for  J?ei  done  Gods  biddinge.  And  fer- 
fore  Jjei  ben  mon-sleers  and  irreguler,  and  cursid  of  God,  for 
\ei  letten  his  puple  to  be  saved,  and  so  neden  horn  to  be 
dampned.  And  sith  Jjo  principal  poynt  and  ende  of  Cristis 
dyinge  and  his  passioun^was  to  save  monnis  soule,  and  Jjo 
principal  werk  of  Sathanas  is  to  leese  monnis  soule,  ]?ei  ben 
traitoures  to  Crist,  and  aungels  of  Sathanas  transformed  into 
aungel  of  light,  and  cruel  traytoures  of  all  men. 

Cap.  XIII. 

Also  capped  freris,  j^at  ben  calde  ^  maystres  of  dyvynite,  have 
hor  chaumber  and  servise  as  lordis  or  kynges,  and  senden  oute 
ydiotis  ful  of  covetise  to"!^reche,  not  ]?o  gospel,  bot  cronyclis, 
fablis,  and  leesingis,  to  pleese  }>o  puple  and  to  robbe  horn.  And 
"what  cursidenesse  is  ]?is  to  a  deed  mon,  as  to  ]?o  world  and  pride 
and  vanyte  J)erof,  to  gete  hym  a  cappe  of  maysterdome,  by 
preyer  of  lordis,  and  grete  giftis,  and  makyng  of  huge  feestis  of 
a  hundrid  and  mony  hundrid  poundes,  and  ))en  be  ydel  fro 
teching  of  Gods  lawe,  bot  if  hit  be  seelden  ^,  byfore  lordis  and 
ladyes  or  grete  gederyngis  for  name  of  J?o  worlde,  and  J>en  to 
leeve  hor  povert  and  symplenesse  ]?at  he  is  bounden  to,  and 
devoure  pore  mennis  almes  in  waste  and  feestynge  of  lordis 
and  grete  men,  and  so  ^if  sclaunder  to  his  breper  and  oj^er  men,  to 
lyve  in  pride  and  covetise,  gloterie  and  ydelnesse,  and  leeve  J)0 
servise  of  God  as  ]?of  \ei  were  exempt  from  alle  godis.  And 
^itt  forfendynge  ^  of  ]?ese  covey touse  foolis  }?at  ben  lymytoures, 
gos  myche  symonye,  envye,  and  myche  foule  marchaundise ; 
and  who  can  beste  robbe  }»o  pore  puple  by  fals  beggyng  and 
ojjer  disseytis,  shal  have  ])is  Judas  offis.  And  so  a  neste  of 
Anticrist  clerkis  is  mayntened  by  sotil  cautelis  of  ]?o  fende. 

Cap.  XIV. 

Also  freris  schewen  not  to  ]?o  puple  hor  grete  synnes  stably 
as  God  biddes,  and  namely  to  myghty  men  of  J)0  worlde,  bot 

^  clepid,  X.  ^  seldom,  X.  ^  perhaps  it  should  be /or  sendynge. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


377 


flatreii  horn  and  glosen  and  norischen  horn  in  synne.  And  sith 
hit  is  \o  oflfis  of  a  prechoure  to  schewe  men  her  foule  synnes, 
and  peynes  Jjerfore,  and  freris  taken  ]?is  oflas,  and  done  hit  not, 
}>ei  ben  cause  of  dampnacioun  of  Jjo  puple.  For  in  ])is  ))ei  ben 
foule  traytours  to  God,  and  eke  to  Jjo  puple,  and  J)ei  ben  nursis 
of  ])0  fende  of  helle.  For  by  fiatryng  and  fals  byheestis,  \e\ 
leten  men  lyve  in  hor  lustis  and  counforten  horn  ]?erinne.  And 
simityme  ]?ei  pursuen  o}>er  trewe  prechoures,  for  )?ei  wil  not 
glose  myghty  men,  and  counfort  horn  in  hor  synnes,  but  wil 
scharply  telle  horn  ])0  sothe;  and  fus  myghti  men  hire  by  grete 
costis  a  fals  traytour  to  lede  hom  to  helle.  And  ensaumple 
men  may  take,  how  freris  suffren  myghty  men  fro  ^eere  to  ^eere 
lif  in  avowtrie,  in  covetise,  in  extorsiouns  doyng,  and  mony 
o}?er  synnes.  And  when  men  ben  hardid  in  soche  grete  synnes, 
and  wil  not  amende  hom,  freris  schulden  fie  hor  homely  cum- 
panye,  bot  ]?ei  do  not  ])us,  lest  fei  leese  worldly  frenschip, 
favoure,  or  ^ynnyng.  And  j?us  for  J?o  money  ]?ei  sellen  mennis 
soulis  to  Sathanas. 

Cap.  XV. 

Also  freris  by  lettris  of  fraternite  *  disseyven  ])0  puple  in  feyth, 
robben  hom  of  temporal  godis,  and  maken  ]?o  puple  to  trist 
more  in  deed  parchemyne,  seelid  wi]>  leesinges,  and  in  veyn 
preyers  of  ypocrites,  J)at,  in  caas,  ben  dampned  devels,  J?en  in 
J?e  helpe  of  God,  and  in  hor  owne  gode  lyvynge.  Comynly 
J>ese  lettris  ben  poudrid  wi]>  ypocrisye,  covetise,  symonye,  blas- 
phemye,  and  o]?er  leesinges.  Wi]?  ypocrisie, — for  ]?erinne  ben 
tolde  wi]?outen  ende^  mony  gode  dedis,  and  sumtjnne  ben 
fals,  and  more  to  schewe  hom  holy,  to  gete  worldly  godis,  ]jen 
to  save  mennis  soulis.  Wi)>  covetise, — for  ]?ei  done  ]?is  to  wynne 
]?o  penye ;  for  a  pore  mon  jjat  may  not  gif  hom,  be  he  nevere  so 
trew  to  God,  schal  not  have  hom,  bot  a  riche^  be  he  nevere  so 
cursid,  schal  have  soche  lettris,  and  wenes  )?at  he  is  siker  ynowh 
herby,  do  he  nevere  so  myche  wrong  to  pore  men.  WiJ?  symo- 
nye,— ^for  fei  sellen  })is  spiritual  gode  for  temporal  godis,  and 

1  nede,  X. 
a  Yox  some  account  of  these  letters  of  fraternity,  see  vol.  i.  p.  67. 


They  deceive 
them  and  cheat 
them  by  means 
of  their  letters 
of  fraternity. 


378 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


))at  unskilfuly,  for  suche  chafferynge  or  grauntinge  of  lettris 
was  nevere  ensamplid  of  Crist  ne  his  apostils,  and  ^itte  Jjei  loved 
best  mennis  soulis.  Wijj  blasphemye,—  for  Jjes  synful  wrecchis 
taken  upon  horn  J?o  deelyng  of  gode  dedis;  but  J?is  ]?ing  is 
appropred  to  God ;  and  so  ))ei  ben  blasphemes.  For  ]>ei  passen 
bischopis,  popis,  and  eke  God  hymself;  for  ]?ei  graunten  no 
pardoun,  bot  if  men  ben  contrit  and  schryven,  and  of  meryt  of 
Cristis  passioun  and  o]?er  seyntis;  bot  freris  maken  no  men- 
cyoun,  nou]?er  of  contricioun  lie  schrifFt,  ne  of  meryt  of  Cristis 
passioun,  but  onely  of  hor  owne  gode  dedis.  And  so  Crist 
grauntis  to  no  synful  inon,  contynuynge  in  his  synne,  suche 
part  j  but  freris  graunten  ra}>er  to  cursid  men,  for  worschippe  or 


•nrtm"mrr»frA     TiA-n    ^r\   crr\Aa.    r^rwoi  lonc^-ri 
'V""V"0^5    r"'"    ''^   &^^^    ^vvyx*^   xxxwi.. 


Their  heresy 
concerning  the 
Eucharist 


XXXXV4.     UW.O   xa-iov^iV     vKj 


pass 


Crist,  fFor  Crist  wolde  not  graunte  to  his  cosyns  part  of  his 
kyngdome,  bot  if  Jjei  wolden  suffre  passioun  as  Crist  did,  bot 
freris  wil  make  men  eeyris  in  Jje  blis  of  heven,  si]>  ]>ei  graunten 
men  part  of  hor  gode  dedis  after  ])is  lif ;  and  Jjei  may  not  haf 
Jjen  part  bot  if  fei  schulen  be  saved.  Bot  Cristen  byleve  techis 
)jat  alle  men  in  charitee  ben  parcyneres  by  graunte  of  God  of 
alle  medeful  dedis ;  why  J^en  graunten  freris  ]?is  part  ?  Ffor  J?ei 
wil  have  proprete  of  gostly  godis  where  no  proprete  may  be, 
and  leeven  proprete  of  worldly  godis  where  Cristen  men  may 
have  proprete.  And  ]>us  j?ei  techen  J?o  puple  ])at  hit  is  more 
medeful  to  gif  soche  ypocritis  bodily  almes,  J?en  to  gif  hit  to 
pore  nedy  men  after  ]?o  gospel.  And  )?us  ]?ei  disseyven  J?o  puple 
in  byleve,  and  robben  hom  of  temporal  godis,  and  maken  to 
recke  lesse  of  hor  owne  gode  lyvynge,  for  trist  of  fese  fals 
lettris. 

Cap.  XVI. 

Also  freris  perverten  \o  right  feithe  of  )?o  sacrament  of  J?o 
auter,  and  bringen  in  a  newe  heresie.  Ffor  when  Crist  seis 
])at  \o  bred  ^at  he  brake  and  blessid  is  his  body,  \ti  sey  hit  is 
an  accident  wi]?outen  sugett,  or  noght.  And  when  holi  writt 
seis  openly  ]>at  J;is  sacrament  is  bred  )>at  we  breken,  and  Gods 
body,  ]?ei  seyn  j?at  hit  is  noufer  bred  ne  Gods  body,  bot  acci- 
dent wi)?outen  sugett,  and  noght.  And  J?us  fei  leeven  holy 
writt,  and  taken  new  heresie  on  Crist  and  his  apostils,  and  on 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS.      •  379 

Austyn,  Jerom,  Ambrose,  Ysider »,  and  oJ?er  seyntis ;  and  ]?e 
Court  of  Rome,  and  alle  trew  Cristen  men  })at  holden  \o  feith 
of  J>o  gospel.  Ffor  Crist  seis  J>at,  l>is  bred  is  my  body ;  and 
Seynt  Poule  seis,  po  bred  ])at  we  breken  is  \o  comunycacioun 
of  J?o  Lordis  body ;  and  Seynt  Austyn  seis,  Jiat  }>at  J>ing  ])at  we 
seen  is  bred.  Bot  as  to  faith  fully  tau3te  Jjo  bred  is  Cristis 
body,  Ambrose  seis  ])at  )>ing  ])at  is  bred  schal  be  Cristis  body  b. 
Jerom  seis,  j^at  ]?at  bred  \o  whiche  Crist  brae  and  gaf  to  his 
disciplis  is  \o  body  of  oure  Saveour,  flfor  Crist  seis,  fis  is  my 
body  c.  Berengarie,  by  approvynge  of  \o  Court  of  Rome,  seis 
]?us  ; — I  knoweleche  wij;  herte  and  wij?  mouthe  ])at  \o  bred  \2X 
is  leyd  on  \o  auter  is  not  onely  \o  sacrament,  bot  verrey  Cristis 
body  ^.  O  Lord  I  what  hardy  devel  durste  teche  jjese  freris  to 
denye  ])us  openly  holy  writt,  and  alle  J?ese  seyntis,  and  ]?o  Court 
of  Rome,  and  alle  trew  Cristen  men,  and  to  fynde  ])is  heresie, 
})at  )?is  sacrid  oost  is  accident  wij)0uten  sugett,  or  noght  ?  sith 
|?is  is  not  tau3te  opunly  in  holy  writt,  and  resoun  and  witte  is 
ageyns  J?is.  And  Austyn,  in  J?re  or  foure  grete  bookis,  seis  ex- 
pressely  ]>at  noon  accident  may  be  wi]?outen  sugett,  and  alle 
wise  philosoforis  acorden  here  wij?  Austyn.  Lord,  what  schulde 
move  Crist  Almyghty,  al- witty,  and  alle^  weP  willynge,  to  hide  J?is 
byleve  of  freris  by  a  thousande  jeer,  and  nevere  to  teche  his 
apostils  and  so  many  seyntis  ]jo  right  byleve,  but  to  teche  first 
J»ese  ypocrites,  ]>at  comen  nevere  into  \o  Chirche  til  \o  foule 
fende  Sathanas  was  unbounden  ?  Herby  schulden  alle  Cristen 
men  knowe  }?o  freris  heresie,  and  not  resseyve  horn  into  hor 
housis  byfore  fat  ]>ei  confessiden  under  hor  general  seel  \o  right 
bileve  of  Cristen  men,  and  had  forsaken  hor  olde  heresie. 

1  So  in  X;  om.W.  2  go  in  X;  W  has  wil. 

a  Isidore.  dicente  ad  eos,  Accipite  et  comedite, 

^  S.  Ambr.  De  Sacramentis,  lib.  iv.  hoc  est  corpus  meum* . 

cap.  5.  d  See  the  abjuration  of  Berenga- 

c  The  passage  is  in  St.  Jerome's  rius  (made  by  him  at  the  Council 

Epistola  ad  Hedibiam,  ch.  ii. :  '  Nos  of  Rome  in  1059)  ^^  Labbe's  Co7i- 

autem  audiamus  panem,  quern  fregit  cilia,  torn.  ix.  p.  iioi  (edit.  1671, 

Dominus,  deditque  discipulis  suis,  Paris), 
esse  coi-pus  Domini  Salvatoris,  ipso 


38o 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


The  parochial 
system  im- 
paired by  the 
encroachments 
and  covetous- 
ness  of  the 
iriars* 


Cap.  XVII. 

Also  freris  bylden  mony  grete  chirchis  and  costily  waste 
housis,  and  cloystris  as  hit  were  castels,  and  ]?at  wi|30ute  nede, 
where-thorw  parische  chirchis  ^  and  comyne  weyes  ben  payred, 
and  in  mony  placis  undone.  And  so  J)ei  techen  in  dede  ))at 
men  schulden  have  heritage  and  dwellynge  cyte  in  erthe,  and 
forgete  heven,  ageyns  Seynt  Poule.  Ffor  by  })is  new  housinge 
of  freris,  }?of  hit  rayne  on  Jjo  auter  of  J)0  parische  chirche,  ]?o 
blynde  puple  is  so  disseyved  ]?at  fei  wil  raper  gif  to  waste 
housis  of  freris  j?en  to  parische  chirchis,  or  to  comyn  weyes, 
]?of  men  catel  and  beestis  ben  perischid  J?erinne.     Byfore  }?at 


freris  comen  in  ^er  was  more  puple,  and  be 


plenty- 


uos ;  and  ]?en  were  chirchis  ynowe.  Whatj  skil  is  hit  now  to 
make  so  myche  cost  in  new  byldyng,  and  lete  olde  parische 
chirchis  falle  doune }  And  if  men  seyn  J?at  in  ))ese  grete 
chirchis  God  is  feyre  served,  certis  grete  housis  make  not  men 
holy,  and  onely  by  holynesse  is  God  wel  served.  Ffor  in  heven, 
j;at  was  so  feyre,  Lucifer  served  God  untreuly,  and  so  did  Adam 
in  Paradise.  And  Jesus  seis  ]?at  }>o  grete  temple  of  Jerusalem, 
J>at  was  a  hous  of  preyer  and  sumtyme  Gods  hous,  was  made  a 
den  of  thefis,  for  covetouse  prechoures  dwelliden  j^erinne,  Bot 
Job  served  God  ful  wel  on  })0  dunghil,  and  so  did  Adam  oute 
of  Paradise,  and  Crist  beste,  when  he  preyed  in  hilles  and 
desertis,  and  Baptist  eke.  And  ]?erfore  Crist  and  his  apostlis 
maden  no  grete  chirchis  ne  cloystris,  bot  wenten  fro  cuntrey  to 
cuntrey,  preching  J?o  gospel,  and  teching  men  to  do  hor  almes 
to  pore  men,  and  not  to  waste  housis.  Ffor  Crist  tau3te  men 
to  preye  in  spirit  and  treuthe,  j^at  is,  in  gode  ^ville  and  devo- 
cioun  and  holy  lyvynge.  And  to  destrie  ))is  ypocrisie,  he 
ordeyned  ]}0  temple  of  Jerusalem  schulde  be  destried,  for  synne 
done  Jjerinne. 


a  As  bishops  and  [monastic]  cor- 
porations were  in  mutual  hostility, 
so  the  parochial  clergy  found  oppo- 
nents and  dangerous  rivals  in  the 
richly  privileged  Mendicant  Orders, 
who  were  indefatigable  in  their  at- 


tempts to  appropriate  the  lucrative 
functions  of  the  priesthood,  and  to 
decoy  the  people  from  the  parish- 
churches  into  their  own.' — The  Pope 
a?id  the  Councih  p.  167  (English 
translation,  Rivingtons,  1869). 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


381 


Cap.  XVIII. 

Freris  also  destrien  obedience  of  Gods  lawe,  and  magnifyen 
singuler  obedience  made  to  synful  men,  and,  in  caas,  to  devels ; 
whiche  obedience  Crist  ensaumplid  nevere,  nou}»er  in  hymself 
ne  in  his  apostils.  Ffor  by  teching  of  Seynt  Poule  iche  mon 
owis  to  be  sugett  to  ojjer  in  \o  drede  of  Crist,  ])at  is,  in  als 
myche  as  he  techis  hym  Gods  wille;  and  no  mon  schulde 
obeeche  more  to  any  mon.  And  evere  |)0  more  ]?at  a  mon 
were,  Jjo  more  schulde  he  ])us  meke  hym  self,  as  Crist  did  to 
alle  his  apostils.  Bot  freris  tellen  no^t  by  Jjis  obedience,  bot 
if  )?ei  maken  singuler  professioun  to  sinful  foolis,  }?at  mony 
tymes  techen  and  comaunden  horn  ageyns  Gods  wille;  and 
seyn,  J)at  in  suche  Jjinges  as  ben  not  expressely  comaundid  ne 
forfendid  in  Gods  lawe,  Jjei  schulden  algatis  do  after  hor 
sovereyns,  ^he,  \oi  hit  be  unwittingly  ageyns  Gods  wille.  And 
sith  hit  is  approprid  to  ])0  Holy  Gost  to  gif  ful  counseil  in 
soche  poyntes,  ))ei  maken  hor  synful  prioures  even  wi)?  |)0  Holy 
Gost;  and  where  J^ei  schulden  be  governed  in  soche  douty 
poyntes  by  J)0  Holy  Gost,  ]?ei  leeven  his  counsel  and  reulyng 
mony  tymes,  and  taken  hom  to  ^o  reulynge  of  a  synful  fool, 
and,  in  caas,  a  dampned  fende  in  helle.  And  ]?us  \^i  leeven 
obedience  J^at  Crist  tau^te  and  ensaumplid,  as  unperfite  and  not 
sufficient,  and  prysen  more  feyned  obedyence  to  synful  foolis, 
J)at  )?ei  taken  of  hor  owne  presumpcioun,  as  if  soche  foolis 
hade  founden  perfiter  obedience  ]?en  evere  did  Crist,  God  and 
mon. 

Cap.  XIX. 

Also  freris  forsaken  perfeccioun  of  hor  ordir  for  worschip  of 
]?o  world  and  covetise,  and  ben  not  sufFrid  to  take  ]?o  fredome 
of  J)0  gospel,  for  to  preche  Gods  worde  to  \o  puple.  Ffor  freris 
ben  made  bischopis, — 3he,  mony  tymes  bi  symonye,  and  sworne 
strongly  to  go  and  preche  and  convert  hethen  men ;  and  leeven 
j?is  gostly  offis,  and  ben  suffragans  in  Englond,  and  robben 
men  by  extorciouns,  as  in  punysching  of  synnne  for  money, 
and  suffren  men  to  lye  in  synne  fro  3eer  to  ^eer  for  an  annuel 
rente.     And  so  in  halo^v)^nge  of  chirchis  and  chirche-^erdis  and 


Their  doctrine 
of  implicit 
obedience  to 
a  superior  is 
dishonouring 
toCIirist. 

Eph.  V.  21. 


Friars  who 
leave  their 
Order  to  ac- 
cept Church 
dignities  are 
still  more 
pernicious. 


383 


They  inculcate 
a  superstitious 
reverence  for 
their  habit, 
and  trust  in  its 
virtue  at  the 
hour  of  death. 


TFCLIF'S  WORKS. 

auters,  and  comynly  alle  o)?er  sacramentis,  for  money.  And 
J?us  Jjese  freris,  bischopis,  lyven  comynly  evere  after  in  symonye 
pride  and  robberye,  and  J?us  ]>ei  ben  exempt  by  Cayaphas 
bischopriche  fro  alle  gode  observaunsis  of  Gods  lawe,  and  of 
hor  owne  ordir,  and  be  fre  to  lyve  in  synne,  and  to  robbe  oure 
lond,  and  envemyn  ^  hit  by  mony  cm-singes.  And  so  \d  beren 
oute  first  J?o  golde  of  oure  lond  to  aliens,  and  sumtyme  to  oure 
enemyeSj  to  gete  of  Anticrist  ]?is  fals  exempcioun,  and  evere 
after  lyven  in  rObbynge  of  pore  men,  and  mayntenen  myche 
synne,  cursinge,  and  symonye,  ])at  is  passing  heresie.  And 
o}?er  bischopis  of  horn  ]?at  have  diocisis  in  l?is  lond,  forsaken 
povert  and  penaunse  and  obedience,  for  ]?ei  loken  to  be  maysters 
of  all  freris  of  jjat  ordir  in  J)is  lond^  and  to  lyve  in  pride,  lustis 
of  hor  flesche,  ydelnesse,  and  spoyling  of  \o  puple  more  suttily 
Jjen  ofer.  And  ])us  a  frere  schalle  dwelle  in  courtis  of  lordis 
and  ladies,  to  be  hor  confessours,  and  not  displeese  horn  for 
no])ing,  ])of  ])ei  lyven  in  nevere  so  cursid  synnes,  for  to  lyve  in 
his  lustis,  and  to  gete  falsely  muk  to  Anticristis  covent,  and 
lette  pore  men  of  hor  almes.  And  herto  he  schal  have  leeve 
and  comaundement  upon  vertue  of  obedience;  bot  he  schal 
no  leeve  have  to  go  geiieraly  aboute  in  ))0  worlde,  and  preche 
treuly  \o  gospel  wi]?outen  beggyng,  and  lyve  an  open  pore  and 
just  lif,  as  Crist  and  his  apostils  diden,  ffor  ])is  were  destrying 
of  hor  feyned  ordir.  And  ]?erfore  \q\  loven  more  pride,  covetise, 
and  lustis  of  hor  owne  flesche,  fen  \o  worschip  of  God  and 
heele  of  monnis  soule.  And  ]5us  }>ei  maken  sacrifice  to  Lucifer, 
to  mammon,  and  to  hor  owne  stenkynge  bely. 

Cap.  XX. 

Also  freris  prysen  more  hor  rooten  habite  J^en  }>o  worschipful 
body  of  oure  Jesus  Crist.  Ffor  J^ei  techen  lordis,  and  namely 
ladies,  J^at  if  ]?ei  dyen  in  Fraunceys  habite  j^ei  schul  nevere  cum 
in  helie  forvertu  |5erof;  and  certis  ]?is  is  an  open  heresie,  damp- 
nynge  alle  |?at  tristen  J?us  into  hor  lyves  ende.  Bot  a  mon  may 
have  J)0  sacrament  of  \o  auter,  \2X  is  verrey  Gods  body,  in  his 

^  envenyme,  X. 


CONTRO  VERSIAL  TRA  CTS. 

mouthe,  and  streyght  fle  to  helle  wiJ?outen  ende,  and  \o  more 
be  dampned  for  \o  yvel  takynge  of  ])is  sacrament.  Soche 
heretikis  ben  miable  to  be  amonge  Cristen  men. 

Cap.  XXI. 

Also  freris  beggen  wi})Outen  nede  for  hor  owne  riche  secte, 
and  not  for  pore  bedraden  men  ]?at  may  not  go,  and  have  no 
mon  to  sende  for  hor  lyvelode,  bot  ra{?er  drawen  riche  mennis 
almes  fro  soche  pore  men.  And  herfore  charite  is  outelawed 
amonge  hom,  and  so  is  God;  and  leesinges,  covetise,  and 
fendis,  ben  enhabited  amonge  hom.  For  J^ei  disseyven  men  in 
hor  almes,  to  make  costily  housis,  not  to  herberow  pore  men, 
bot  lordis  and  myghty  men ;  and  techen  men  to  suffer  Gods 
temple,  }?at  ben  pore  men,  to  perische  for  defaute.  And  J?us 
\€\  ben  traytoures  to  God,  and  his  riche  puple,  -whom  \€\  dis- 
seyven in  hor  almes,  and  monquelleres  of  pore  men,  whose 
lyvelode  }?ei  awey  taken  fro  hom  by  fals  leesinges,  and  herfore 
])ei  ben  irreguler  bifore  God,  and  despisen  hym,  and  harmen 
\q  puple  when  \€\  seyn  masse  or  mateynes  in  J?is  cursid  Hf, 
as  holy  writte  techis,  and  Austyn  and  Gregor  declaren  fully. 

Cap.  XXII. 

Freris  also  kepen  not  correpcioun  of  \o  gospel  ageyns  hor 
bre}?er  ])at  trespassen,  bot  cruely  done  hom  to  peyneful  prisoun. 
Bot  ]>is  is  not  \o  meke  suynge  of  Jesus  Crist,  for  he  and  his 
apostils  prisoneden  not  synful  men  in  ])is  lif,  bot  scharply 
reproved  hor  synne,  and  at  \o  laste,  when  fei  wolden  not 
amende  hom,  tau^ten  gode  men  to  comyne  not  wi]?  hom.  Bot 
J?ese  freris  schewen  here  tirauntrie  at  \o  fulle,  whoso  knewe 
wil  hor  peynes  and  tourmentis.  And  hit  semes  no  wisedome 
ne  profite  to  gif  freris  power  to  prisoime  men.  Ffor  when  \o 
kyng  by  his  officeris  prisounes  a  mon,  ]>at  is  comynly  done  for 
gret  and  open  trespas,  and  J)at  is  gode  warnyng  to  o])er  mys- 
doers,  and  sum  profit  comes  to  \o  kynges  ministers.  Bot 
when  freris  prisounen  her  bre]?er,  Jjo  peyne  is  not  knowen  to 
men,  jaof  ]?o  synne  were  nevere  so  open  and  sclaunderouse,  and 


383 


Friars  beg 
without  need, 
and  thus  inter- 
cept alms  from 
those  in  real 
distress. 


Their  cruel 
practice  of 
imprisoning 
members  of 
their  own 
Order. 


384 


WrCLIF'S  WORKS. 


This  the  king 
ought  not  to 
suffer. 


Their  inordi- 
nate  power, — 
social,  pohtical, 
and  ecclesias- 
tical. 


]?at  dos  harme  to  Jjer  lege  men,  and  profite  of  kynges  ministris 
is  awey.  And  when  J)0  potestatis  of  freris  ben  proude,  covet- 
ouse,  and  synful,  and  haten  J>o  treuthe,  J?ei  wil  soone  prisoun 
trew  men  ]>at  reproven  hor  synnes,  and  spare  oJ?er  schrewes,  fat 
))ei  may  flater  horn  and  mayntene  horn  in  hor  synne,  and  so, 
byside  ]?o  kynges  leeve,  tormenten  trew  men,  for  )?ei  wolden 
do  Gods  heestis.  And  sith  \o  kyngis  graunte  is  occasion 
herto,  \o  kyng  is  holden  to  revoke  and  lette  freris  prisonyng, 
leste  he  be  gilty  of  ]>o  synne  ]?at  comes  )?erby,  sith  he  may 
destrie  hit  and  dos  not.  And  Jjus  deede  beggers,  freris,  lippen 
up  to  kynges  power,  and  mony  tymes  more  J?en  Jjo  kyng  dar 
do,  and  maken  J30  kyng  fo  fendis  tormentonr  to  prisoune  trewe 
men,  for  \ei  seyn  fo  sothe.  And  so  }o  kyng  stoppis  Gods 
lawe  to  be  knowen  in  his  lond,  and  norischis  yvel  men,  and 
prisounes  gode.  Ffor  }>is  deede  and  mony  moo  schulde  J30  kyng 
revoke  ])is  prisonyng,  and  make  clerkes  by-reulid^  aftir  \o 
gospel,  by  symplenesse  and  holy  lyvynge. 

Cap.  XXIII. 

Also  freris  maken  oure  lond  lawelesse,  for  J^ei  leeden  clerkes, 
and  namely  reulen  prelatis  and  lordis  and  lay  dies,  and  comynes 
also;  and  ]?ei  ben  not  reulid  by  Gods  lawe,  ne  lawes  of  \o 
Chirche,  ne  lawes  of  J?o  kyng.  Ffor  ]?ei  glosen  Gods  lawe  as 
horn  likes,  and  ben  exempt  fro  bischopis  and  ofer  ordinaries, 
and  leeden  \o  bischop  of  Rome  as  hom  likes.  And  men  seyn 
)?ei  ben  not  lege  men  to  J?o  kynge  ne  sugett  to  his  lawes ;  ffor 
J?of  )?ei  steelen  mennis  childer,  hit  is  seyd  ]?er  gos  no  lawe  upon 
hom.  And  J>at  semes  evil,  for  ]>ei  robben  }>o  kynges  lege  men 
by  fals  beggynge  of  sixty  thousande  mark  by  ^eere,  as  men 
douten  resonably,  and  ^itte  })ei  ben  not  punisched  herfore. 
And  J)us  lawelesse  freris,  by  hor  fals  reulynge,  maken  our  lond 
laweles,  ffor  ]?ei  letten  clerkes,  lordis,  and  comyns  to  knowe 
j30  treuthe  of  holy  writt,  and  maken  hom  to  pursue  trew  men 
to  ])0  deth,  for  \qi  techen  ]?o  comaundementis  of  God,  and  crien 
to  )?o  puple  j?o  foule  synnes  of  fals  freris.     And  )?us  falsenesse 


to  he  reulid,  X. 


WYCLIF. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


i^S 


-is  mayntened,  and  fals  men  ben  raysid  to  grete  astatis,  and 
treuthe  is  putt  on  bac,  and  trew  men  ben  pursued,  ^he,  to 
prisonyng,  to  losse  of  alia  hor  godis,  and  to  scharpe  jugement, 
for  als  myche  as  Jjei  wolden  destrie  synne  J?at  was  openly  and 
cursidly  done,  and  in  poynt  for  to  fordo  oure  lond.  And  of 
J?is  reuling  ben  freris  moste  gilty,  for  \€\  leeden  prelatis,  lordis 
and  ladies,  justisis  and  ojjer  men  by  confessioun,  and  tellen 
horn  not  spedily  hor  synnes ;  fFor  if  J)ei  tolden  horn  hor  synnes, 
and  J?ei  wolde  not  amende  hom,  \q  freris  J?at  ben  hor  confes- 
soures  schulden  leeve  hom  up,  as  Crist  and  Poul  techen.  Bot 
\€\  done  not  J)us,  for  ]?en  \€\  schulden  leese  wynnyng  and  favor 
of  \o  worlde.  And  ])us,  for  love  of  money  and  wilfare  of  hor 
body,  \€\  leeden  oure  lond  oute  of  \q  lawe  of  God  and  al 
rightwisenes. 

Cap.  XXIV. 

Also  freris  ben  irreguler  procuratours  of  ]?o  fende,  to  make 
and  mayntene  werris  on  Cristen  men,  and  enemyes  of  pees  and 
charite.  For  freris  counseilen  and  opunly  prechen,  }>at  men 
schulen  fie  to  heven  wi]?outen  peyne  if  \€\  wolden  goo  and  slee 
in  hor  owne  persone,  or  mayntene  and  fynde  one  at  hor  coste, 
to  slee  Cristen  men.  And  \o  ende  was  to  make  Cristis  viker 
moste  riche  to  \o  worlde,  \o  whiche  viker  schulde  be  moste 
pore,  suynge  in  J?is  moste  hyely  Crist  and  his  apostlis.  Bot 
Crist  dyed  to  make  pees  and  charite ;  and  if  men  myghten  j)us 
frely  graunte  pardoun,  J^ei  schulden,  ^he,  to  lese  hor  owne  lif, 
graunte  pardoun  to  make  pees.  ^\\X^  \€\  prechen  no  pardoun 
ne  mede  to  make  pees  and  charite,  and  3itte  J^ei  ben  bounden 
of  God  to  make  men  siker  to  have  \o  blis  of  heven,  if  \€\  wil 
treuly  procure  for  pees  and  charite.  Bot  of  \o  pardoun  }>at 
men  usen  to  day  fro  J50  Court  of  Rome,  J^ei  have  no  sikernesse 
by  holy  writte  ne  resoun,  ne  ensaumple  of  Crist  or  ^  his  apostils. 
And  so  of  ojjer  werris  and  debatis,  J?at  freris  myghten  lette  if 
Jjei  wolden.  And  si]^  ]?ei  done  not,  bot  ra];er  counseilen  ]?erto, 
and  counforten  men  J?erinne,  and  tellen  not  \o  periles  of  hom, 
\€\  ben  cause  and  procuratoures  of  alle  werris,  and  specialy  of 


The  friars 
eai^erly  pro- 
moted the  late 
disastrous 
crusade  to 
Flanders. 


WOBKS. 


1  SO  X  ;  W  has  of, 
VOL.    III.  C  C 


386 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


The  same  sub- 
ject continued. 


)?is  werre  in  Flaundris.  For  J^ei  prechiden  j^at,  and  haden  hit 
forth,  a^eyns  \o  kyng,  J>o  duke  a,  and'  o]?ir  lordis  and  clerkis, 
and  scharply  pursueden  prestis  ]jat  stoden  by  charite  and  profite 
of  J)0  rewme.  And  so  ]?ei  weren  J^en  above  \o  kyng,  lordis, 
and  trew  prestis,  and  robbiden  Jjo  kyngis  lege  men  by  fals 
leesinges  of  many  thousande  poundis,  ]?at  ]?of  ])0  kyng  schulde 
now  be  taken,  and  oure  lond  conqueerid  or  destried,  \o  kyng 
myght  not  reyse  so  myche  to  helpe  hymself  and  his  lond. 
And  certis  here  was  tresoun  to  God  and  \o  kyng,  and  false 
disseyte  of  alle  men,  bothe  of  catel  and  of  soule,  and  lettinge 
and  destrieyng  of  pees  and  of  charite. 

Cap.  XXV. 

Freris  also  ben  Scarioths  childre,  bitrayinge  trew  men  of  \o 
gospel,  and  so  Crist,  for  money.  And  for  money  ]?ei  senden 
soulis  to  Sathanas,  by  ensaumple  of  hor  yvel  lyvynge,  by  connseil 
to  werris,  and  norischinge  and  counfortinge  men  in  synne,  for 
lustis  of  hor  flesche.  Ffor,  in  pleesinge  of  bischopis  and  oj^er 
men,  ])ei  prechen  ageyns  povert  of  Crist,  and  seyn  Jiat  prechours 
of  ])0  gospel  and  Cristis  lif  ben  heretikes,  worthy  to  be  brende. 
And  so,  for  giftis  of  bischopis  and  oJ?er  men,  and  worldly  favor, 
J?ei  sellen  treuthe  of  Jjo  gospel,  and  so  Crist,  as  Judas  did.  Ffor 
Seynt  Bede  and  Seynt  Ambrose  seyn,  sith  Crist  is  treuthe,  he 
])at  for  money  seis  falsenesse,  and  leeves  jjo  sothe,  dos  suche 
synne  as  Judas  did.  And  so  ])ei  counseilen  to  werris,  for  j^ei 
wynnen  myche  Jjerby;  and  for  defaute  of  charite  ]?ei  senden 
soulis  to  helle,  when  men  by  hor  counseile  taken  fals  werris 
and  enden  in  hom,  wenynge  jjat  Jjei  done  wil,  and  )?erfore  dyen 
wi]?outen  sorwe  of  hom.  And  for  to  hert  men  in  ]?is  cursid 
werringe,  J?ei  gone  with  hom  into  werre,  and  ben  hor  confes- 


*  That  is,  the  Duke  of  Lancaster, 
for  lie  was  in  power  in  1383,  the 
year  of  the  expedition  to  Flanders. 
The  foim  of  expression  also  seems 
to  show  that  this  was  wiitten  before 
1386,  in  which  year,  owing  to  the 
departure  of  John  of  Gaunt  for  Por- 
tugal,   his    brother,  the    Duke    of 


Gloucester,  obtained  a  commanding 
influence  at  court.  At  the  same 
time  the  enterprise  of  Bishop  Spen- 
cer is  not  spoken  of  as  a  very  recent 
event ;  so  that,  if  this  tract  be  really 
by  Wychf,  we  must  assign  it,  I 
think,  to  the  last  six  months  of  his 
Ufe. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


387 


soures,  and  sumtyme  sleen  men  in  hor  owne  persone.  And 
]?us  J?ei  ben  Anticristis  martiris,  and  fleen  to  helle,  to  drawe  o]?er 
men  }?ider  after  horn. 

Cap.  XXVI. 

Also  freris  destryen  ])is  woiide  moste  of  alle  cursid  men,  ffor 
]?ei  bacbyten  gode  clerkis,  and  seyn  }>at  \€\  distourblen  \o 
worlde,  and  fiateren  yvel  clerkes  in  hor  synne.  And  so  J^ei 
preysen  lordis  ]>at  ben  tyraimtis,  extorsioneris,  and  yvel  l)^ers, 
and  ladies  also.  And  Jjei  dispisen  lordis  and  ladies  J)at  bygyn- 
nen  to  leeve  pride  and  vanyte  of  Jjo  world,  and  seyn  hit 
was  not  myrie,  sithen  lordis  and  ladies  taken  rewarde  to  \o 
gospel,  and  lafFten  hor  aunsetris  maners  J>at  weren  wurschipful 
to  |>o  worlde.  And  so,  of  riche  men  and  o]?er,  j^ei  preysen  horn 
j>at  bringen  horn  myche  money,  wij)  wronge  and  mony  disseytis, 
and  seyn  }>at  J^ei  ben  holy ;  bot  o]3er  men  ]?at  gyven  not  freris 
much  more  J?an  ynowhe,  \€\  lakken  at  }>o  fulle,  )?of  \€\  done  hor 
almes  myche  better  to  hor  pore  neghtboris.  And  sith  God  seis 
]?at  yvel  techers  ben  cause  of  destruccioun  of  J)0  puple,  and 
Grosted  declarid  hit  wil,  and  freris  ben  principal  yvel  techers, 
]jei  ben  principal  cause  of  destryinge  of  J)is  worlde,  Ffor  jjei 
ben  confessoures,  prechoures,  and  reulers  comynly  of  alle  men, 
and  J?ei  techen  hom  not  hor  foule  synnes,  and  periles  of  hom, 
bot  suifren  hom  in  hor  synnes,  for  ^vynnynge  of  stinkynge 
muck  and  lustis  of  hor  owne  bely,  Jjat  is  foule  wormes  meete 
and  a  sack  of  dritt. 

Cap.  XXVIL 

Also  freris  ben  moste  rebel  ageyns  \o  techinge  of  Cristis 
gospel  and  moste  out  of  patiense  and  pite,  ffor  J?ei  ben  moste 
unpacient  ageyns  reprovynge  of  synne  and  destryinge  J?erof. 
Ffor  a  lord  wil  mekelier  suffer  scharpe  despisinge  of  his  litel 
synne,  ]?en  \€\  wil  suffer  meke  and  soffte  reprovynge  of  hor 
grete  heresies.  Ffor  J?ei  ben  wode  \2X  mennes  almes  schulde 
be  rightly  departid  amonge  pore  men,  nedy,  feble,  crokid,  and 
blinde, — ^ffor  fen  fei  se)Ti  j?ei  ben  undone.  Bot  \€\  ben  of 
veyne  religioun,  as  Seynt  Jame  seis,  Ffor  J)is  is  a  clene  religioun, 
wijjouten  spott  anentis  God  J?o  Fadir,  to  visite  fadirles  and 

c  c  2 


As  spiritual 
guides,  they 
encourag-e  the 
rich  in  pride 
and  worldli- 
ness. 


Their  impa- 
tience of 
reproof ; 


388 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


their  treason- 
able language. 


The  friars 
virtually  deny 
the  truth  of 
holy  Scripture. 


modirles  childre,  and  widows  in  hor  tribulacioun,  and  to  kepe 
a  men  unfoulid  fro  ]?is  worlde,  J?at  is,  fro  pride,  covetise,  and 
vanytees.  Bot  freris  done  al  J?o  contrarie,  for  Jjei  visiten  riche 
men,  and  by  ypocrisie  geten  falsely  hor  almes,  and  wijjdrawen 
hit  fro  pore  men.  Bot  ]?ei  visiten  riche  widows  for  hor  mucke, 
and  maken  horn  to  be  biried  at  ]?o  freris ;  bot  pore  men  comen 
not  in  ]?ere.  And  mlleful  povert  )jei  forsaken,  and  ben  moste 
covetouse  of  alle  men,  and  boosten  more  of  hor  holynesse,  and 
ben  moste  dislavy  ^  of  hor  veyn  speche  and  worldly.  And,  as 
trewe  men  tellen,  freris  seyn  apertely,  if  \o  kynge  and  lordis  and 
o]?er  men  stonden  ])us  ageyns  hor  fals  beggyng,  and  wil  not 
suffer  freris  to  robbe  hor  tenauntis,  bot  gif  hor  almes  to  hor 
pore  neghtboris,  freris  wil  go  out  of  J30  lond  and  cum  ageyne 
wij?  bright  hedis  \    And  loke  whej)er  ]>is  be  tresoun  or  noon. 

Cap.  XXVIIL 

Also  freris  techen  and  mayntenen  fat  holy  writt  is  fals,  and  so 
J?ei  putten  falsenes  upon  oure  Lord  Jesus  Crist,  and  on  ]?o  Holy 
Gost,  and  on  al  J)0  blessid  Trinyte.  Ffor  sith  God  Almyghty 
tau^te,  confermes,  and  mayntenes  holy  writte,  if  ])is  wryting  be  fals, 
Jjen  God  is  fals,  and  mayntenour  of  error  and  falsenesse ;  bot 
certis  jjen  he  is  no  God.  5^^^^  knewen  we  nevere  jjat  any  sect 
wold  sey  }?at  lawes  of  hor  God  were  fals,  and  j?erwij)  byleve  on  J)0 
same  God,  bot  Jjis  despit  done  ]?ese  blasphemes  to  J)0  holy  Trinyte. 
Alas !  who  may  suifer  )>is  blasphemy e  ?  ])at  Crist  in  whom  is  al 
tresoure  of  witte,  wisedome,  and  treuthe,  couthe  not  or  wolde 
not  sey  trew  wordis  and  sentence,  bot  synful  folis  haf  trew 
maner  of  speking,  contrarie  to  J)0  speche  of  oure  Lord  Jesus 
Crist.  Ffor  if  ])is  be  sothe,  synful  folis,  ^he,  in  caas,  devels  of 
helle,  ben  wiser  and  trewere  ])en  is  Jesus  Crist.  And  when  J>is 
cursid  grounde  is  sought,  hit  stondes  in  ]?is  error;  flfor  I  am 
mayster  of  vanyte,  and  of  heresie  mysundirstonde  \o  wordis  of 
God,  jjerfore  ]?ei  ben  fals.  Bot  ])ese  heretikis  schulden  knowe 
J)at  hit  sues  of  hor  cursid  grounde  jjat  God  is  ]?o  falsest  ])ing 

^  dilavy,  X. 

a  That  is,  with  helmets  on  their  heads.  - 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


389 


in  erthe  or  heven  or  in  helle.  Why  ?  for  men  falsely  under- 
stonden  moste  falsenesse  of  hym;  and  })us  myght  iche  Pay- 
nyme  or  Saracen  make  oure  God  fals  as  hym  likes.  Bot  why 
seyn  \t\  J?at  holy  writt  is  fals  ?  for  ]?ei  ben  wonte  so  myche  to 
leesinges  and  falsenesse,  ]?at  \€\  taken  falsenesse  for  treuthe. 
As  men  seyn,  a  mon  may  so  long  be  norischid  litel  and  Htel  by 
venym,  J^at  he  wenes  \2X  hit  be  holsum  meete  and  gode.  Also 
holy  writt  dampnes  hor  foule  ypocrisie,  beggyng,  covetise,  and 
o]?er  synnes ;  and  )?erfore  J^ei  seyn  J^at  hit  is  fals,  to  coloure  by 
hor  falsenesse.  Also  holy  writt  preysis  myche  Cristis  religioim, 
and  tellis  how  newe  sectis,  ful  of  ypocrisie  and  covetise,  schulden 
cum  and  disseyve  Cristen  men,  and  biddes  hom  knowe  horn  by 
hor  covetise  and  ypocrisie.  And  herfore  Jjei  seyn,  as  Sathanas 
clerkis,  Jjat  holy  writt  is  fals. 

Cap.  XXIX. 

Freris  also  ben  stronglier  weddid  wij)  hor  roten  habite,  ageyns 
\o  fredome  of  Jjo  gospel,  J?en  \o  housbande  is  wiJ)  his  wif  by 
ordynaunce  of  God.  Ffor  Jjo  housbande  may  lawefully  be 
absente  fro  his  wif  by  a  moneth,  an  half  ^eer,  and  sumtyme 
seven  ^eer,  and,  by  comyn  asent  of  hom  bothe,  by  al  hor  lyve. 
Bot  if  a  frere  be  oute  of  his  roten  habite,  ^he,  an  hour,  he  is 
apostata,  Jjof  he  love  more  God  and  serve  hym  better,  and  pro- 
fite  more  to  Cristen  men.  And  J>us  J?ei  putten  more  holynesse 
in  hor  roten  habite  )?en  evere  did  Crist  or  his  apostils  in  hor 
clo))is,  flfor  Crist  was  thries  on  a  day  oute  of  his  clothis,  and  ^itt 
he  v/as  not  apostata.  Bot  jjei  chargen  so  myche  jjis  roten 
habite,  for  herby  J)0  puple  wenes  ))at  \€\  ben  holy,  and  gyven 
hom  more  dritt  Jjen  is  nedeful  or  profitable.  And  herfore  iche 
partye  drawes  ojjer  to  helle, — \o  freris,  for  hor  fals  takyng  of 
almes  when  no  nede  is,  ne  \€\  have  leeve  of  Gods  lawe  ])erto, — 
\o  blynde  puple,  for  \€\  drawen  hor  almes  fro  hor  pore  and 
nedy  neghtboris,  where  \€\  schulden  do  hit  by  \o  heest  of  God, 
and  mayntenen  freris  in  hor  fals  beggyng,  ypocrisie,  and  ojjer 
synnes  mony. 


Their  inordi- 
nate and_ 
superstitious 
regard  for  the 
haoit  of  their 
Order. 


39° 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


Friars  inculcate 
an  extravagant 
and  servile 
reverence  for 
papal  dispensa- 
tions and  the 
mandates  of 
superiors. 


Their  usury, 
simony,  cove- 
tousness,  and 
extortion. 


Cap.  XXX. 
Also  freris  techen  J>at  hit  is  not  leeveful  to  a  prest  or  ano)?er 
mon  to  kepe  ]?o  gospel  in  his  boundis  and  clennesse,  wijjouten 
error  of  synful  men,  bot  if  he  have  leeve  |)erto  of  Anticrist.  And 
})us  J?ei  seyn  hit  is  not  leveful  to  a  Cristen  mon  to  do  Gods 
comaundement,  bot  if  a  fend  gif  hym  leeve  ]?erto,  as  if  \o  leeve 
and  comaundement  of  God  be  not  ynowh  herto.  For  jjei  seyn 
)>at  a  prest  })at  has  bounden  hymself  to  errours  of  synful  men  by 
new  professioun,  may  not  go  to  ]?o  fredome  of  ]?o  gospel,  and 
lif  )?erafter  as  Crist  tau^te  prestis,  bot  if  ]?ei  have  dispensacioun 
of  j)0  pope.  And  I  suppose  j^at  he  be  Judas,  and  schal  be 
dampned ;  )?en  he  is  a  devel,  as  Crist  seis ;  and  J?en  hit  is  pleyne, 
sith  J?is  prest  may  not  kepe  })0  gospel  in  his  fredome  wi]?outen 
his  leeve,  and  he  is  in  J^is  caas  a  devel,  pen  a  prest  may  not 
kepe  \o  comaundementis  of  God  wi])Outen  leeve  of  a  fend.  Bot 
for  to  gete  ]?is  leeve  is  oure  golde  gyven  to  aliens,  and  sum- 
tyme  oure  enemyes;  and  ^itte  ])0  prest  schal  be  bounden 
comynly  to  J)0  roten  habite,  and  be  exempt  fro  godenesse,  and 
boldid  in  synne. 

Cap.  XXXI. 

Also  freris  ben  ressett,  and  a  swolowhe  of  symonye,  of 
usure,  of  extorsiouns,  of  raveyns,  and  of  thefftis,  and  a  nest  or 
hoorde  of  mammons  tresoures.  Ffor  \oi  men  lyven  in  sy- 
monye, J?ei  wil  not  counseil  hom  and  charge  hom  in  schriffte  to 
resigne  hor  benefice,  bot  counforten  hom  to  holde  hit  stille,  and 
bringe  hom  myche  dritt  J)erof,  and  ]?ei  wil  undertake  for  hor 
synne.  And  so  of  usureris,  ]?ei  chargen  hom  not  spedely  to 
make  restitucioun,  bot  ra})er  colouren  ]?is  synne,  to  be  partyner 
of  ]?is  wynnyng.  And  so  of  oj^er  robberie,  J;ei  resseyven  hit 
prively,  and  so  mayntenen  and  colouren  thefes  in  theffte,  where 
oJ?er  lege  men  schulden  be  punisched  J>erfore.  And  so  \ti  ben 
more  coveytous  };en  ]>o  wicked  Jewes  ]?at  bou^ten  Crist,  for  ))ei 
wolden  not  take  \o  money  of  Judas,  and  do  hit  to  hor  money 
ne  tresoure,  for  hit  was  J70  price  of  Cristis  blode,  for  Crist  was 
solde  and  trayed  to  deth  for  })at  money ;  bot  freris  wil  ressey ve 
money,  geten  by  as  grete  synnes  or  more,  to  make  grete  housis 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


391 


and  grete  festis  to  lordis,  and  not  bye  a  felde  to  birie  inne  pil- 
grimes,  as  \o  Jewis  diden,  bot  rajjer  leyen  hit  up  in  hor  tresoure, 
to  majTQtene  wronges  ageyns  hor  curatis  and  o}?er  pore  men,  by 
fals  plee  at  Rome,  and  marchaundise  in  Englond. 

Cap.  XXXII. 

Freris  also  cryen  loude  Jjat  pore  prestis  ben  heretikes,  for  \€\ 
techen  by  Gods  lawe  hou  clerkis  schulden  kepe  willeful  povert 
of  Cristis  gospel,  and  \o  kyng  and  lordis  owen  to  compelle  horn 
Jjerto.  And  ])us  J?ei  dampnen  holy  writt,  and  j?o  kyngis  regalriel 
Ffor  sith  pore  prestis  have  tau^te,  bothe  in  Engiische  and  in 
Latyn,  hou  mony  open  lawes,  bothe  in  \o  Olde  Testament  and 
in  \q  Newe,  forfenden  alle  prestis  and  dekenes  to  have  seculer 
lordschip,  and  ]?es  lawes  ben  confermed  by  Cristis  lif  and  his 
apostils,  and  freris  seyn  Jjat  ]?is  is  heresie,  \€\  dampnen  openly 
holy  writt.  And  sith  J/o  kynges  regalrie  askes  by  olde  statute 
])at  \q  kyng  may  in  mony,  in  caas  ^,  take  temporaries  fro  clerkis, 
and  freris  seyn  jjat  J>is  takyng  is  error  ageyns  Gods  lawe,  Jjei 
dampnen  jjis  rightful  regalye.  And  so  )3ei  dampnen  \o  rightful 
regalie  of  oure  kynge,  and  also  oure  kyng  and  lordis,  as  here- 
tikis,  if  ]?ei  mayntenen  ]?is  rightful  lawe  to  stable  pees  of  oure 
rewme.  And  sith  by  Gods  lawe  \q  offis  of  Jjo  kyng  and  lordis 
is  to  preyse,  rewarde,  and  mayntene  gode  and  rightful  men,  and 
to  chastise  scharply  wicked  men,  and  constreyne  clerkis  to  holde 
J)0  state  ]?at  Crist  putt  hom  inne,  and  algatis  willeful  povert, 
ffreris  sey,  if  \o  kyng  and  lordis  done  hor  offis  of  Gods  lawe, 
J?at  ]?ei  ben  foule  heretikes.  Bot  why  schulde  ]?o  kyng  mayn- 
tene in  his  lond  soche  traytoures  bothe  to  God  and  hym,  and 
cruel  enemyes  of  alle  Cristen  men  ? 

Cap.  XXXIII. 

Also  freris  ben  theves,  bothe  nyght  thefis  and  day  thefis, 
entryng  into  \o  Chirche  not  by  \o  dore,  J?at  is  Crist ;  flfor  \sd}>- 
outen  autorite  of  God  j^ei  maken  new  religiouns  of  errours  of 
synful  men.  And  ^itt  \€\  maken  worse  reulis  evere  \o  lenger 
J)at  \€\  lasten,  and  J?ei  seken  not  mekely  \o  worschip  of  God, 


regalie,  X. 


in  many  caases,  X. 


Friars  tax  poor 
priests  with 
heresy,  be- 
cause they 
wouid  take 
wealth  and 
lordship  from 
the  Church, 
and  support 
the  king's 
regale. 


Friars  enter 
the  Church 
hke  thieves, 
and  not  by  the 
door. 


39=^ 


WrCLlF'S  WORKS. 


They  bind  their 
novices  to 
impossible 
thmgs. 


The  burden- 
someness  of 
their  innumer- 
able rules  and 
ceremonies. 


and  profite  of  Cristen  mennis  soulis,  and  })is  ]>ing  ))ei  mosten  do^ 
if  Jjei  comen  in  by  Crist.  Bot  pel  chesen  and  fynden  a  new 
ordir,  lesse  perfite  and  profitable  Jjen  is  fat  j)at  Crist  made  hym- 
self,  and  so  J)ei  maken  dyvisioun  in  presthed,  ageyns  fo  com- 
aundement  of  God.  And  sith  Jjei  ben  not  groundid  on  Crist 
and  his  lawe,  ]?ei  moten  nedis  be  drawen  up,  and  J?o  ordynance 
of  Crist  mot  stonde  in  his  clennesse  and  perfeccioun. 

Cap.  XXXIV. 

Also  freris  by  ypocrisie  bynden  horn  to  impossible  J)ing  J?at 
J)ei  may  not  do ;  for  jjei  bynden  hom  ouver  \o  comaundementis 
of  God,  as  ]?ei  seyn  homself ;  bot  Jsei  may  do  no  more  ]?an  j?o 
comaundement  of  God.  For  God  biddes  in  his  moste  com- 
amidement,  J)at  J?ou  schalt  luf  ]30  Lord  J^i  God  of  al  jji  lif,  of  al 
])i  mynde,  and  of  alle  }?i  strengthis  and  myghtis.  Bot  who  may 
do  more  Jjen  }>is  ?  No  mon ;  J)en  ]?ei  bynden  hom  to  more  Jjen 
J)ei  may  do.  And  sith  hit  is  not  counseil  of  Crist  to  make 
synguler  professioun  to  a  synful  ydiot,  and,  in  caas,  a  devel, 
and  ]?ei  bynden  hom  to  siche  oon,  ]?at  j^ei  done  over  ))0  counseil 
of  Crist.  Bot  al  ]?at  is  over  ])0  counsel  of  Crist  is  algatis  yvel, 
si]?  Crist  counseils  to  iche  gode  ]?ing.  And  ])us  many  blynde 
foolis  bynden  hom  to  ]?o  hye  counseils  of  Crist,  j?at  connot  kepe 
]?o  leest  comaundement.  Bot  se  ypocrisie  of  hom!  sith  iche 
counseile  of  Crist  is  comaundement  for  sumtyme  and  summe 
circumstaunsis,  hou  bynden  ]}ei  hom  to  more  }>en  to  comaunde- 
mentis.? Not  by  ]?o  counseils,  for  ])ei  ben  comaundementis. 
Bot  ]?ei  feynen  Jjis  to  drawe  ^onge  childre  into  hor  roten  habite, 
and  ojjer  foolis,  fat  knowen  not  ]?e  perfeccioun  of  Cristis  ordir. 

Cap.  XXXV. 

Freris  also  ben  worse  heretikis  ]?en  weren  Jewis,  J?at  wolden 
kepe  cerymonyes  of  ])0  olde  lawe  wij)  fredome  of  Cristis  gospel. 
Ffor  |?o  Jewis  kepten  resonable  lawes,  made  of  God,  and  mede- 
ful  for  tyme  })at  God  ordeyned  hom ;  bot  freris  kepen  now  lawes 
feyned  of  erroures  of  men,  moo  }»en  God  ordeyned  in  \o  olde 
lawe,  and  more  uncerteyne.  For  to  day  j)is  lawe  is  holden 
amonge  hom,  and  to  morowen  destried,  bot  Jjus  uncerteyne  was 
not  Gods  lawe.     And  j^ese  lawes  of  freris  ben  more  ageyns  J?o 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


393 


gospel;  for  j>o  lawes  of  ))0  Olde  Testament  were  figure  of  Cristis 
comynge  and  passioun,  and  ledden  men  to  \o  gospel ;  bot  new 
lawes  of  freris  ben  not  suche  figure,  and  letten  men  to  holde 
fredome  of  j?o  gospel.  O  Lord !  sith  gode  lawes,  ordeyned  of 
God,  mosten  nede  ceese  for  fredome  of  J)0  gospel,  myche  more 
moten  yvel  lawes,  ordeyned  of  erronr  of  synful  men  and  worldly, 
ceesse,  and  lette  not  men  to  kepe  J)0  gospel  in  his  fredome. 

Cap.  XXXVI. 

Also  freris  ben  adversaries  of  Crist  and  disciplis  of  Sathanas, 
not  ^eldinge  gode  for  yvel,  as  Gods  lawe  techis,  ne  gode  for 
gode,  as  kynde  and  monnis  lawe  techen ;  bot  5elding  yvel  for 
gode,  as  \o  fendis  lawe  techis.  For  ]?ei  casten  and  ymagynen 
\o  deth  of  trew  men  ]?at  desiren  and  travelen  to  delyver  hom  fro 
J>o  fendis  mouth  and  everlastinge  deeth,  and  to  bringe  hom  to 
J)at  staate  in  whiche  Crist  ordeyned  prestis  to  lyve  inne.  And 
\€\  proferen  freris  Jjis  condicioun,  if  J>ei  wil  teche  by  holy  writt 
or  resoun,  J?at  freris  ordir  and  lyvynge  is  beste  for  prestis,  \€\ 
wil  gladly  be  professid  to  \o  freris  ordir;  and  if  prestis  may 
teche,  bothe  by  holy  writt  and  resoun,  ]?at  hor  ordir  is  better 
))en  freris,  sith  Crist  hymself  made  hor  ordir,  and  not  freris,  \€\ 
preyen  freris  for  luf  of  God  to  take  J)at  ordir,  and  to  leeve  hor 
singuler  ordir,  in  als  myche  as  hit  drawes  hom  fro  \o  fredome 
of  J)0  gospel.  And  J>us  \€\  pursuen  prestis,  for  \t\  reproven  hor 
synnes  as  God  biddes,  bothe  to  brenne  hom,  and  \o  gospels  of 
Crist  written  in  Englische,  to  moost  lernyng  of  oure  nacioun. 
And  ]>us,  for  \o  grete  almes  jjat  men  gyven  to  freris,  fei  letten 
men  to  con  Gods  lawe,  and  so  letten  hom  to  be  saved,  flfor  j)ei 
may  not  be  saved  wi]?outen  connyng  and  kepynge  of  Gods  lawe. 
And  so  freris  neden  oure  lond  to  be  dampned  wi|?  fendis  in 
helle. 

Cap.  XXXVII. 

Freris  also  ben  worse  enemyes  and  sleers  of  monnis  soule 
J?en  is  \o  cruel  fende  of  helle  by  hymself.  Ffor  ]?ei,  under  \o 
habite  of  holynesse,  leden  men  and  norischen  hom  in  synne, 
and  ben  special  helpers  of  )?o  fende  to  strangle  mennis  soulis, 


In  persecuting 
poor  priests, 
they  return 
evil  for  good. 


They  give  easy 
absolution,  and 


394 


WYCLIF'S  WORKS. 


.4 


Their  blas- 
phemous set- 
ting up  of 
Church  curses 
above  the  curse 
of  God. 


For  \€\  han^  name  of  holynesse  and  of  grete  clerkis  in  repu- 
tacioun  of  \o  pnple,  ])at  j)0  puple  tristis  not  to  few  trew  men, 
prechinge  ageyns  hor  covetise,  ypocrisie,  and  fals  desseyt.  And 
J)0  freris,  for  luf  of  a  litel  stinkynge  mucke,  and  wilfare  of  hor 
foule  bely,  sparen  to  reprove  j)0  cursid  synne  of  \o  puple.  Ffor 
comynly  if  ])er  be  any  cursid  jurour,  extorsioner,  or  avoutrer,  he 
wil  not  be  schryven  at  his  owne  curat,  bot  go  to  a  flatryng  frere^ 
|)at  wil  asoyle  hym  falsely  for  a  litel  money  by  ^eere,  J)of  he  be 
not  in  wille  to  make  restitucioun  and  leeve  his  cursid  synne. 
And  ]jus,  if  J)0  foule  fende  myght  be  schewed  in  his  schappe  to 
])0  puple,  as  men  seyn  he  was  in  tyme  of  Seynt  Bartholomew  % 
J?o  puple  wolde  be  ferde  to  dwelle  in  his  servise,  jjat  is  synne. 
Bot  \Q  cursidnesse  of  synne  is  hid,  and  \o  puple  is  made  siker 
by  fals  pardouns  and  lettris  of  fraternite,  J?of  \€\  alle  breken  )jo 
heestis  of  God  and  kepea  not  charite.  And  certayne  ]jen  is  \o 
devel  siker  of  bothe  partyes. 

Cap.  XXXVIII. 

Also  freris  leden  and  norischen  oure  prelatis,  oure  lordis  and 
comyns,  in  grete  blasphemye  ageyns  God.  For  fei  techen  al 
Jjis  puple  to  recke  lesse  of  ]?o  moste  rightful  curse  of  God,  ]?en 
by  J)0  wrong  curse  of  mon  synful,  \oi  he  be  a  dampned  devel. 
Ffor  Jjei  callen  \o  curse  of  God  J?o  lasse  curse,  and  \q  curse  of 
synful  mon  ]?o  more  curse.  Ffor  j?of  a  mon  be  nevere  so  cursid 
of  God,  for  pride,  envye,  covetise,  or  avoutrie,  or  any  o]?er,  }>is 
is  not  chargid  ne  pursued,  nou]?er  of  prelat  ne  lord  ne  comyns. 
Bot  if  a  mon  wi]>stonde  onys  Jjo  cytacioun  of  a  synful  prelat, 
3he,  after  J?o  comaundement  of  God,  ]?en  he  schal  be  cursid  and 
prisouned  after  fourty  dayes ;  and  alle  men  schulen  gow  upon 

1  So  X  ;  om.  W. 


»  The  wonderful  tale  may  be  read 
at  large  in  the  Legenda  Awrea  of 
Jacobus  de  Voragine,  how  Polimius, 
an  Indian  king,  had  a  huge  idol  which 
was  tenanted  by  a  devil,  and  how 
St.  Bartholomew  undertook,  if  the 
king  would  receive  baptism,  to  pro- 
duce his  god  before  liim  bound  with 


chains.  The  demon,  lilce  the  racoon 
in  the  American  story,  owned  him- 
self beaten  at  once,  came  out  of  the 
idol  in  the  presence  of  all  the  peo- 
ple, and  after  obediently  breaking  it 
in  pieces,  was  allowed  by  the  apostle 
to  retire  into  the  jungle. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


395 


hym,  })of  ]?o  mon  be  pursued  for  treuthe  of  j>o  gospel,  and  be 
blessid  of  God.  And  ]?us  synful  mennis  dome,  and,  in  caas,  of 
\o  fendis,  is  more  dred  and  magnifyed  J)en  is  po  rightful  dome 
of  God  Almyghty. 

Cap.  XXXIX. 

Freris  also  destrien  })is  article  of  Cristen  mennis  faith,  I  byleve 
o  comyn,  or  general,  holy  Chirche.  Ffor  Jjei  techen  {?at  ])0O 
men  })at  schul  be  dampned  ben  membris  of  holy  Chirche.  And 
j?us  Jjei  wedden  Crist  and  Jjo  devel  togedir,  flfor  Crist  is  gostly 
weddid  wij)  iche  membre  of  holy  Chirche,  and  summe  of  Jjese, 
as  ]?ei  seyn,  schul  be  dampned ;  and  |?en,  as  Crist  seis,  ]?ei  ben 
fendis ;  ]>erfore  by  horn  Crist  and  j)0  devel  ben  weddid  togedir. 
Bot  God  seis  by  Poule,  )?at  ]?er  is  no  comynynge  ne  consent  to 
Crist  and  to  Belial.  And  )>en  may  ]?er  no  weddinge  be  bitwixe 
hom.  Bot  ]>is  general  holy  Chirche  "is  Jjo  congregacioun  of 
Crist,  ])at  is  hed,  and  alle  gode  aungels  in  heven,  and  alle  men 
and  wymmen,  in  erthe  or  in  purgatorie,  ]?at  schulen  be  saved, 
and  no  moo.  For  Crist  seis,  ]>at  noone  of  his  membris  schal 
perische,  for  no  mon  schal  take  hom  out  of  his  hondis.  And 
Jon  Evaungelist  seis  of  fals  techers,  ]>at  ]>ei  wenten  out  of  us,  bot 
])ei  were  not  of  us.  And  Jjerfore  Crisostom  seis,  l>at  J?oo  ]?at 
kepen  not  Gods  lawe,  bot  dyen  out  of  charite,  weren  nevere 
Cristis  body,  fo  whiche  schal  not  regne  wi])  hym.  And  sith 
iche  part  of  Cristis  gostly  body,  of  whiche  Austyn  spekes  as 
holy  writt  dos,  schal  regne  wi]?  hym  in  blis,  ]?en  no  mon  ]>at 
schal  be  dampned  is  part  of  Cristis  gostly  body,  and  so  part  of 
membre^  of  holy  Chirche.  Bot  freris  seyden  jjus,  for  men 
schulden  gyf  hom  myche  money  to  preye  for  alle,  bothe  gode 
and  yvel,  and  also  to  plese  bischops  and  possessioneres. 

Cap.  XL. 

Also  freris  seken  bisily  hor  owne  worldly  worschip,  and  putten 
j)0  worschip  of  God  byhynde,  ageyns  ^o  techinge  of  Jesus  Crist 
and  Seynt  Poule.    Jhe,  ]?at  is  worse,  ]?ei  taken  upon  homself 

^  part  ne  membre,  X. 


Their  heresy 
in  affirming  that 
the  wicked  are 
members  of  the 
Church  of 
Christ. 


2  Cor.  vi.  15. 


X  John  ii.  19. 


General  world- 
liness  and  pride 
of  the  friars. 


39<5 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


They  exalt 
themselves 
even  above 
Christ  Himself, 


and  will  not 
be  content  to 
abide  by  His 
rule  and  com- 
mandment. 


glorie  )>at  is  approprid  to  God,  and  so  maken  horn  even  wij? 
God.  For  ])ei  seken  faste,  by  grete  giftis  and  veyne  costis,  to 
be  calde  maysters  of  dyvynite,  and  speke  bifore  lordis,  and  sitte 
at  \o  mete  wi]>  horn,  and  not  to  teche  treuly  \o  gospel  to  alle 
maner  of  men,  by  meke  lif  and  frely,  as  Crist  biddes.  Also  to 
be  confessoures  of  lordis  and  ladyes,  and  algatis  to  be  myche 
tolde  by,  and  fare  wil,  and  not  seke  pore  men,  ])of  Jjei  have 
more  nede.  And  so  of  o]?er  bisynesse  of  freris,  whoso  takes 
gode  si^t  to  horn.  Ffor  if  a  frere  do  wil  litel,  ]?at  schal  be 
preysid  algatis,  bot  ]?of  anoj?er  mon  do  myche  better,  ]?at  schal 
be  lacked  or  despised.  Also  J?ei  schulen  swere  by  hym  J)at  ))ei 
callen  patroun  of  hor  ordir,  and  leeve  God  bihynde,  and  ^itt  j)ei 
done  so  for  worschip  of  hor  owne  patroun  and  hor  owne  sect. 
And  no]?oles  God  techis  to  swere  by  hym  in  nede,  and  not  by 
his  creaturis.  Bot  for  hor  proude  sweringe  and  ydel,  )?ei  dis- 
pisen  God  and  hor  patroun  also. 

Cap.  XLL 

Freris  ^itte  hyen,  jitt^  falsely,  homself  above  Crist.  Ffor 
where  Crist  biddis  ]>at  men  trowe  not  to  hym,  bot  if  he  do  jjo 
werkis  of  ]>o  Fadir  of  heven,  freris  chalengen  ]>at  men  triste  and 
obeeche  to  hom,  as  nedeful  to  soulis  heele,  when  ]?ei  done  not 
])0  werkis  of  God.  Ffor  ellis  J)ei  may  not  aske  |>at  men  do  after 
horn,  when  ]?ei  witten  not  whe]?er  J)0  J>inge  ]>at  )?ei  comaunden 
is  ageyns  Gods  dome  or  ])erwi]?.  And  ]?us  no  mon  schulde  do 
after  horn,  bot  when  J?ei  techen  certeynli  J?o  heestis  of  God,  or 
his  counseils,  leste  men,  doynge  after  hor  techynge,  in  ])is  do 
ageyns  \o  wille  of  God.  Bot  farewil  ]?en  ]?is  new  feyned 
obediense,  wi]>  }>is  new  professioun. 

Cap.  XLII. 

Also  freris  falsely  enhansen  homself  abofe  Crist  and  his 
apostils,  for  ]?ei  wil  not  be  payed  wi]?  Cristis  reule  in  l?o  gospel, 
to  teche  trewly  \o  gospel,  and  have  mete  and  drinke  frely  of  a 
gode  mon  and  devout  to  God,  ne  be  apayed  wi}?  fode  and 
hyllynge,   as   Crist   and  his  apostils  weren.     Bot  jjei  robben 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS, 


397 


curatis  of  hor  offis  and  gostly  worschip,  and  letten  horn  to 
knowe  Gods  iawe,  by  holdynge  bokis  fro  horn,  and  wi]?drawinge 
of  hor  vauntageSj  by  whoche  Jjei  schulden  have  bokes  and  lerne. 
And  also  \€\  robben  lordis  of  hor  rentis ;  and  somme  by  more 
ypocrisie  taken  fre  annuel  rentis  of  lordis  cooferis;  and  J?ei 
robben  J)0  comyns  of  hor  lyvelode  by  ypocrisie,  and  fals  beg- 
gyng,  dampned  by  Gods  Iawe.  And  j>us  at  \o  bygynnynge  \€\ 
feynen  horn  moste  pore  of  alle  clerkis,  bot  at  \o  last  j^ei  passen 
alle  o]?er  in  grete  housis,  and  costily  libraries,  in  grete  feestis, 
and  mony  ojjer  prides  and  covetisis.  And  evere  j^ei  passen 
foule  Crist  and  his  apostils ;  ffor  where  Crist  had  not  to  reste 
inne  his  heved,  freris,  feyned  beggers,  have  lordly  plasis  ^,  Jjat 
almoste  ])orw  Englond  ]?ei  may  iche  nyght  lye  on  hor  owne. 

Cap.  XLIII 

Freris  also  of  grete  cautel  bynden^  novycis  to  unknowen 
])ing,  for  J)ei  wil  not  sufifre  horn  knowe  hor  privetees  of  hor 
reule  and  hor  Hf,  til  J^at  \€\  ben  professid;  and  ]?en  \€\  schulen 
not  be  suffred  to  leeve  hor  reule,  \oi  \€\  witten  wel  ]?at  \€\  may 
not  kepe  hit.  And  J)is  is  openly  ageyns  Cristis  techinge  in 
Jones  gospel.  Ffor  Crist  seis  })at  he  spake  opunly  to  J?o  world, 
and  in  hyddenesse  no]>ing ;  and  freris  done  here  fully  \o  con- 
trarie.  For  firste  \€\  schewen  grete  devocioun  and  swettenes 
of  holy  lif  to  5onge  childre,  til  \€\  ben  professid,  and  J)en 
maystren  horn  by  tyrauntrie  to  do  mony  )>inges  ageyns  hor 
conscience,  and  so  neden  hom  to  go  to  helle  or  to  prisoune, 
and  sumtyme  to  cruel  deth. 

Cap.  XLIV. 

Also  freris  ben  wasteris  of  tresour  of  oure  lond  by  mony 
blynde  and  unskilful  maners.  Ffor  iirste  ]?ei  bynden^  hom 
blyndely  fro  fredome  of  j)e  gospel,  and  )>en  spenden  myche 
golde  to   gete  hom  dispensacioun,  and  mony  tymes  bringen 


^  pacis^  X ;  probably  by  mistake  for  palacis, 
'  So  in  X ;  hlynden^  Bodl. 


'  So  in  X  ;  by?idynge,  W. 


They  deceive 
their  novices, 


and  impoverish 
the  land,  by 
referring  the 
decision  of 
everything  to 
Rome. 


i9^ 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


In  their  Satanic 
pride  they 
deem  them- 
selves holier 
than  other 
men. 


Yet  they  set 
greater  store 
on  nches  than 
on  virtues. 


veyne  pardouns,  quienals  %  and  o|?er  veyne  privilegies.  And  in 
al  )?is  \o  gold  of  cure  lond  gos  oute,  and  symonye,  and  curse, 
and  boldenesse  in  synne  comes  ageyne.  And  God  wot  wher 
privitees  of  oure  lond  ben  J?us  schewed  to  oure  enimyes.  And 
God  wot  wher  matrimonye  be  ])us  departid  for  money  by  soche 
freris,  makynge  fals  suggestioun,  and  fals  poursuyte  after.  Also 
hit  semes  j^at  in  J)is  ]?ei  magnifien  a  synful  caytif,  and,  in  caas,  a 
dampned  fende,  more  ]?en  God  Almyghty.  For  \€\  dar  not  by 
fre  graunt  of  God  do  a  gode  }>ing  to  pleese  hym  J^erwij),  bot  if 
]?ei  haf  leeve  of  suche  a  synful  caytif.  And  if  \€\  have  leeve  of 
suche  an  unwitty  caytif,  Jjei  dar  do,  ageyns  Gods  pleesinge,  an 
unresonable  J?ing,  and  synful,  and  sclaunderouse  to  alle  Cristen 


men. 


Cap.  XLV. 


Freris  also  by  Lucifers  pride  hyen  homself,  and  holden  bom 
holier  ])en  alle  oJ>er  oute  of  hor  sect,  for  as  myche  as  fei  bynden 
horn  to  new  tradiciouns  of  synful  men,  jjo  whiche  ben  ful  of 
error,  over  J)0  moste  sufficient  reule  of  Jesus  Crist,  ]?at  leffte  no 
profitable  ne  nedeful  ]?ing  out  of  his  reule.  Ffor  ]?of  a  prest  or 
bischop  do  nevere  so  treuly  \o  offis  ]?at  God  bad  prestis  do,  ^itte  Jjei 
seyn  he  is  more  holy  if  he  cum  to  hor  newe  feyned  religioun 
and  obediense.  Bot  si]?  boostinge  and  rejoysching  of  synne  is 
one  of  J)0  grattest  synnes  of  alle,  and  ]?ese  freris  boosten  so 
myche  of  hor  synful  errour,  hou  \€\  have  founden  a  better 
religioun  J^en  Crist  made  for  his  apostils  and  prestis,  hit  semes 
J)ei  ben  moste  synful  and  cursidly  proude  over  alle  oJ?er  wicked 
men.  Ffor  hit  semes  \2X  \€\  maken  homself  wiser  ]?en  Crist, 
more  witty  and  more  ful  of  charite,  si]?  \€\  techen  better  wey  to 
heven  Jjen  did  Crist,  as  jjei  feynen. 

Cap.  XLVI. 

Also  freris  setten  more  by  stinkyng  dritt  of  woddly  godis  J^en 
\€\  done  by  virtues  and  godis  of  blis.     Ffor  if  a  Caymes  Castel 


a  *  Quienal  *  seems  to  be  a  cor- 
ruption of  quinquennale,  by  which 
was  meant,  an  arrangement  for  say- 
ing mass  for  a  departed  soul  during 
the  period  of  five  years.     Trie?male 


(English,  trinal  or  trienal)  and  annu- 
ale,  are  similar  arrangements  for 
thi-ee  years  or  one  year.  See  Du- 
cange,  Trietmale. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


399 


of  freris  haf  myche  dritt  of  worldly  godis,  J?of  J>o  freris  Jjerinne 
ben  ful  of  pride,  covetise,  symonye,  and  fals  robberie,  by  fals 
\itg%yB%  and  flatering,  5itte  )?ei  seyn  J?at  riche  hous  is  better 
J?en  a  pore  hous  of  freris,  |?of  \€\  lyven  in  mekenesse,  povert, 
and  penaunce,  and  myche  holynesse.  And  ]?ei  travelen  more 
for  to  gete  dritt  of  J)is  world  Jjen  to  gete  J?o  blis  of  heven ;  and 
Jjei  comenden  more  a  frere  ]?at  con  sotely  and  thicke  gete  ]?is 
worldly  dritt,  J?en  anofer  J)at  con  do  and  teche  myche  virtuous 
lif.  And  J?us  Jjese  freris  maken  sacrifice  to  fals  gods,  for  hor 
covetise,  and  forsaken  God  Almyghty ;  si])  \€\  loven  more 
worldly  mucke  J)en  virtues  and  \o  love  of  Jesus  Crist. 

Cap.  XLVII. 

Freris  also  schewen  and  wittenessen  in  homself  Anticristis 
miraclis,  right  as  La^ar,  and  ojjer  reysid  by  Crist,  shewiden  and 
•wittenessiden  Cristis  miraclis.  Ffor  as  La^ar  and  oJ)er  weren 
verely  deede,  and  verely  reysid  by  Crist  to  lyve  of  kynde  and 
grace,  so  ])ese  freris  feynen  horn  deede  to  pride  of  \o  world  and 
oJ?er  synnes,  hot  j^ei  ben  reysid  by  Anticristis  doyng  to  pride  of 
staatis,  covetise,  and  sotil  mayntenynge  or  colouringe  of 
synne.  Ffor  ])of  men  ben  cursid  avoutreris,  extorsioneris, 
and  wrongeful  mayntyneris  of  falsenesse  and  debatis,  ^itte 
freris  wil  coloure  J)ese  synnes,  and  undertake  for  ]?ese  synful 
men,  if  J>ei  wil  gif  hom  myche  dritt  and  mayntene  hor  veyne 
sect,  and  comende  hit  more  ])en  Cristis  owne  religioun.  And 
J)ei  ben  quicke  to  stryve,  pleete,  and  feght  bodily  for  worschipis 
and  staatis  of  J)is  world,  and  so  )?ei  ben  deede  to  mekenesse, 
charite,  and  gode  religioun,  and  ben  reysid  to  cursid  lif  of 
synne ;  and  J)is  is  Anticristis  myracle. 

Cap.  XLVIIL 

Also  freris  ben  foule  envenymed  wi])  gostly  synne  of  Sodome, 
and  so  ben  more  cursid  J?en  \q  bodily  Sodomytis,  \2X  weren 
sodeynli  deede  by  harde  vengeaunce  of  God.  For  \€\  done  gostily 
lecchorie  by  Gods  worde,  when  j^ei  prechen  more  hor  owne 
fyndyngis,  for  worldly  mucke,  )jen  Cristis  gospel  for  savynge  of 
mennis  soulis.  And  when  \t\  leeven  to  preche  \o  seed  of  Gods 
w^ord  and  leesen  hit,  by  whiche  men  schulden  by  gostly  gendrure 


They  feign  to 
die  to  the 
world,  but 
rise  again  both 
to  cloak  and  to 
practise  sin. 


They  are 
guilty,  in  a 
spiritual  sense, 
of  the  sin  of 
Sodom. 


400 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


They  are 
notoriously 
the  agents 
of  papal  im- 
positions cuid 
extortions. 


Lastly,  friars 
are  generally 
pernicious  to 
the  Church, 
and  burden- 
some to  the 
State. 


be  made  Gods  sones,  Jjei  done  more  synne  ])en  ])of  j^ei  losten 
monnis  seed,  by  whiche  \o  body  of  mon  schulde  be  gendrid. 
Ffor  \o  mysusing  of  J30  better  virtue  is  more  synne.  Bot  J?o 
seed  of  Gods  word  is  better  jjen  \o  seed  of  mon ;  ferfore  hit  is 
worse  to  mysspende  ])at  ]?en  to  myswaste  monnys  seed.  And 
Robert  Grosted  declaris  J)is  resoun  wil  ageyns  yvel  curatis. 

Cap.  XLIX. 

Freris  also  ben  moste  privy  and  sotil  procuratoures  of  sy- 
monye  and  foule  wynnynge,  and  biggynge  of  beneficis,  of 
indulgensis  and  trinels  \  pardouns,  and  veyne  privilegies.  Ffor 
men  seyn  J>ei  wil  gete  a  grete  J>ing  of  J)0  pope,  or  of  cardinalis, 
in  Englond  better  cheep  |?en  o)?er  procuratoures,  and  ]?ei  ben 
more  wily,  and  more  plesauntly  con  flater  Jjo  pope  in  his  court, 
and  most  prively  make  lordis  to  mayntene  fo  pope  and  his  in 
robbinge  oure  lond  of  tresoure  by  his  pardouns,  privilegies,  and 
]?o  firste  fruytis  of  beneficis  in  oure  lond,  and  dymes  and  sub- 
sidiis  ^,  to  werre  on  Cristen  men  for  stinkynge  worldly  lordschip, 
]?at  God  haves  forbeden  to  hym  and  alle  prestis.  And  in  fals 
confession  })ei  stiren  lordis  myche  herto,  and  neden  to  distrie  \o 
lond,  when  ]?ei  mayntenen  ))0  pope  in  ))is  fals  robbynge* 

Cap.  L. 

5itte  freris  ben  moste  perilouse  enemyes  to  holy  Chirche  and 
al  oure  lond,  for  Jjei  letten  curatis  of  hor  ofiis,  and  spenden 
comynly  and  nedeles  sixty  thousande  mark  by  ^eere,  J^at  ]?ei 
robben  falsely  of  |?o  pore  puple.  Ffor  if  curatis  diden  hor  offis 
in  gode  lyve  and  trewe  prechinge,  as  ))ei  ben  holden  upon  peyne 
of  dampnynge  in  helle,  J)er  were  clerkis  ynowhe,  of  bischops, 
parsouns,  and  o])er  prestis,  and,  in  caas,  over  mony  to  )?o 
puple.  And  ^itte  not  two  hundrid  ^eere  agone  Jjer  was  no  frere  ; 
and  ]>en  was  oure  lond  more  plentyuous  of  catel  and  men,  and 
))ei  were  j?en  strengere  of  complexioun  to  labour  J^en  now, 
and  ))en  were  clerkis  yno^v^e.  And  now  ben  mony  thousande 
of  freris  in  Englond,  and  })0  olde  curatis  stonden  stille  un- 


^  iryenalis,  X.     See  note  on  qiiienal,  p.  398. 


subsidies,  X. 
WYCLIF. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


401 


amendid.  And  amonge  alle  synne  is  more  encreesid,  and  }>o 
puple  chargid  by  sixty  thousande  mark  by  ^eere,  and  j^erfore 
hit  mot  nedis  fayle.  And  so  freris  sujBfren  curatis  to  lyve  in 
synne,  so  ])at  J>ei  may  robbe  J)0  puple  and  lyve  in  hor  lustis. 
Ffor  if  curatis  done  wil  hor  offis,  freris  weren  superflu,  and  owre 
lond  schulde  be  dischargid  of  mony  thousande  marke.  And 
]?en  )>o  puple  schulde  better  paye  hor  rentis  to  lordis,  and  dymes 
and  oflfringis  to  curatis ;  and  myche  flatering  and  norisching  of 
synne  schulde  be  destried,  and  gode  lif  and  pees  and  charite 
schulden  regne  amonge  Cristen  men.  And  so,  when  al  J?o 
grounde  is  sought,  freris  seyn  ])us  in  dede,  Lete  olde  curatis 
waxe  roten  in  synne,  and  lete  horn  not  do  hor  offis  by  Gods 
lawe,  and  we  ^vil  lyve  in  lustis  so  longe,  and  waste  veyneliche 
and  nedeles  sixty  thousande  marke  by  ^eere  of  >o  pore  comyns 
of  \o  lond ;  and  so  at  ]?o  laste  make  discencioun  by twene  horn 
and  hor  childre,  for  dymes  and  offringes  )?at  we  wil  gete  prively 
to  us  by  ypocrisie,  and  make  discencioun  bitwene  lordis  and  hor 
comyns.  Ffor  we  wil  mayntene  lordis  to  lyve  in  hor  lustis, 
extorcioims,  and  o]?er  synnes,  and  \o  comyns  in  covetise, 
lecchorie,  and  o]?er  disseytis,  wij)  fals  sweringe  in  mony  giles ; 
and  also  })0  curatis  in  hor  dampnacioun,  for  leevynge  of  hor 
gostly  offis ;  and  so  be  procuratoures  of  Jjo  fende  for  to  drawe 
alle  men  to  helle.  pus  ])ei  done  in  dede,  houever  )?ei  feynen 
in  ypocrisie  of  pleesing  of  wordis.  Off  j?ese  fiffty  heresies  and 
errours,  and  mony  moo,  if  men  wil  seke  horn  wil  out,  )?ei  may 
knowe  ])at  freris  ben  cause,  bygynnyng,  welle,  and  mayntenyng, 
of  perturbacioun  in  Cristendom,  and  of  alle  yvels  of  J)is  worid. 
And  ))ese  errours  schulen  nevere  be  amendid,  til  freris  be  brou3t 
to  fredome  of  j^o  gospel,  and  clene  religioun  of  Jesus  Crist. 

God  for  his  endeles  mercy  and  charite  make  verrey  pees, 
unite,  and  charite,  amonge  Cristen  men,  and  bringe  alle  prestis 
to  Cristis  clene  religioun,  wi>outen  errour  of  wronge  by  lawes. 
Amen. 


WORKS.      VOL.    HI. 


Dd 


402 


WYCLIF-S  WORKS. 


The  prevalence 
of  Blasphemy, 
especially 
among  friars, 
with  whom  it 
takes  three 
forms  : 


Vs.  Ixiv.  3. 


XXV. 

DE   BLASPHEMIA,   CONTRA 
FRATRES. 


[The  only  MS.  of  the  following  tract  known  to  exist  is  contained  in 
Bodl.  647  (W).  In  the  Catalogue  of  Bale  it  bears  the  title  ('  De  Blas- 
phemia,  contra  Fratres'),  here  prefixed  to  it.  Wyclif's  Latin  treatise, 
'  De  Blasphemia,'  also  mentioned  by  Bale,  but  without  first  words,  and 
frequently  quoted  by  Walden  in  the  Docirinale,  is  an  entirely  different  work. 
I  can  discover  in  this  tract  no  reliable  indication  of  the  date  at  which  it 
was  composed.  Although  Bale  is  our  only  authority  for  ascribing  the 
authorship  to  Wyclif,  I  am  disposed,  from  the  evidence  of  style,  language, 
and  turn  of  thought,  to  consider  it  authentic] 


[PARS  L]^ 

Hit  is  seide  Jjat  thre  ])inges  stourblen  }?is  reume,  and  specialy 
heresie,  ])at  hafs  thre  parties;  bot  of  blasphemye,  j^at  is  ]>o 
worste,  is  bot  litel  spoken.  And,  for  wickidnesse  of  ])is  vice, 
])0  bischopis  of  ]>q  temple  putten  blasphemye  upon  Crist,  to  do 
him  to  de]?.  For,  as  ]>o  Psalme  seis,  and  ])0  gospel  beris  witte- 
nesse,  pei  scharpid  hor  toungis  and  cried  togedir.  What  kepe 
5e  wittenesse  ?  ^e  have  herde  his  blasphemye.  Blasphemye  is 
in  a  maner  sclaundring  of  God.  And  so  in  ]>re  maners  may 
mon  blaspheme  in  God.  Ffirst,  when  wor]?ynesse  approprid 
to  God  is  unwor])ily  putt  to  a  pore  creature,  po  secounde, 
when  unperfeccioun  is  putt  upon  God.  po  J^ridde,  when 
divynyte  is  denyed  for  God,  J>at  mot  acorde  to  hym  for  his  grett 

^  Some  unlucky  binder  has  cut  away  the  greater  part  of  the  heading  in 
the  MS  ;  it  seems  to  have  been  '  Pars  Prima  Blasphemise/ 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


403 


lordship.  And  if  blasphemye  be  scaterid  amonge  mony  men, 
nerejjoles  j?is  heresie  is  comynly  wi]?  freris.  And  wi]?  thre  blas- 
pemyes  J?ei  blynden  \o  puple.  po  first  is  hor  heresie  of  J)0 
sacrament  of  J?o  auter.  po  secounde  is  blasphemye  of  beg- 
gyng  of  Crist,  po  ]?ridde  is  hor  blasphemye  of  graunt  of 
gostily  helpe  to  hem  ]>at  wil  bye  or  pourchasse  to  be  Anticristis 
bro]?er. 

As  to  \o  first,  we  seyn,  siker  of  om-e  feyth,  \2X  \o  whyte 
]?ing  and  rounde  ]}at  \o  prest  sacris,  like  to  \o  unsacrid  oostis, 
and  is  broken  and  eeten,  is  verrely  Gods  body  in  \o  fourme  of 
bred.  Ffor  Crist  toke  bred  in  his  hondes,  blessid  hit,  brake  hit, 
and  bad  alle  his  disciplis  eete  ]?erof.  Ffor  as  he  hymself  seide, 
pis  is  my  body;  and  everiche  Cristen  mon  is  fully  certeyn  ]?at 
alle  blasphemyes  in  J?o  world  may  not  fals  Crist.  Bot  here  \o 
fals  blasphemes  gropen  after  weyes,  and  seyn  ]?at  bi  {)is  ]?ei 
schewe  Gods  body  and  not  >at  bred.  Bot  witte  |?ei  wil  by 
Cristen  mennis  bileve,  ]?at  jjes  wordis  of  Crist  ben  not  so  naked 
of  witte,  to  telle  his  apostils  )?at  his  body  is  his  body,  for  Jjat 
knew  ]?ei  first.  Also,  }?of  al  Cristis  shewyng  were  straunge  to 
\o  bred,  hou  shulde  Jjese  blasphemes,  by  virtu  of  ]>ese  wordes, 
profFe  \2X  bred  tournes  to  no^t,  and  accident  leeves  wijjouten 
any  sogett,  or  J?at  Gods  body  is  newly  )?ere  ?  Also,  as  everiche 
Cristen  mon  moste  graunt,  Crist  schewid  wyn  in  \o  chalis,  })at 
he  cald  his  blode.  Lord,  why  shulde  he  not  shewe  by  J?o  same 
skil  bred,  ]>at  he  toke  in  his  honde  and  comaundid  to  eete  hit  ? 
For  everiche  Cristen  mon  may  wel  witte,  J>at  Crist  seide  not  \2X 
■)?o  metal  was  his  blode ;  ne  Crist  undirstode  not  J>at  accidentis 
were  his  blode,  ne  he  schewid  not  his  blode  wi])inne  his  body, 
bothe  for  his  wordis  were  \tn  wij)0uten  witte,  and  also  Jjen  his 
wordis  were  fals,  for  \o  tyme  ]?at  he  spake  hom.  Of  J?is  may 
we  se  ]?at  Crist  was  a  gabber,  or  J)is  was  so]?  )>at  he  seide,  ]?is 
bred  is  my  body. 

And  herfore  Seynt  Jerome,  )?at  couthe  more  of  holy  writte 
]?en  alle  J?o  men  now  on  lyve,  for  he  was  lenger  tau^t,  wrytes 
}>us  ^.  Here  we,  he  seis ;  J^at  bred  \2X  Crist  brake,  and  gaf  his 
disciplis  to  eete,  is  his  owne  body,  ffor  he  hymself  seis  )?at  ]?is 

a  S.  Hieron.  ad  Hedibiam,  §  2. 
D  d  2 


I.  Blasphemous 
doctrine  re- 
spectiii^r  the 
Eucharist. 


Their  expla- 
nation of  the 
words  of  insti- 
tution novel 
and  untenable 


404 


WrCLIF'S  WORKS. 


The  sttbstance 
of  the  bread 
remains  after 
consecration, 
contrary  to 
what  they 
maintain. 


They  dare  not 
publicly  place 
their  doctrine 


is  my  body.  And  to  dampne  wordis  or  sentence  of  ])is  holy 
mon  were  a  foolis  tourne,  to  scorne  of  \o  dampner;  as  we 
shulden  scorne  J^es  heretikes,  \2X  leven  Cristis  wordis,  and 
feynen  wordis  or  sentence  wij^outen  auctorite.  As  somme  seyn, 
J>at  is  \o  sentence  of  J?o  gospel,  not  J)at  fis  bred  is  Cristis  body, 
bot  ]?at  Jjis  bred  schal  be  Cristis  body.  Somme  ben  not  payed 
of  J)is,  but  ]>at  of  Jjis  bred  shal  be  Cristis  body,  po  ]?ridde  seis, 
J)at  Cristis  body  is  not  new  made,  ne  getis  not  new  mater  ]?at 
was  in  J?o  bred ;  so  \2X  not  of  ))is  bred  is  makid  Gods  body,  but 
fat  ]?es  accidentis  bitoken  Gods  body.  Mony  soche  sentencis 
ben  feyned  of  freris,  by  whom  Anticristis  clerkis  reversen 
Cristis  sentence.  By  ])is  mot  we  graunte  ]>at  ])is  bred  )?at  Crist 
brak  is  verrely  his  body,  or  elles  sey  ]?at  ])is  holy  gospel  is  fals, 
or  ellis  uncraftily  cloute  to  wordes  of  Crist.  And  sith  everiche 
mon  ]?at  wi]>outen  auctorite  of  Crist  puttes  witte  to  Cristis 
wordes  ])at  God  askes  not,  is  an  heretike,  hit  is  open  fat  soche 
feyners  ben  alle  blasphemes. 

Bot  ageynis  fis  grutches  Anticrist,  fat  J>is  sacrament  shulde 
togedir  be  bred  and  Gods  body.  Bot,  as  he  feynes,  when  fat 
Gods  body  bygynnes  to  be  fere,  fen  bred  turnes  to  no^t,  and 
accident  leeves.  pes  foolis  shulden  undirstonde  fat  Baptist,  when 
he  was  naked,  holly  ceesid  not  to  be  Jon,  ne  non  of  er  f  ing.  And 
so  f es  blasphemes  passen  Juwes  in  fooly,  for  Juwes  knowen  fat 
hit  is  bred  when  fei  kyndely  eten  hit;  and  so  fese  freris  and 
Pharisees  ben  madder  fen  Juwes  and  falser  fen  Paynims,  sif  fei 
trowen  nowf er  fat  hit  is  Gods  body,  ne  bred,  ne  creature  fat 
ever  God  made.  Bot  feythe  of  fo  gospel  techis  us  to  trowe 
fat  |)is  is  verey  bred  after  f o  sacringe,  for  Crist  hymself  seis,  f is 
bred  is  my  body ;  bot  what  foole  con  not  se  fat  ne  fen  hit  is 
bred }  Also  f  o  gospel  techis  Cristen  men  to  preye  aftir  f  is  iche 
day  bred,  or  owne  substaunce.  And  Austyn  techis  fat  by  f is 
bred  Crist  undirstode  fis  sacrament.  Also  f o  apostlis  knewen 
Crist  by  brekyng  of  fis  bred ;  and  fis  bred  was  f o  sacrament, 
as  Austyn  seis,  wif  fo  popis  lawe.  And  Seynt  Poule,  fat 
owver  of  er  knew  of  Gods  priveytes,  calles  fis  sacrament,  bred 
fat  we  breke. 

Owe,  whef er  we  shal  se  Anticrist  so  myghty  fat  he  shal 
dampne  Cristen  men  for  fei  graunte  fo  gospel!    Wil  I  wot 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


405 


fat  we  may  amonge  Saracens  trowe  and  teche  ))is  gospel  wi]?- 
outen  any  punyschyng;  bot  alle  Cristen  men  shulden  have 
freris  suspecte,  Jjat  ]?ei  dar  not  putt  out  her  fei];e  to  \q  puple, 
and  putt  hit  by  oure  feythe,  and  stonde  J?erby.  And  certis  one 
of  Jjese  J?ree  j?inges  semes  to  meete  horn, — J)at  ouf^er  \€\  con 
not,  or  dar  not,  or  J^ei  travel  by  envye.  God  helpe  us  few 
Cristen  men  ]?at  stonden  in  j)is  feythe,  fFor  leesynges  and  flater- 
ynges  of  freris  spreden  ful  wyde.  And,  as  Crist  schewid  bred 
bifore  \o  sacringe,  and  bad  hem  all  eete  ]?erof,  so  he  schewid 
aftir. 

And  as  Anticrist  marres  men  in  hor  wittis,  so  he  destries 
virtues  }?at  shulden  cum  of  hom.  Ffor  amonge  alle  bodily  wittis, 
moste  certeyne  of  alle  are  gropynge  and  tastynge,  as  philoso- 
phers seyn.  Bot  gropynge  J?ei  marren  by  hor  foly  sentence; 
fFor  no  bodily  j?ing  we  knowen  more  certeynly  jjen  hardenesse 
and  soflftenesse  of  ]?is  holy  bred.  For  when  hit  is  new  baken, 
hit  brekes  in  a  maner,  and  varies  in  sounde  fro  olde  baken 
bred;  bot  olde  bred,  in  moyste  tyme,  brekes  not  )>us.  Bot, 
as  philosoferes  seyn,  hardenesse  and  sofftenesse,  freelnesse  and 
towghnesse,  with  soche  qualytees,  may  now]?er  qualite  ne  quan- 
tite  sogetten.  Ow,  whejjer  God,  j^at  is  treuj>e,  ordeyned  Cristen 
men  for  to  be  marred  in  hor  wittes  in  Jjo  sacrament  of  trewht, 
more  ]?en  Juwes  or  Paynims  erren  in  hor  feythe !  And  so  \o 
sacrament  of  J)0  chalis  may  opinly  shewe,  fi5rst,  swettenesse  of 
wyne,  and  aftir  sournesse,  as  prestis  knowen  wil.  Lord,  whejjer 
swettenesse  and  sournesse  ben  sogettid  in  figure !  And  here 
mennis  innwittis  mot  algatis  erre  in  knowynge  and  jugynge  of 
difference  of  substaunce ;  as,  if  mony  oostis,  sacrid  and  un- 
sacrid,  were  mengid  togedir,  a  blaspheme  J?at  knewe  not  \o 
medelynge  of  hom,  kouthe  not  knowe  accident  fro  bred,  ne  telle 
what  is  ])is  more  j^en  a  beeste.  And  if  tonnes  of  wyne  were 
sacrid  by^onde  \o  see,  now|>er  vyntyners  of  Englonde  couthe 
taaste  ]?is  Hkoure,  ne  prestis  my^t  synge  wij?  soche  accidentis. 
And  so  j^es  fals  men  mot  algatis  dowte  whejjer  alle  soche  men 
faylen  in  hor  jugementis. 

And  after  soche  errours  in  kyndely  wittes  )?ei  make  ra^VL  to 
erre  in  science  and  vertues,  as  |?ei  mot  curse  gramaryens  ]>at 
Englishen  ]>o  gospel,  J>at  ]>o  apostlis  knewen  Crist  in  brekyng 


by  the  side 
of  ours, 


for  it  is  con- 
tradicted by 
the  plainest 
evidence  of 
sense. 


The  friars 
quarrel  with 
the  new  trans- 
lation of  the 
Bible. 


4o6 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


The  laity  ought 
to  suppress 
their  errone- 
ous teaching 
on  the  Eucha- 
rist, and  spi- 
ritually stone 
them  as  blas- 
phemers. 


of  bred,  for  ]?ei  myght  make  hor  scolers  to  trowe  ]>at  Jjo  sacra- 
ment of  J?o  auter  were  bodily  bred ;  as  \o  gramarien  were  to 
blame  }>at  taught  ]?us  hir  childer,  ]?at  ]?o  hounde  schynes  aboven 
\o  Sonne  a.  For  if  gramariens  shulden  construe  ])is  Jjus,— J)0 
apostils  knew  Crist  in  brekynge  of  accydent  wi]?outen  suggett, 
])en  nowJ»er  fei  ne  ]?o  puple  wiste  what  jjei  mente ;  as  ]?is  were 
erroure  in  gramer  to  teche,  for,  ]>is  bred  is  nedeful  to  mon,  Jjat 
J?ing  is  nedeful  to  mon.  And  here  Anticristis  clerkes  maken 
homself  perplex ;  hit  nedes  not  to  suen.  Owe !  ]?is  blasphemye 
pervertis  boj^e  logik  and  science  of  kynde.  Bot  moste  harm  in 
])is  mater  stondes  in  ]?is ;  \2X  ]>ei  perverte  \o  feythe  of  ]>o  gospel. 
For  ]?o  gospel  seis,  pat  Crist  toke  bred  in  his  hondes,  blessid 
hit,  and  brake  hit,  and  gaf  his  disciplis,  and  bad  horn  ich  one, 
Fete  5e  of  fis  ;  for,  as  he  seide,  ]?is  is  my  body.  By  ])0  first 
J?is,  }>ei  sey  J^at  bred  is  shewid,  and  by  \o  seconde  J?is  is  al 
ano))er  ]>ing.  And  so  }>ei  blaspheme  in  Crist  and  mystaken  his 
worde.  For  as  ^  everiche  gode  mon  by  resoun  con  se,  J)at  as 
])0  wisdome  of  Crist  shulde  first  schewe  bred,  so  schulde  he 
aftir  shewe  \o  same  bred ;  ffor  elles  ]?is  were  a  causel  wi|?outen 
any  witte,  Feds  alle  of  J>is,  for  J^is  is  my  body. 

And  herfore  lordis  and  eomyns  and  alle  trew  men  schulden 
juge  j?o  blasphemes  in  hor  wronge  partye.  Ffor  so  myche  may 
prelatis  erre,  Jjat  hit  is  worthy  })0  puple  to  juge  horn,  as  ]?o 
bischopis  of  \o  temple  were  nedid  to  forsake  to  juge  Crist,  ]?at 
is  trewth  of  \o  gospel.  And  right  as  a  blaspheme  in  }>o  olde 
lawe  shulde  be  stoned  of  al  ]?o  puple,  so  alle  Cristen  men 
shulden  gostily  stone  blasphemes.  Bot  who  is  a  Cristen  mon, 
bot  he  }>at  trowes  }?at  bred  is  Cristis  body,  as  }»o  gospel  seies  ? 
And  so  by  erroures  ]?at  growen  of  ]?es  blasphemes  is  holy  Chirche 
lettid  to  profit  in  virtues.  Ffor  if  mon  trowid  holly  in  }>o  lawe 
of  J)0  gospel,  and  durst  not  cloute  J^erto  nor  drawe  ])erfro,  |)en 
shulden  ])ei  be  mekely  Cristis  disciplis  and  fle  soche  blasphemes, 


dele  as. 


^  The  friars  impute  to  gram- 
marians, who  imdertake  the  trans- 
lation of  the  Bible,  the  desire,  by 
the  way  in  which  they  render  this 
passage,  to  bring  down  the  sacra- 
ment of  the  altar   to  the  level   of 


common  bread, — which  would  be 
like  saying  that  the  dog-star  shone 
more  brightly  than  the  sun.  Such 
appears  to  me  to  be  the  meaning  of 
this  difficult  passage. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS, 


407 


as  vertues  techen;  for  bofe  vertues  and  vyces  ben  knyttid 
togedir,  and  ]?en  shulde  Cristis  lawe  be  worshippid  as  hit  is 
worthy,  for  hit  suffices  by  hitself  to  reule  Cristis  Chirche,  wiJ?outen 
J)0  popis  lawe  or  any  suche  o}jer.  And  as  men  thar  not  renne 
to  Rome,  ne  to  any  one,  to  fecche  by  leeve  of  Crist  or  ellis  to  be 
made  Cristis  membre,  so  men  thar  not  go  j>ider  for  to  cum  to 
heven.  Ffor,  as  everiche  mon  had  a  lyne  streght  unto  heven, 
so  haves  he  Crist  above  hym,  ])at  wi]?outen  oper  prelatis  sufficis 
to  gif  grace  and  al  ]?at  men  neden.  Mony  jjinges  ben  hidde 
here  )?at  Cristen  men  may  fynde,  and  witte  wel  j^at  of  vanyte 
sues  more  vanyte. 

Bot  5itte  ageyns  ]?is  sentence  meefes  Anticrist,  and,  as  an 
heretik  departid  fro  treuth,  he  wandris  unwarly  unto  wronge 
wayes.  po  first  is  in  derkenesse  of  resouns  of  scole.  pis  wil 
we  passe  owver,  certeyn  of  oure  feythe  J)at  J^ei  shal  nevere  hirte 
oure  sentence  of  \o  gospel,  bifore  J?ei  con  Porfyry,  wij?  Aristotils 
textis.  po  secounde  wey  J>at  ]?ei  walken  is  trist  of  new  witte- 
nesse.  po  first  wittenesse  and  \o  moste  is  \o  pope  and  his 
cardynals,  whom  \€\  have  hyed  so  myche,  and  evened  him  with 
Crist,  f>at  as  Jjei  sey  he  myght  not  synne  in  leedyng  of  his 
Chirche,  so  he  myght  not  erre  in  articles  of  \o  trouth.  Bot 
blessid  be  God,  jjat  schewes  us  in  dede  Jjat  one  |?at  men  callen 
pope  may  erre  in  Jjes  bothe.  And  one  ))ing  I  sey,  certen  of 
resoun,  \2X  no  mon  in  J)is  worlde  may  lightlyer  or  grevouslyer 
synne,  for  his  fote  is  festid  at  pride  by  hynesse  of  state,  and  \o 
fende  temptis  hym  more,  for  hope  of  more  harmynge  bycause 
of  his  synne.  And  one  }>ing  is  certen,  j^at  he  is  not  confermed, 
in  |?at  ]?at  he  hyes  him  and  varyes  fro  Crist.  And  evere  \o  moo 
of  soche  men  ben  gedird  togedir,  ]?o  strenger  ]?ei  ben  to  Anti- 
crist, and  \o  ferrer  fro  Crist ;  as  aght  hundrid  prestis  on  Baal 
syde  were  not  so  stronge  in  God  as  Hely  hym  one.  And  here 
may  we  se  hou  falsely  \o  fend  bigiles  \o  Chirche  wi]?  his  fals 
principle,  \2X  if  )>o  more  part  of  soche  men  assenten  to  a  sen- 
tence, J?at  al  holy  Chirche  shulde  trowe  hit  as  gospel.  And  so, 
Jjof  \o  pope  and  alle  his  cardynals  determen  as  gospel,  }>at  jjo 
sacrament  of  \o  auter  is  accident  wijjouten  sugette,  neverjjoles, 
for  j?ei  con  not  grounde  hem  on  Gods  lawe  ne  resoun,  holy 
Chirche  shulde  not  trowe  hom,  bot  have  horn  suspect. 


The  friars  rest 
their  doctrine 
on  the  Pope, 
whom  they 
declare  to  be 
infallible. 


4o8 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


This  attempt 
to  change  the 
ancient  faith 
must  be  re- 
sisted. 


Lord,  whe]?er  feythe  of  >o  gospel  gyven  to  Cristen  men,  })0 
whoche  lastid  \o  thousande  ^ere  l?at  Sathanas  was  bounden, 
wolde  not  suffice  nowe  when  Sathanas  is  lowsid !  Ffaythe  of 
\o  gospel  seis  f^at  haven  and  er)?e  shal  passe,  and  chaunge  fro 
state  to  state,  bot  })0  wordes  of  Crist  schul  not  ])us  passe.  Ow ! 
what  wodenesse  J?en  were  hit,  any  Cristen  mon  to  leve  ])0  wordis 
of  Crist,  ]?o  gospel,  and  trowe  to  fals  wordis  !  Bot  worschippid 
be  ]?o  lore  of  sothfastnesse  }>at  mevyd  J)is  courte  to  confesse  J)is 
faythe,  as  schewes  pope  Nychol^.  And  ^itte  afftir,  when  Jjis 
courte  was  fer  fro  \o  trewthe,  hit  determyned  not  j?is  feyned 
sentence  pat  men  holden  nowe,  al  ]?of  wode  glosatoures  had 
wrytten  in  ))is  mater  more  than  j^ei  knew  of,  or  elles  couthen 
grounde.  And  ^itte  alle  Jjes  freris  pat  procur  for  Anticrist,  mot 
cloute  to  leesynge  to  textis  and  glosis.  And  so  ]?o  fende  haves 
counseilde  wij)  Anticrist  his  viker,  and  heght  hym  Gog  and 
Magog  to  bigyle  po  puple ;  and  comettis  pis  fantasye, — pat  if 
pei  maken  men  to  denye  hor  wittes  and  Cristis  wordis  bope, 
pat  pis  sacrament  is  not  verely  bred,  but  ping  pat  pei  knowen 
not,  he  schuld  make  hom  lightly  to  denye  aiftir  pat  pis  were 
Gods  body,  or  what  he  wolde.  And  so  my5t  he  lightliere  make 
hom  lye  by  wyfes,  and  disuse  temporal  godes,  or  do  what  pei 
wolde,  and  sey  po  puple  shulde  not  trowe  soche  pinges,  bot 
trowe  po  sawes  pat  Anticrist  lyes,  for  wittes  of  po  puple  erren 
ful  ofte.  For  we  may  als  opunly  knowe  pat  pis  is  bred,  as  we 
may  knowe  po  synnes  of  Anticrist.  Bot  one  ping  lettis,  pat  pen 
pei  my^t  not  wynne  po  money  of  hor  soggettis,  pat  pei  nowe 
spoyle ;  and  so,  by  hydynge  of  synne  pat  pei  nowe  selle,  pei 
shulde  not  feble  pes  rewmes  pat  pei  nowe  bygile.  Ne  alle  Anti- 
cristis  clerkis  con  not  telle  po  cause,  why  accydentis  schulden 
leve  wipouten  sogett,  bot  if  hit  were  to  sygnifie  one  of  pese 
pinges, — ouper  pat  soche  men  ben  partid  fro  Crist,  or  elles  pat 
blessynge  of  prelatis  are  verely  cursynge,  or  elles  to  make  po 
puple  to  trowe  'pat  pei  passe  God.  Ffor  houevere  pei  blaber 
here  wip  hor  lippes,  hor  soule  may  not  understonde  what  are 


a  The  reference  is,  I  think,  to  the 
recantation  of  Berengarius,  incoipu- 
rated  in  the  Acts  of  the  council  held 
at  Rome  in  the  year  1059  under 
Nicholas  II,  in  which   the   former 


declares  that  he  accepts  the  faith 
concerning  the  Eucharist  prescribed 
to  him  by  '  Nicholas  and  this  holy 
Synod.'  Coficilia,  ed.  reg.  vol.  xxv. 
p.  591- 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


409 


J)ese  accydentis;  ne  God  may  not  undirstonde  an  accydent 
wi])0ute  a  sugett.  Bot  anentis  \o  first  of  J?ese,  Austyn  seis  \%X 
as  mon  may  not  be  wijjouten  his  God,  so  an  accydent  may  not 
be  wijjouten  his  sugett  a  And  if  we  glose  Austyn,  J)at  ]?is  may 
not  be  by  kynde,  by  ]?o  same  skil  shulde  we  putt  on  Austyn  ])at 
he  shulde  denye  al  holy  faythe,  for  none  of  J)es  articles  may  be 
wifouten  myracle.  And  so  Jjo  first  and  J?o  laste  ben  falsely 
feyned,  for  al  ]?of  \€\  be  partid  fro  God,  nej)oles  God  fyndes 
horn,  and  puttes  hom  to  payne. 

God  wolde  Jjat  Anticristis  clerkes,  ]?at  perverten  oure  byleve, 
and  chargen  more  wordes  of  Ambrose  J^en  wordes  of  ]?o  gospel, 
wolden  ^if  us  leve  to  treuly  glose  Ambrose.  When  he  seis  ])at 
aftir  ]?o  sacringe  \o  sacrament  shulde  not  be  holden  bred,  J)is 
seynt  undirstondes,  as  he  ofte  telles,  ))at  it  schulde  not  be  trowid 
afftir  principaly  bred  ^.  Ffor  ))is  Ambrose  seis  )?at  ]?at  Jjing  ]?at 
was  bred  is  nowe  Gods  body ;  and  wil  may  we  witte  Jjat  Am- 
brose seis  not  ]>at  bred  gos  to  noght,  as  Anticrist  seis.  As 
anentis  ]?is  cursid  blessynge  falsely  feyned,  hit  is  knowen  J^at 
Crist  curside  J?o  fige  tre  more  mekely  ]?en  ]?ese  men  feynen  \2X 
\€\  blesse  J^is  bred.  Ffor  ^itte  aftir  Cristis  cursynge  was  \o  tre 
dryed,  and  substaunce  lefft,  as  \o  gospel  seis.  Bot,  as  )?es  seyn, 
aftir  hor  blessyng  leves  nowJ)er  mater,  ne  forme,  ne  part  of  ]?is 
bred.  Ffor,  as  \€\  seyn  in  sentense,  J?ei  blesse  ])is  bred  to  noght 
in  forme  of  noght.  Bot  schilde  us  fro  soche  blessynges  of 
blaspheme  prestis  !  And  si])  noght  j?at  was  bifore  in  bred 
tournes  into  Gods  body,  or  any  oj^er  creature,  as  Jjei  mot 
nedely  sey,  how  falsely  Jien  feyned  fei  ]>at  \o  bred  of  \o  auter 
tournes  into  better !  For  by  \o  same  skil  hit  tournes  into 
Cristis  soule,  and  into  his  Godhead.  Sothe  hit  is  J>at  J)is  bred 
tournes  into  Cristis  body.  Ffor,  as  Seint  Ambrose  seis,  hit 
shal  be  Cristis  body.  And  so  \o  substaunce  of  bred,  offerd  in 
\o  auter,  shal  be  turned  into  substaunce  of  Cristis  owne  body, 
and  nowjjer  schal  be  broght  to  noght,  for  l^ei  ben  not  contrarye. 
Lett  we  ])ese  blasphemes  take  hede,  how  Crist,  bifore  J)0  sacrynge, 
bad  alle  eete  of  }>is  bred;   bot   everiche   blaspheme   schulde 


^  This  dictum  is  taken  from  a 
treatise  on  the  Ten  Categories, 
falsely    ascribed  to   St.  Augustine. 


See  his  Worhs^  vol.  i.  App.  p.  34 
(Benedict,  ed.  1679). 
*>  See  vol.  i.  p.  379,  note. 


What  St  Am- 
brose really 
held  on  the 
subject ; 


both  sub- 
stances remain 
after  consecra- 
tion. 


4IO 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


II.  Blasphem- 
ous doctrine 
concerning 
begging.    The 
writer  distin- 
guishes 

between  lawful 
and  unlawful 
begging. 


Psi  Ixix.  29. 


schame  Jjat  Crist  shulde  bidde  horn  do  ])ing  contrarye  to  his 
purpose,  J)at  were  not  for  to  do.  And  herefore  wi}>outen  dowte 
Crist  wolde  ))at  J)is  bred  were  lastynge  til  it  were  his  body,  and. 
aftir  were  eeten,  ffor  elles  mot  Jsei  putt  tregettrye  and  falsenes  in 
Crist.  And  sith  bodily  eetyng  was  bidden  of  Crist,  and  J)is 
bodily  eetyng  my^t  not  be,  bot  if  hit  were  bred,  ))en  J)is  bred 
lastis  aftir  \o  sacrynge.  And  J?us  Seynt  Poule  and  o]?er  apos- 
tils  usiden  suche  eetynge;  ffor  gostily  eetynge  of  Cristis  owne 
body  was  not  tau^t  by  schewyng  of  bred,  bot  by  brekyng  of 
bred,  as  Seynt  Poule  seis.  And  o])er  wittenes  in  J)is  mater  is 
multitude  of  doctoures.  Bot  si]?  Seynt  Austyn  forbedes  J?at  ony 
man  trowe  hym,  bot  if  he  grounde  hym  in  resoun,  or  elles  in 
Gods  lawe,  myche  more  of  alle  ]?ese  doctors,  si)?en_  \o  fende 
was  loused,  no  mon  schulde  trowe  hom,  bot  J^ei  grounde  horn 
]?us.  And  myche  more  of  oure  popis  wi]>  alle  hor  cardinals. 
And  so,  }?of  we  had  an  hundred  of  popis,  and  alle  J?o  freris  iii 
])is  worlde  were  tourned  unto  cardinals,  ^itte  schulde  we  more 
trowe  J?o  lawe  of  fo  gospel  ]?en  we  schulde  trowe  al  ]?is  mul- 
titude. 

II  PARS  BLASPHEMIAE. 

po  secounde  blaspheme  grounden  ]?es  freris,  for  ]?ei  feynen 
falsely  beggynge  in  Crist ;  and  hereby  Jjei  peyren  \o  Chirche, 
and  spoylen  J)0  pore  puple.  pei  supposen  sothely  ]?at  Crist 
was  pore,  for  Seynt  Poule  seis  fat  Crist  was  made  bojje  pore 
and  nedy,  for  ]?o  luf  of  mon.  And  \is  we  graunten  hom,  and 
more  J?erto,  \2X  Crist  was  a  beggar,  as  ]?o  Salme  seis.  Bot,  for 
to  knowe  fraudes  and  falsenesse  of  freris,  moste  we  knowe  what 
is  beggyng,  and  maner  of  beggynge.  No  creature  beggis  bot 
mon-kynde  one;  ne  nevere  shulde  have  begged  bot  for  his 
owne  synne.  And  so  begges  a  mon,  J)at  askes  purely,  for 
Gods  luf,  helpe  of  any  ])ing  to  releve  him  of  his  wreechidnes. 
And  by  dyversite  of  ]>ingis  \2X  we  beggen  of,  and  by  maner  of 
beggyng,  may  we  knowe  kyndes  of  beggynge.  Everiche  mon 
is  nedid  to  begge  of  his  God,  for  we  asken  of  hym  oure  iche 
dayes  bred,  and  in  jjat  we  begge  of  hym,  as  Austyn  beres 
wittenes  a.    Bot  speke  we  of  beggyng  of  mon  and  beggyng  of 

a  S.  Aug.  Serm.  No.  LVIII.  (ed.  Paris,  1685). 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS, 


411 


temporal  godes ;  and  so  somme  beggen  of  men  in  worde,  and 
somme  beggen  in  dede.  And  of  J)00  ]?at  beggen  [in]  worde, 
somme  seyn  treuly  and  expressely  hor  owne  myscheffe,  for  to 
be  releved  as  \€\  shulde  be,  and  such  beggynge  is  algatis  of 
synne  of  \o  puple.  And  som.me  cryen  by  worde  aftir  temporal 
godes  in  yvel  maner,  aftir  more  ))en  \€\  schulde  have ;  and  suche 
willeful  begg}mge  lackes  groundynge  of  resoim.  Ffor  of  Crist 
I  rede  not  ]?at  evere  he  beggid  in  worde,  ne  he  my^t  not  begge 
more  })en  hym  nedid.  Sothely  ill  Ijo  olde  lawe  was  beggynge 
forbeden^-,  for  hit  gos  oute  of  kynde  more  })en  is  nede;  si}> 
bestis  by  kynde  taken  hor  fode,  ich  one  by  hymself,  als  myche 
as  hym  nedes.  And  if  him  wante  strenght,  by  tendernesse  of 
^outhede,  kynde  hafs  taught  Jjo  first  beste  to  norische  his  owne 
issue.  In  elde  \€\  bisye  hom  no^t,  sij?  hor  soule  lastis  not  aftir. 
And  so  iche  mon  schulde,  by  \q  wey  of  kynde,  take  ]>at  hym 
nedes  of  temporal  godes ;  and  if  hym  wantid  witte  in  kyndely 
power,  he  schulde  be  releved  by  men  ]?at  God  sendes  more. 
And  so,  sith  beggynge  is  unkyndely  to  bestis,  myche  more  to 
mon  j?at  God  lufs  more,  ffor  God  haves  gyven  a  mon  bothe 
powere  and  witte,  for  to  begge  not,  bot  if  he  be  nedid  by  un- 
kyndenesse  of  mon.  And  herfore  men  wischen  \2X  yvel  mot 
he  spede  J?at  begges  on  ]?is  wyse,  bot  if  he  have  nede;  for 
slouthe  of  coveytouse  men,  J>at  shulden  gif  bifore,  and  helpe  J?o 
pore  men,  is  cause  of  ]?is  beggynge,  or  elles  slouthe  in  covetyse 
of  l^ese  stronge  beggers.  And  ])us  forbedes  Gods  lawe  ])at  any 
mon  be  begger.  And  as  God  haves  gyven  men  tole,  to  begge 
]?us  in  nede,  so  haves  he  gyven  men  power  to  helpe  homself  as 
bestis ;  and  he  J)at  mysuses  ]>is  powere  reversis  Gods  ordy- 
naunse.  And  herfore  techis  Austyn  munkes  to  travel;  and  so 
algatis  hit  is  synne  a  mon  to  begge  J>us ;  for  if  he  willefuly  begge, 
and  haves  no  nede,  he  is  a  schremd  begger,  reproved  of  God. 
If  he  be  nedid  to  begge  for  synne  of  his  neghtbore,  defaute  is 
in  his  neghtbore,  al  ]?of  he  be  clene ;  and  so  suche  beggynge 
moste  smake  synne,  ouj^er  in  hym  \2X  begges,  or  in  hym  J>at 
first  schulde  helpe  hym.  Here  may  we  se  J?at  Crist  begged  not 
]3us,  si}>  he  had  no  nede,  but  evere  was  occupied  in  o]?er  better 

a  The  reference  is  to  Deut.  xv.  4;  see  p.  371,  note  a. 


41  a 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


In  what  sense 
Christ  begged. 

Acts  L  i6. 


The  begging  of 
the  friars  is  of 
a  totally  differ- 
ent kind. 


werkes ;  and  of  Crist  lemed  Seynt  Poule  to  travel  wij?  his  hondis, 
and  flew^h  suche  beggynge,  in  hym  and  his  folowers. 

Bot,  for  Seynt  Petre  expo^vnes  J)0  prophete,  ]?at  Judas  pur- 
sued Crist,  mon  nedy  and  bagger,  hit  were  for  to  witte  hou 
Crist  was  a  begger.  Ffor  hit  semes  J^at  Crist  beggid,  not  onely 
in  his  membres,  bot  in  his  owne  persona,  as  he  was  pore  and 
nedy ;  and  so  \o  moste  honeste  beggyng  ordeyned  of  God,  and 
Mkeste  to  ]?o  state  of  innocense,  acordid  to  Crist ;  and  ]?at  he 
seide  in  dede  defaute  that  he  was  inne,  and  asked  not  in  worde 
helpe  for  his  myschef,  not  by  almes  of  mon  ne  pleynynge  to 
hom.  And  ])is  seyinge  in  dede,  wi])0uten  Cristis  bisynes, 
was  \o  beggynge  J?at  \o  Psalme  puttes  to  Crist.  Bot  as  in 
byinge  of  a  hors,  mon  byes  hym  not  to  bye  \o  heer  of  J?is  hors, 
ne  none  o]?er  lymme,  so  Crist  bisyed  hym  not  for  ]?is  bodily 
almes,  bot  for  to  worschip  his  Fadir,  and  profite  to  \o  puple. 
And  ne  were  Gods  lawe,  J?is  speche  were  ful  straunge,  ffor  men 
speken  comynly  of  beggynge  by  mowthe,  not  by  mevynge  of 
voyce,  bot  by  expresse  wordes ;  and  ]?us  menen  men  ]?at  seyn 
]?at  Crist  begged  not. 

And  si})  freris  beggen  on  ]?is  wyse  by  autorite  of  Crist,  hit 
semes  Jjat  \ti  conseyven  ]>at  Crist  begge  j)us.  Bot  Seynt 
Richart  of  Armawhe  proves  on  feir  maner,  ];at  were  an  heresye 
to  putt  upon  Crist  suche  maner  of  beggynge,  and  mayntene  hit 
stifly.  For  feyth  nedes  us  to  trowe,  >at  al  J?at  Crist  did,  he  did 
hit  on  J?o  beste  maner  wipouten  defaute ;  bot  what  nede  of  pro- 
fite shulde  mefe  J)is  Lord,  for  to  begge  l?us  wijjouten  any  cause  ? 
Nede  drof  him  not  ferto,  sij>  Crist  hungred  nevere  bot  when  he 
chees  to  hungre  so,  and  ^if  ensaumple  of  penaunce.  Bot  Lord ! 
what  profit  were  hit  Crist  to  begge  ])us,  sij?  he  myght  mefe  men 
to  gif  hym  when  hym  nedid,  wi))Outen  any  bisynes  of  askyng  of 
hom  ?  And  sith  )?is  were  algatis  \o  better  to  Crist  and  to  ]?o 
puple,  what  shulde  mefe  \o  blasphemes  to  lye  ])us  on  Crist  ? 
Also,  sij)  Crist  did  ever  more  \q  beste,  what  shulde  mefe  hym  to 
ocupye  his  mouthe  wi]>  suche  beggynge  ?  Certis,  si})  Crist  ches 
to  be  unchargeaunte  to  \o  puple,  ne  gif  non  occasioun  of  ava- 
rise  to  o}?er,  \d  shulden  fle  }?is  doynge,  and  occupye  hom  bet- 
ter,— specially  sij?  he  forfended  to  begge  in  his  lawe.  Also,  si}) 
freris  seyn  })at  beggynge  groundes  hom,  and  puttes  hom  in  hyer 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


413 


degre  of  al  ]?is  Chirche,  why  wolde  not  Crist  byfore  J?o  comynge 
of  freris  teche  Jjis  beggynge,  to  profite  of  his  spouse  ?  Hit  semes 
])at  he  shulde  not  bid,  to  lousyng  of  ]?o  fende.  Bot,  as  Seynt 
Hildegar  seis  in  hir  prophesye,  J?is  beggynge  abode  }?is  peri- 
louse  tyme,  when  fals  ypocritis  disseyven  \o  puple  ^  Also,  si]? 
J?o  gospel  is  fill  of  dedes  of  Crist,  and  suf&cyent  in  treuthe  to 
governe  Cristis  Churche,  if  J?is  beggynge  of  freris  were  taken 
of  Cristis  lif,  sumwhere  in  J?o  gospel  shulde  hit  be  groundid. 
Bot  ]?o  gospel  leves  hit,  ])at  holdes  al  treuthe.  And  so  J?o  blas- 
pheme freris,  to  grounde  hor  ordir,  putten  Crist  out  of  state  of 
innocense,  and  putten  folie  in  his  werkes,  si]?  he  wrot  unwarly. 
Mony  fayre  resoun  makis  ]>is  holy  bishop  to  convicte  in  l?is  fals- 
nesse  of  freris. 

Bot  si})  freris  were  heretikes  and  blasphemes  in  Crist,  bot  if 
J?ei  groundid  J)is  beggynge  in  lawe  of  ]?o  gospel,  \t\  bisien  horn 
ful  faste  to  seke  horn  a  grounde.  po  first  and  ^0  myghtiest 
resoun  of  freris  to  prove  beggyng  in  Crist,  stondes  in  })is; 
Crist  askid  \o  womman  watir  to  drinke,  and  5itte  he  was  an 
alien,  for  he  was  a  Samaritan ;  myche  more  wolde  he  be  homely 
to  his  owne  kyn.  Bot  here  \o  blynde  blasphemes  mosten 
lerne  hor  logik.  Ffor  lewid  men  wot  wel,  ])at  hit  sues  not, 
J)of  J)0  Lord  aske  of  his  owne  )?inge  ]?at  hym  nedes,  j^en  he  moste 
begge  Jjat  J)ing  of  his  servaunt.  And  so,  if  Crist  bad  J)0  wom- 
mon  gif  hym  a  drinke,  never])oles  he  beggid  not  J)is  drinke  of 
\o  wommon.  And  wolde  God  J^at  soche  freris  beggid  no^t  bot 
water,  or  eUles  oj^er  elementis,  Jjate  by  kynde  shulden  be 
comyne  !  And,  for  freris  may  not  feyne  oJ)er  drinke  bot  water 
of  |)0  welle  ])at  Crist  shulde  aske,  fei  feyne  falsely  ))at  Crist 
asked  watir  to  drinke.  Bot  hit  is  not  semely  \2X  he  wolde 
])en  drinke  watir,  si)?  he  sende  his  disciplis  to  towne  to  bye 
meete,  and  a  fastynge  mon  lufs  litel  suche  drinke.    Also  J?o 


a  St.  Hildegardis  was  abbess  of 
the  convent  of  St.  Robert  on  the 
Nahe  near  Bingen.  She  lived  to 
the  age  of  82,  dying  in  the  year 
1 1 80.  The  passage  here  alluded  to 
is  probably  contained  in  the  Eleventh 
Vision  of  the  third  book  of  Scivias, 
the  name  which  she  gave  to  the 


book  of  her  Visions ;  for  this  par- 
ticular vision  deals  with  the  state  of 
things  existing  in  the  Church  in  her 
own  time,  and  to  exist  after  her 
death.  But  the  work  not  bemg  in- 
dexed, I  have  been  unable  to  light 
on  the  passage.  See  the  Liber  3 
virorum  et  5  virgimitn,  Paris,  151 3. 


The  friars  say 
that  Christ 
begged  water 
of  the  Sama- 
ritan woman : 
it  would  be 
well  if  they 
begged 
nothing  else. 


414 


V/FCLIF'S  WORKS. 


They  also  say 
that  He  begged 
of  Zaccheus ; 
but  He  rather 
commanded 
him. 


Replies  to 
other  similar 
arguments  of 
the  friars. 


gospel  telles  not  ])at  Crist  askid  water,  ne  ]?at  he  dranke  water 
when  })at  hit  was  drawen.  And  so  it  semes  \2X  feynyng  of 
freris  expownes  })is  gospel  as  heretikes  done.  Bot  hit  is  more 
semely,  si};  \o  welle  was  depe,  and  Crist  loved  ]>o  womman  in 
shewynge  of  myraclis,  J)at  he  shulde  make  ])is  water  by  myracle 
springe  up,  and  sithen  drinke  ferof  if  he  had  nede.  And  herfore 
olde  sentence  is  acordyng  wij?  \o  gospel,  ]>at  Crist  spake  here 
of  spiritual  eetynge  anddrinkynge;  for  when  his  disciplis  bad 
him  eete,  he  seyde  he  had  mete  to  eete  Jjat  Jjei  knewen  not. 
And  so  when  J?is  wommon  by  devocioun  of  feyth  ^af  Crist  hir 
hert,  ])en  he  dranke  wij)  hir.  Lord,  whe}?er  God  begge  of  mon 
when  he  askes  his  wille,  or  Crist  beggid  of  ]?is  wommon  when  he 
mevid  hir  hert,  and  gaf  hir  water  of  lif,  and  filled  hir  for  evere ! 

Bot  ^itte  ])0  freris  fablen  of  beggynge  of  Crist,  and  seyn  he 
beggid  of  3achee  bo]?e  meete  and  house.  Bot  here  \o  ydiotes 
faylen  in  discrevynge  of  beggynge.  Ffor  if  a  bayle  aske  rent 
to  ]50  lord,  he  begges  not  ]?is  rent  of  \o  lordis  tenaunte.  Ne 
if  a  mon  aske  his  dette  of  ano]?er,  he  begges  not  Jjis  of  hym,  for 
dyversite  of  titel.  Miche  more  Crist,  ]?at  was  bo))e  God  and 
mon,  and  had  by  state  of  innocense  lord^  of  al  ))is  worlde, 
J)of  he  asked  of  his  owne,  as  a  lord  shulde,  ]?inges  of  his  ser- 
vauntis  \2X  he  had  myster  of  and  nede,  he  beggid  not,  bot 
nedid  his  servauntis  thorw  mercy.  And  lefe  loke  ]?o  wordes 
J)at  Crist  seyde  to  Zachee,  whe))er  J^ei  sowned  beggynge  or 
lordship  in  Crist.  Zachee,  hyinge  cum  doune  of  ]?o  tre,  for  I 
mot  )jis  day  dwelle  in  J^in  house.  A  riche  mon  wolde  jjenke 
spyte  of  a  begger,  )?at  bad  him  hastily  cum  doune  fro  a  sight 
))at  hym  liked,  and  seide  fat  he  moste  herberow  }>is  begger; 
ifdr  suche  a  mon  wolde  sey  sone  to  suche  a  begger, — Begger, 
^itte  myghtes  J^ou  aske  whej?er  Jjat  I  wolde.  Bot  J?o  gospel 
techis  )?at  Crist  did  mercy  unto  J^is  riche  mon,  and  begged  not 
of  hym. 

5itte  \o  foles  blabur  to  prove  Jjat  Crist  beggid,  si|?  he  sende 
his  disciplis  to  Jerusalem,  to  fett  him  an  asse  and  hir  foole  for 
to  ryde  on.  Bot  J?is  blyndenesse  of  |)0  blasphemes  gos  fjo 
same  waye,  ffor  ]?ei  blabur  heresye  )?at  God  asked  not     And 

^  an  error  probably  for  lordship. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS, 


415 


si))  }?ere  is  no  begg^nge  of  soche  comyne  bestis,  \o  freris 
shulden  schame  to  forge  suche  beggynge ;  specialy  si)?  \o  Lord 
bad  his  disciplis,  Jjat  if  ony  mon  seide  owght  unto  horn,  J?ei  ^ 
schulden  sey  J)at  J?o  Lord  had  myster  of  horn,  pei  schulden 
leme,  ]?at  name  of  Lord,  taken  by  hymself,  sygnifies  God,  Lord 
of  all  lordes.  And,  for  hit  were  to  streyte  to  lordship  of  Crist 
to  be  a  special  lord  of  Jude  or  Jerusalem,  ]?erfore  he  bad  ])at 
)>ei  schulde  calle  him  Lorde.  Bot  ^itte  \o  freris  casten  out 
oJ>er  blynde  resouns,  Jjat  Crist  beggid  a  house,  to  eete  inne  his 
maundye,  flfor,  as  \o  gospel  seis,  he  had  none  of  his  owne,  and 
so  he  toke  almes  bothe  of  men  and  of  wymmen ;  why  schulde 
we  not  sey  Jjat  ne  Crist  was  a  begger  ?  Bot  here  we  seyn  to 
freris,  as  \o  Psalme  seis,  J?at  Crist  was  to  geder  bothe  riche  and 
pore,  and  herfore  he  ordeyned  \o  apostils  to  sey  })at  he  was 
Lord  of  alle  lordes ;  and  ^itte  had  he  myster.  And  so  Crist 
was  moste  pore  mon  ]?at  evere  was  oute,  and  ferto  most  riche 
mon,  and  also  moste  curteyse.  And  so  in  al  his  povert  he 
beggid  not  by  voyce,  bot  meved  folk  to  gif  him,  for  more  mede 
of  hom.  And  so,  ])of  Crist  toke  bodily  almes,  nevere|3oles  he 
gaf  better  ageyne  gostily  ahnes,  and  beggid  nevere  on  fis 
maner  ])at  \o  freris  feynen.  And  so  he  bad,  as  verrey  Lord, 
to  go  to  J?o  cyte,  and  sey  to  sum  myghty  mon  by  ))is  token, 
J)at,  po  mayster  seis,  I  make  Paske  wij?  ^e.  And  at  J?is  lordely 
worde  of  ])is  maister,  |)is  burgeys  of  \o  cyte  schewed  hom  a 
grett  house  strewid.  Lord,  whejjer  ])is  menes  beggynge  of 
Crist !  Bot  j^es  blynde  blasphemes  con  not  depart  beggynge 
fro  povert,  for  bo]?e  acorden  sumwhat. 

Bot  se  we  whe]?er  ]?es  newe  sectis  seyn  so]?  upon  Crist,  ]?at 
Jjei  suen  hym  in  lif  bifore  alle  ojjer  men ;  bot  hit  semes  nay. 
Ffirst,  when  ]?ei  sey  \2X  \€\  ben  pore  as  Crist,  Jjo  fend  hafs 
clothid  hom  in  a  cope  to  bringe  in  more  deceyte.  Certis  J?ei 
have  feele  rentis,  bot  Crist  had  nevere  one.  Crist  was  her- 
berowid  in  symple  houses  of  oJ>er  comyne  men;  }}ese  freris 
have  in  propur^  houses  of  coste.  Crist  ])at  was  al  wyse  had 
bot   twelve  disciplis;    }?ese   founed  freris  rekken  nevere   how 

^  corrected ;  \>e,  W. 

*  As  their  own. 


They  profess 
to  imitate 
Christ  in  life, 
but  falsely. 


41 6 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


Gen.  iv.  17. 


Christ  gave  to 
the  people 
more  than  He 
received  from 
them ;  the 
friars  take  all, 
and  pfive 
nothmg. 


mony  Jjei  have.  And,  for  Crist  chees  his  disciplis,  and  gedrid 
horn  of  mony,  J)0  freris  steelen  lesse  childer  wi])OUte  discre- 
cioun ;  herfore  fei  have  Scarioths  moo  Jjen  apostils.  Bot  loke 
how  jjese  freris  kepen  ))0  lawe  of  Jjo  gospel.  Crist  wolde  J>at 
nowj^er  he  ne  his  were  chargeaunt  to  J^o  puple;  Jjese  freris 
loken  how  myche  ])ei  may  gete  of  godes  of  \o  comynes,  to 
carye  to  hor  castel.  Ffor  by  ])is  entent  )?ei  make  hom  a  cyte, 
as  Caym,  to  carye  to.  Bot  oujjer  Seynt  Poule  seide  fals  of 
propurtees  of  charite,  ])at  hit  sekes  not  his  owne  gode,  but  godes 
of  comynes,  or  elles  fese  freris  reversen  ])0  rewles  of  charite. 

I  rede  not  ]>at  Crist  wi]?  alle  his  apostlis  toke  more  of  jjo 
comynnes  ]?en  he  gaf  ageyne.  Ffor  in  his  two  feestis  )>at  he 
maked  by  myracle,  he  fed  ])0  puple  in  als  myche  as  he  and  his 
apostils  token  of  \o  puple;  and  spiritual  giftes  fat  Crist  ^af  })0 
puple  was  wi]?outen  mesure  better  }>en  hor  giftes.  If  freris,  in 
more  spense  of  housyng  and  mete,  in  clothyng,  in  juwels, 
chargen  more  ]?o  puple  jjen  Crist  wij?  his  apostils,  how  suen  J>ei 
Crist  in  }>is  maner  of  lyvynge?  And  so  hit  were  al  one  to 
grounde  soche  ordiris  of  beggers,  and  grounde  Anticristis  clerkis 
and  blasphemes  of  Crist.  Ow  1  si]?  Seynt  Richarde,  bishop  of 
Armawh,  proves  ageyne  freris  by  mony  feyre  resouns  \2X  ])ei 
faylen  opunly  fro  Cristis  religion ;  and  harmen  J?o  Chirche  and 
\o  comynes  bothe ;  how  ben  oure  bishops  and  freris  now 
knyttid  togedir,  bot  as  Herowde  and  Pilate  were  made  fals 
frendes  ?  And  ]?is  knotte  lastid  not,  for  hit  was  yvel  groundid 
in  hate  of  Crist,  and  of  his  lawe;  so  hit  semes  here.  And 
harmyng  of  J30  puple  may  we  sone  se ;  sij>  heven  lokes  lesse 
to  fruyt  of  ])0  erthe,  monnes  strength  is  lesse,  here  lyve  is 
shortere,  \o  tyme  is  lesse  sesounable,  and  charite  withdrawen. 
What  shulde  mefe  Anticrist  to  double  \o  rentis  of  }?o  pore 
puple  in  suche  yvel  tyme  ?  Ffor  byfore  Jjat  freris  comen  by 
cautel  of  \o  fende,  \o  puple  gaf  no  more  rente  for  so  myche  to 
hor  lordes.  And  al  J?inge  acountid,  f>ei  gyven  nowe  to  j^o  ordiris 
wel  nyhe  als  myche  as  J?ei  did  to  hor  lordes.  And  so  frutis  of 
worldes  godes  faylen  in  ]?o  grounde.  And  si))  yvel  partynge 
of  soche  godes  is  cause  of  discencioun,  ))0  fende  hafs  caste  J?is 
snare  for  to  bryge  men,  ffor  charite  is  exiled,  and  envye  is 
kyndelid.     And  ))is  semes  ))0  caste  of  \o  fende  of  helle,  )?at  he 

WYCLIF. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


417 


schal  destiye  lordes  and  hor  tenauntes,  and  leve  none  in  \o 
world  hot  Anticrist  clerkes.  And  so,  in  ])is  })at  freris  ben 
chargeaunt  to  \o  puple,  J^ei  suen  hor  mayster  Anticrist,  and  not 
Jesus  Crist. 

po  secounde  wa3^e  )>at  \€i  go  fro  Crist  and  his  lawe  is  wed- 
dyng  of  hor  newe  ordiris,  and  dyversen  fro  Cristis  lawe.  Men 
may  opunly  se  hou  freris  tellen  more  by  hor  newe  ordir  and 
hor  ordynaunse,  )?en  )>ei  do  by  Cristis  lawe,  or  profit  of  his 
Chirche.  Ffor  ]>is  ]?ei  suen  scharplyer,  and  punyschen  herfore  ; 
and  ]?is  privey  horedame  makes  myche  harme.  As  Crist  biddes, 
undertake  thryes  oure  bro]?er,  and  at  J?o  fourt  tyme  forsake  horn 
as  hethen  men.  Bot  ])ese  private  ordiris  bidden  al  J)0  con- 
trarye ;  for  he  ]?at  sues  jjis  gospel  is  holdun  sclaunderer  of  his 
brej?eren,  destroyer  of  hor  house,  and  of  hor  newe  religioun. 
Ffor  oft  sithe  he  shulde  telle  apertely  \o  fautes  of  his  brether, 
and  oft  fie  hom  as  cursed  men  }?at  his  reule  ageyne-seis.  Ffor 
oft  his  gode  brethere  ben  putt  into  prisoun,  and  moste  schrewis 
of  ojier  have  leve  to  go  aboute,  and  use  frely  hor  mahce  as 
procuratoures  of  ]?o  fende.  And  sith  hit  is  al  one  to  luf  a  lord 
and  his  lawe,  ofte  tyme  )?ei  luf  more  hor  ordir  ]?en  Crist.  And 
in  mony  caas  fredom  of  \o  gospel  moste  be  forsaken  for  hor 
newe  tradiciouns. 

Bot  5itte  j)0  blasphemes  blaburen  ageyne  j?is  sentense,  ))at 
bothe  resoun  and  holy  writte  acorden  togeder,  J)at  whoso  edifyes 
]30  puple  shal  lif  on  ]?o  puple ;  bot  sij?  freris  in  lif  and  worde 
edifyen  moste  \o  puple,  hit  semes  ]?ei  schulde  first  take  almes 
of  \o  puple.  Bot  wayte  we  whydir  \o  blasphemes  drawen. 
pis  resoun  meenes  |?at  no  maner  of  comynes  schulde  gif  tem- 
poral godes  to  lordis  or  persouns,  bifore  J?o  freris  were  served 
of  ]?at  at  j?ei  craven.  Bot  hit  were  al  one  to  holde  upon  ]?is 
sentense,  and  destrye  ]?o  ordiris  ]>at  Crist  made,  and  mayntene 
his  enemy es.  And  ))us  bigan  Anticrist  to  reverse  Crist,  not 
mending  defaute^  fat  were  in  Cristis  ordir,  bot  makyng  newe 
ordiris  and  sectis,  as  he  wolde  passe  Crist.  Bot  feyth  and 
kynde  techis  us,  ]?at  ordir  of  Crist  is  better,  and  J?at  he  ordeyned 
his  Chirche  as  beste  wolde  be,  noujjer  to  myche  ne  to  litel,  bot 
in  gode  mesure.  Bot  J70  bastarde  braunchis  of  \o  newe  ordiris 
spronge  in  wi})Oute  auctorite  of  God.     Ow  1   what  wise  mon 

WORKS.      VOL.  III.  E  e 


Nor  do  they 
irnilale  Christ 
in  their  inordi- 
nate attach- 
ment to  their 
several  Orders. 


When  they 
ground  their 
right  to  alms 
on  the  spiritual 
services  they 
render,  they 
prove  too 
much. 


4i8 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


Had  Christians 
only  been  con- 
tent with  the 
law  and  teach- 
ing of  Christ, 
no  prelates, 
monks,  canons, 
nor  friars 
would  have 
been  needed ; 


wolde  make  a  hye  house,  and  putte  tymbre  bynethe,  and  stoories 
aboven  ?  or  elles  above  more  hevye  Jnnge  \tn  \o  foundement 
wolde  bere  ?  po  foundement  of  \o  Chirche  ben  comyners  and 
laboreres ;  bot  if  moo  ordiris  and  sectis  ben  clotirde  on  hom 
]?en  schulde  by  resoun  hele  hom  wi]>  charite,  defaute  is  in  ordy- 
naunce  of  maker  of  )?o  Chirche.  And  so  soth  hit  is,  if  freris 
travel  more  to  profite  of  }»o  Chirche  ]?en  ojjer  men  done,  fei 
schulden  upon  resoun  be  susteyned  of  ]?at  Chirche,  if  ]?ei  come 
to  ]?is  werke  by  autorite  of  God.  Bot  Seynt  Poule  techis  ]?at 
soche  schulde  not  be  hevye  to  \o  puple  ]?at  Jjei  techen,  bot  lyve 
on  litel,  as  foules.  Bot  }>ese  raveyners  robben  po  puple,  and 
done  not  hor  devere.  And  so  resoun  wolde  aske  ]?at  noumbre 
of  prestis  schulden  stonde  in  mesure,  and  travel  in  hor  offis ; 
and  if  J)ei  were  ydel,  or  elles  to  monye,  withdrawe  of  hor  sus- 
tynaunce,  and  spende  on  o}>er  maner  J>o  tresor  of  God,  and  not 
norische  his  enemyes.  Bot  howevere  ]?ese  blasphemes  bosten 
]>at  ]?ei  travel  more  to  profite  of  jjo  Chirche  }>en  done  oj^er 
prestis,  one  jjinge  men  knowen,  })at  sith  ]?ei  comen  in  hafs  ])0 
Chirche  payred  in  everiche  membre. 

How  blessidful  were  Jjo  Chirche  to  renne  aftir  Crist,  if  it  were 
onely  payed  of  \o  ordynaunce  of  hym,  and  broght  up  no  newe 
lawes,  ne  no  newe  sectis,  bot  amendid  mysdoeris  by  Cristis 
owne  lawe,  and  bringe  hom  ageyne  to  ]>o  lyve  fat  Crist  hymself 
ordeyned !  And  ]?en  J)0  do^vynge  of  })0  emperoure  had  nou]?er 
comen  in,  ne  his  prelatis  had  not  blasphemed  ]?us  ageynes 
Gods  lawe,  ne  J>ese  private  religiouse  schulde  nou]?er  on  Jjis 
wyse  have  stourblid  Cristis  Chirche,  ne  pervertid  his  ordir. 
Ffor  chaunouns,  munkes,  and  freris  schulden  no3t  }>en  have 
stonden  in  sted,  bot  few  pore  prestis  schulde  have  sufficid  to  ]>o 
Chirche  by  pure  Cristis  lawe.  Bot  here  cryes  Anticrist  }>at  by 
Jjis  blaspheme  holy  Chirche  schulde  perishe,  and  Crist  be  un- 
worshipped ;  ^e,  and  seintes  in  heven,  patrouns  of  J>o  ordiris, 
schulden  be  sclaundrid  of  hor  moste  gloriouse  werkes.  Bot 
wolde  God  ]?at  Anticrist  wolde  gedir  his  wittes,  and  witte  [^at 
hit  were  better  to  hye  Cristis  ordenaunce,  Jjen  ordynaunce  of 
Benett  or  Domynik  or  Fraunces.  Ffor  we  owe  to  trowe  ]?at 
Crist  myght  not  fayle,  nou]?er  in  ordenaunce  ne  lawe  sufficient  for 
his  Chirche ;  and  whosoevere  reverses  ])is  sentense  blasphemes 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS, 

in  Crist.  Here  may  we  se  ]/at  J^ei  take  fals,  for  J)us  \o  Chirche 
schulde  be  saved  and  Crist  more  worshippid,  \o  fendes  host 
ow\^ercomen,  and  Cristendome  confortid.  Ffor  multitude  of 
cowardes  harmes  Cristis  batel,  fFor  fei  knowen  nowj?er  his  armes, 
ne  his  feghtyng.  As  aneyntis  }?o  patrouns  schulde  we  wil  trowe, 
J)at  jjei  did  not  poynt  devyse  as  oure  Jesus  did ;  and  herfore 
erroure  in  secte  of  horn  brynges  m^n  to  more.  Ne  bere  not  to 
hevye  }?at  \q  seyntis  errid.  Ffor  Seynt  Jon  seis  fat  if  we  seyn 
we  synnen  not,  we  deceyve  oureself,  and  passen  oute  of  treuthe. 
And  so,  si|»  J?oo  seyntis  diden  not  ]?o  beste  in  foundyng  of  J?oo 
ordiris,  bot  synned  venyaly,  hit  were  a  gret  folye  to  sue  horn  in 
J)is  erroure,  and  leve  \o  ordynaunce  of  Crist  }?at  may  not  be 
amendid.  And  herfore  Poul  durste  not,  ne  none  ojjer  apostil, 
founde  newe  sectis  bysyde  fo  ordir  of  Crist.  Bot  J?re  })inges  of 
]>is  sentence  may  we  suppose,  ])at  ]?ei  keppid  \o  ordiris  better 
fen  fei  no  we  ben,  so  fat  fes  newe  ordiris  ben  ofte  newe  made. 
Also  fo  seyntis  wolde  not  fat  hor  sect  were  weddid  wif  hor 
tradiciouns,  and  laft  Cristis  lawe.  And  f  o  f  ridde  we  supposen, 
fat  fo  seyntis  sorowed  in  tyme  of  hor  deth,  ffor  alle  soche 
erroures.  And  so,  for  of er  godes  fat  f ei  did  ofte,  suppose  we 
fat  f ei  ben  nowe  in  heven,  and  so  we  dampnen  not  f o  seyntis, 
but  putt  Crist  byfore. 

Lord,  sif  Poule  presumed  not  to  founde^  soche  sectis,  why 
schulde  foles  and  ydiotes  take  fis  upon  hom?  Specialy  sif 
folye  were  to  one  unwyse  to  take  a  flok  of  Gods  folke,  fat 
lastid  bot  for  his  Hf ;  myche  more  an  ydiot  schulde  not  gif  a 
reule  to  alle  his  sect,  iastynge  for  evere,  whiche  reule  were  not 
expressid  in  Gods  lawe.  And  so  fes  sectis  sclaunderen  hor 
owne  patrouns,  amendynge  hor  defautes,  and  passynge  fro  hor 
ordiris.  And  so  al  f of  f ese  newe  ordiris  profiten  to  Cristis 
Chirche,  neverf  oles  not  so  myche  as  fendes  in  helle.  Ffor  f ei 
made  meryte  of  Crist,  and  mony  of  er  merytis,  byfore  fat  freris 
comen.  And  so,  if  fei  wil  be  purgid,  turne  fei  to  Cristis  ordire, 
and  fen  thar  hom  not  aske  confermynge  of  f o  pope. 

^  corrected ;  founded,  W. 


419 


not  that  the 
founders  of 
Orders  were 
not  holy  men ; 


but  they  erred 
in  founding 
new  sects,  and 
their  followers 
now,  departing 
from  their 
rules,  get 
deeper  into 
error. 


E  e  2 


4^o 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


Ill,  Blasphe- 
mous pretence 
of  sharing  the 
merits  of  their 
Order  with 
other  men  by 
letters  of 
fraternity. 


Ill  PARS.— OF  LETTRIS  OF  FFRATERNITE. 

Nowe  of  ])0  thridde  blaspheme  is  for  to  speke,  for  freris 
founden  hor  ordires  fully  in  leesynges.  pei  feynen  first,  ))at 
Crist  beggid  as  ]?ei,  and  herby  ]?ei  lyve  by  leesynge  upon  lees- 
ynge;  and  for  to  spoyle  more  f>o  puple,  }>ei  feynen  horn  a 
powere  to  graunt  men  gostily  helpe  more  l?en  J)ei  have  of  Gods 
lawe,  or  elles  may  ^e\  helpe  homself.  pei  graunten  letters  of 
bretherhed  under  hor  comyne  seele,  ]?at  hor  brej^er  schal  have 
part  of  alle  hor  gode  dedes,  bothe  in  lif  and  in  deth,  and 
rekkenen  mony  werkes.  Bot  first  may  men  se,  hou  ]?is  maner 
of  doynge  savers  heresye  in  proude  ypocrites.  For  )?es  gostily 
sufirages  fei  sellen  in  a  maner,  si]>  ]?ei  graunten  not  comynly, 
bot  ]?ere  j^ei  hope  wynnynge.  And  more  booste  of  J)0  fende 
herde  we  nevere,  sith  quantite  of  merytes  is  hydde  fro  seyntis, 
and  chafiers  wij?  soche  ]>inges,  unknowen  to  \o  partyes,  were 
presomptuose  foly  upon  bothe  sides.  Also,  sith  }>ei  supposen 
])at  hor  naked  graunte  is  als  myche  worthe  as  graunte  wi]>  hor 
lettres,  J)en  hor  lettres  serven  of  noght  bot  for  to  jape  ]?o  pepul. 
And  in  ]?is  J?ei  suen  not  Crist,  as  ]?ei  falsely  feynen,  for  he 
grauntid  nevere  soche  lettres  of  ]?ing  ]5at  he  gaf ;  and  ]?us  ]?ei 
passen  J?o  apostels,  bot  in  ypocrisye.  Also  J)is  charite  of  freris 
schulde  strecche  to  alle  gode  men ;  and  sij?  hit  is  als  myche 
worthe  by  graunte  as  by  letter,  J>en  introduccioun  of  soche 
lettres  serven  of  noght  bot  if  it  be  to  bleere  mennis  eyne  wij? 
threde,  and  wi|?  gaye  wrytynge.  Also,  si]?  Cristen  men  wot  wil 
]3at  no  man  aftir  his  deth  shal  have  part  of  meryt  but  if  he  go 
to  heven,  and,  as  freris  seyn,  Jjei  may  graunt  iche  Cristen  mon 
part  of  hor  meryt  aftir  his  deth,  ])en  may  ])ei  graunt  iche  Cristen 
mon  for  to  be  saved ;  and  so  horn  fayles  charite,  if  any  of  hom- 
self or  elles  any  Cristen  mon  be  dampned  in  helle.  Also,  men 
of  \o  gospel  schulden  do  prively  hor  almes,  so  J?at  hor  lift  honde 
wiste  not  what  hor  right  honde  did.  Bot  J^ese  freris  seyn  j?at  j?is 
is  a  passynge  gostily  almes ;  J^en  J?ei  schulde  do  hit  prively,  and 
not  conferme  hit  opunly  by  hor  char  teres.  And  mony  ]?enken 
J?at  Jjes  two  J)inges  mefen  horn;  fiirst  to  feyne  hor  holynesse, 
makynge  trompe  bifore  horn,  as  ypocrites  done,  and  spoylen 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


4^1 


pore  meiines  godes  by  maner  of  rentis,  and  to  be  confedrid 
with  horn  as  wij?  hor  owne  bre))eren.  Also  hit  were  inogh  to 
freris  to  have  brejjerhed  of  Jjo  puple,  ))at  ben  comynly  better 
fen  }?o  freris,  ]?of  J)ei  come  not  unkyndely  to  spoyle  hor  bre}>ren; 
ffor  ]?ei  haf  no  skil  to  selle  ]?o  letters  \2X  ne  by  J?o  same  skil  ]?ei 
shulde  begge  soche  lettres  of  ojjer  men,  whom  ]?ei  schulde 
suppose  to  be  better  ]?en  ]jei.  And  if  Jjei  did  ]?us,  |?ei  did  as  }?ei 
wolden  ])at  men  did  to  hom ;  and  J>is  is  fo  lawe  of  gospel  and 
kynde.  Also,  Jjese  freris  wot  not  whejjer  ]?ei  shal  be  saved,  or 
whejjer  J^ei  ben  now  viserde  devels,  as  Schariot  was;  and  if 
J)ei  ben  suche,  J?ei  graunten  not  part  of  hor  merytes  to  men  |)at 
shal  not  be  saved.  And  herfore  hit  is  a  fendis  presumpcioun 
to  selle  ])us  hor  merytes  J^at  ])ei  knowen  no^t,  jBfor  \o  gospel 
biddes,  ])at  as  ]?ei  take  frely,  so  schulde  ])ei  frely  gif  to  o)?er. 
Ffor  hit  were  no  kyndenesse  Jjus  to  venyme  hor  gift,  as  Jjo 
Pharisee  venymde  his  dedes,  for  a  privey  boste  )?at  he  made  to 
God.  Also  }7ei  wot  not  whejjer  hor  brej>ren  })at  ]?ei  chaffere 
with  shal  evere  be  saved.  Bot  no  mon  schulde  deceyve  his 
bro])er  in  bodily  chaffer;  myche  more  J?es  freris  shulde  not 
deceyve  \o  puple  of  ]?ing  J?at  ])ei  knowen  not. 

And,  certis,  ]?er  is  no  witte  in  \o  wordes  J)at  trewauntis 
casten  oute  in  )>is  mater,  |?at  evere  })0  better  part  schulde  be 
supposed ;  and  j>us  men  schulde  suppose  J)es  freris  to  be  saved, 
and  by  merytes  of  hom  J?o  puple  to  be  also.  Bot  certis  )?ere  is 
no  werse  worde  to  grounde  ]?es  freris.  For  bi  Jjis  resoun  iche 
mon  shulde  suppose  Jjat  he  shulde  cum  to  heven  withouten  helpe 
of  freris.  Also  Hildegar  seis,  ))at  ])es  cursed  sectis  schal  be 
destr}^ed  and  dampned  in  helle,  for  hor  ypocrisie  and  deceyte  of 
]?o  puple.  pen  ]?is  schulde  be  supposid,  sith  hit  semes  soth,  for 
]>at  God  demes  is  evere  ]?o  better.  And  so  schulde  men  sup- 
pose Jjat  soche  ypocrites  ben  deppere  in  helle  J^en  any  ojjer 
men.  And  if  men  schulde  holde  hor  pees  in  J)ing  Jjat  []?ei]  ^ 
knowen  not,  why  boosten  ]?ese  freris  so  boldely  of  privetees  of 
God  ?  Also  ))es  founed  freris  taken  on  hom  a  ]?ing  ])at  is  pro- 
pred  to  God,  as  partyng  of  blis,  ]?at  aungels  in  heven  presumed 
nevere ;  and  so  ]>es  synful  wrecches  byheten  here  in  erthe,  Jjat 

^  supplied  conjecturally. 


It  IS  folly,  and 
not  charity,  to 
presume  that 
such  merits 
exist. 


4'2'% 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


Immoral  con- 
sequence of 
the  practice. 


Pretended 
miracles  al- 
leged by  the 
friars. 


hengis  onely  in  wille  and  jugement  of  God,  as  ))of  \^i  wolde 
bowe  hym,  as  maysters  of  his  conseile.  And  if  }?ei  feynen  j>at 
J)ei  graunten  al  J)is  upon  condicioun,  Jjen  Jjei  siker  not  hor  bre- 
J)eren  of  partynge  of  hor  merytes,  more  ]>en  J?ei  my^t  siker 
Sathanas  of  \o  blis  of  heven.  Ffor  wil  we  wot,  if  God  wil,  )?us 
shal  hit  be,  Jjof  alle  J?es  freris  were  dampned  in  helle. 

Also  no  mon  shulde  ^if  occasioun  to  his  bro]?er  for  to  be 
deceyved  in  salvacioun  ^  of  his  soule.  Bot  mony,  for  sikernesse 
of  meryte  of  ]?ese  freris,  ben  to  negligent  in  hor  owne  werkes, 
and  dreden  not  to  do  injurye  to  hor  brej^er.  Ffor  sij?  ]?ei  may 
be  asoyled  lightly  of  freris,  and  after  have  ful  part  with  hom  in 
J}0  blis  of  heven,  who  wolde  drede  to  do  his  wille  for  a  litel 
money?  And  ]?is  is  \o  welle  wherwij?  J?o  fende  blyndes  fo 
puple,  and  gendres  wronges  in  ]?is  worlde,  and  moves  hem  to 
feght.  And  so  ]>is  folye  of  freris  unables  homself,  and  eke  \o 
puple  Jjat  chaffaren  wi]?  hom.  And  j)us  ]?ei  make  hom  pertyners 
of  hor  peyne  in  helle,  ffor  more  folye  in  chaflfere  suifred  God 
nevere.  To  bye  a  catte  in  \o  sakke  is  bot  litel  charge :  to  bye 
chii'chis  by  s}Tiionye  semes  sumwhat  siker :  bot  for  to  bye  fus 
heven  and  bro]?erhed  of  Crist,  hit  semes  chaffere  of  Lucifer,  and 
withouten  grounde. 

Owe !  wolde  God  J^at  ]7ese  freris,  \2X  ben  so  bolde  to  graunte 
by  letter  and  comyne  seele  J^inges  ])at  ]?ei  knowen  not,  dursten 
graunte  hor  byleve,  what  is  ])0  sacred  oost.  Bot  J^ese  apostatas 
stirten  abak  where  ]?ei  shulden  go  forth.  And  so  wolde  God 
])at  \o  crabbis  made  by  myracle,  if  ]?ei  myght,  alle  hor  leesyngis 
withouten  any  sugett,  for  Jjen  shulden  \q\  not  noye  us  as  ]>ei 
nowe  do.  Ffor  comynly  ])ese  blasphemes,  when  hom  wantes 
answers,  and  wil  blynde  ]?o  puple,  J?ei  feynen  on  God  miracles 
))at  he  nevere  did.  For  if  men  aske  hor  groundynge,  };ei  stonde 
stille  as  foles,  or  tellen  straunge  tales  no^t  to  ])0  purpose ;  as 
wycches  feyned  of  dede  men  Jjat  ]?ei  myght  not  quicken,  []?at 
])ei]^  were  translate  to  felowschippe  and  dwellynge  wi}>  gods. 
Bot  ]?o  craffte  of  hor  leesynge  moste  Jjei  nede  haunte,  for  elles 
])ei  myght  not  be  mayntened  wij?in  holy  Chirche.  But  wolde 
God  J^at  J?ei  lyed  not  })us  upon  Crist,  and  feyned  hym  to  do 


corrected ;  savacioim,  W, 


-  supplied. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


4^3 


myracles  of  hor  accidentis  ])at  he  nevere  did,  ne  profiten  to  men, 
ne  no  mon  may  se  horn,  ne  where  J?ei  ben  groundid. 

Bot  ageyne  ]?is  argnen  }3ese  Anticrist  clerkes,  and  feynen  ])at 
\ei  have  verey  lordship  of  hor  medeful  dedes,  as  fer  forthe  as 
ony  mon  haves  lordship  of  temporale  godes.  Bot  by  suche 
lordshippe  hit  is  leveful  to  graunte  men  temporal  godes  at  \o 
wille  of  ]?o  Lord ;  ]?en  by  \o  same  skil  hit  is  leveful  to  freris  to 
graunte  men  hor  merytes,  or  partis  of  hom.  And  j?us  })ese  apes 
arguen  by  wey  of  likenes,  and  done  more  harme  to  men  fen  ))of 
Jjei  cutted  hor  throtes.  Ffor  herby  f>ei  myght  bye  mennis 
synnes,  and  laye  hor  soules  in  wedde,  J?at  oj^er  mennis  soules 
shulde  be  saved,  ^e,  fof  God  wil  J30  reverse.  Bot  for  to  falle  to 
jjo  answere.  Byleve  techis  us  }?at  no  mon  may  levefully  chaunge 
any  godes,  bot  if  he  have  leve  of  fo  chefF  lorde.  Nevere}>oles 
summe  godes  ben  more  nyghe  God,  as  vertues,  }?at  may  not  be 
gyven  of  none  bot  of  God,  ne  noujjer  mon  ne  fende  may  dysuse 
vertues.  Bot  ^itte  go  we  nerre  to  J>ese  ypocrites,  and  telle  hom 
]>at  merytes  and  delynge  of  merytis  ben  dyverse  in  hor  kynde, 
as  ]?ei  con  knowe  hit.  Ffor  as  gyvynge  of  vertues  and  gy^nge 
of  grace  ben  appropred  to  God,  so  delynge  of  merytes ;  for  in 
])0  same  mesure  ]?at  God  approves  merytes,  deles  he  ])0  merytes 
to  whom  ]?at  hym  likes.  Bot  merytes  of  men  ben  dedis  or 
lyves,  ))at  God  of  his  grace  acceptis  to  mede.  Bot  ^itte  fjes 
blasphemes  blabur  hereageyne;  and  seyntes  in  heven  gyven 
foure  maner  of  mede,  and  so  erthely  men  schulden  dele  hor 
mer)1:es.  Bot  certis  )?es  apis  travelen  in  veyne  as  j?ei  did  ever, 
for  seyntis  in  heven  gyven  hor  blis,  as  none  of  us  in  erthe  hafs 
powere  to  gyve.  And  ^itte  suche  gyvynge  and  delynge  dy- 
versen;  for  seyntes  gyfen  accydentaly  blisse,  when  Jjei  be 
objectis  to  glade  o]?er  seyntes ;  bot  God  hymself  deles,  as  he 
acceptis  seyntes.  Ne  God  bisyes  hym  not  makynge  soche 
doole,  jQfor  lette  a  mon  able  hymself,  and  ]?o  dole  is  done.  Bot 
Lucifer  wolde  be  like  to  God.  pese  blasphemes  wol  refe  God 
his  owne  stede,  and  dele  merytes  of  men  after  hor  wille. 

3itte  for})ermore,  ];ese  ydiotes  scharpen  hor  tounges,  and  seyn 
])at  popis  graunten  pardouns,  and  merytes  of  seyntis  J>at  nowe  I 
ben  in  heven ;  and  sith  freris  have  fully  and  frely  powere  of 
popis,  why  may  })ei  not  dele  hor  propir  desertis  ?     Bot  loke 


Their  argu- 
meats  replied 


They  are  more 
reckless  in 
their  tjrants 
than  the  Popes 
themselves. 


424 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


Against  exag- 
gerated lan- 
guage about 
the  immunity 
of  Popes  and 
Cardinals  from 


now  })at  jjese  ypocritis  wolden  here  passe  popis.  For  popis 
graunten  no  pardoun  to  men  bot  if  ))ei  be  byfore  verrely  con- 
tritte  a  bot  )?ese  freris  in  hor  lettres  speken  of  no  contricioun. 
And  right  as  Jjei  passen  Crist  in  multitude  of  coventes,  so  ))ei 
passen  ))0  popis  in  grauntyng  of  suffrages.  Bot  I  counseile  jjat 
iche  mon  trayste  fully  in  God  and  in  his  owne  gode  dedis,  by 
whoche  he  shal  be  saved,  and  tryste  not  to  myche  to  popis  ne 
freris,  for  hor  graunte  avayles  of  noght,  bot  in  als  myche  as  hit 
is  confermed  to  ]>o  Chirche  aboven. 

And  hereonne  wolde  I  ])at  men  }>oght,  ]?at  taken  as  bileve  Jjat 
}>o  pope  wi}?  his  cardynals  may  not  erre,  in  ]>inges  ]?at  towches 
J30  byleve  of  Cristis  comyne  Chirche.  Comyne  byleve  seis,  ]?at 
nouJ>er  men  in  erthe,  ne  seyntis  in  heven,  may  do  owght  ap- 
proved of  God,  bot  if  God  hymself  do  hyt  bifore.  Bot  who 
wot  }>at  by  ordynaunce  of  God  Jjus  myche  penaunce  is  done  for 
his  synne  ?  or  }>at  ])us  myche  pardoun  is  ordeyned  of  God .?  or 
]?at  J)us  longe  tyme  shal  cum  bifore  ])0  day  of  dome  1  And  ]?us 
hit  is  of  a  hundred  dedis  of  popis,  J?at  bo)?e  hor  cardynals  and 
hor  chirche  approven.  And  sij>  in  mony  soche  caas  Jjei  con- 
traryen  Gods  wille,  hit  semes  of  hor  dedis,  and  of  right  byleve, 
))at  J?ei  reversen  oft  tyme  ]?at  Cristen  men  shulden  trowe ;  ifor 
ofte  tyme  J?ei  feynen  hom  to  do  by  hor  powere,  and  nou})er  J?ei 
wot  whel?er  hit  be  so,  or  Cristen  men  shulden  trowe  hit.  And 
wil  I  wot  ])at  Cristis  worde,  seyde  unto  Petir,  Whatevere  \ou 
byndes  upon  erthe  schal  be  bownden  in  heven,  and  whatevere 
]?ou  lesis  upon  erthe  shal  be  lesid  in  heven,  was  seyde  to  Petir, 
and  successouris  of  him  }>at  verrely  suen  Crist  and  Petir  in 
maners,  ne  erres  n03t  in  byndynge  ne  lesynge  of  men  fro  jjo 
right  jugynge  of  J30  Chirche  aboven.  Lord,  whe]?er  ]?is  be  by- 
leve, })at  f>is  pope  dos  go  amonge  alle  \o  articles  of  ^o  trowthe 
])at  evere  Crist  taught .?  pis  is  none  of  hom,  ne  ordeyned  to  be 
trowed.  For  }>en  were  \o  pope  conformed,  and  nedely  most 
])ei  be  blessid,  bothe  in  erthe  and  in  heven,  be  he  nevere  so 
schrewid.  And  so  hor  bulles  ben  not  gospel,  bot  ofte  tyme 
fals,  )?at  fayles  nevere  of  Cristen  byleve.  And  herfore  triste  we 
to  })0  rightwysenes  of  oure  owne  werkes,  and  laste  we  in  Jjo 
faythe  of  ]?o  lawe  of  Crist,  for  al  suche  fals  feynynge  moste 

•'*  See  vol.  i.  p.  136,  note  b. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


4^5 


nedely  perische.  Bot  as  fo  witte  of  }?is  word,— pis  is  my 
body, — is  mony  weyes  chaungid  as  Anticrist  wil,  so  \o  witte 
of  )?es  wordes  seide  unto  Petir.  So  ]>at  lawe  of  \o  emperoure, 
and  chesyng  of  heretikes,  neden  Crist  to  gif  suche  powere  to 
his  traytoure.  Bot  as  hungre  of  one  and  dronkenesse  of  an- 
o]?er  techis  Jjat  Poule  undirstode  bodily  fode,  so  worldly  lif  of 
emperoure  prelatis  techen  ]?at  \€\  ben  not  \o  same  J)at  Crist 
spake  to. 

Bot  if  Jjese  freris  with  hor  preyers  deceyven  \o  Chirche,  and 
maken  ]?o  puple  to  trowe  \2X  one  masse  of  hor  is  better  to  God 
]?en  oJ?er  of  comyne  prestis, — (and  herof  serven  hor  sygnes, 
and  hor  feyned  varyaunce^  to  schewe  hor  ypocrisye  to  \o 
lewid  folke;  and  herby  men  seyn  }?at  one  frere  takes  mony 
grete  salaryes  of  dyverse  men  togider  for  one  tyme,  bot  hom 
unwittynge,  ffor  hor  speciale  preyeris  ]?at  \€\  slepen  inne  ben, 
as  l?ei  sey,  better  J?en  o)?er  comyne  preyers ;  bot  herfore  thorw 
defaute  of  right  byleve  \o  fende  deceyves  \o  Chirche  by  soche 
fals  procuratours) — We  shulde  understonde,  ]>at  whoso  lifs  bet- 
ter, he  preyes  more  profitably  to  iche  Cristen  mon.  And  ]?us 
Seynt  Poule  biddes  men  preye  wi])Outen  lettynge.  And  so  )>at 
prest  J?at  lyves  better  synges  better  masse;  for  masse  and  J?o 
ooste  ben  dyverse  ]?inges,  si]?  ellis  freris  myght  not  feyne  of  hor 
massis  }?at  ]?ei  ben  better  J?en  masse  of  a  fende.  Scarioth  was 
a  fende,  as  Crist  hymself  seis,  and,  as  freris  seyn,  soche  prestis 
syngen  right.  And  herbi  may  we  se  what  preste  singes  beste ; 
for  Crist  songe  beste  of  alle  by  generale  preyer;  and  certis  \o 
beste  helpe  j>at  men  myght  gete  by  preyere  were  to  dresse 
Cristis  Chirche  aftir  his  owne  ordenance.  And  ]?us  specialte  of 
preyere  blyndes  mony  men.  Ffor  generale  preyere  is  better 
J?an  speciale,  sij)  it  comes  of  more  large  charite,  and  is  abowte 
better  and  more  comyne  profite. 

And  herfore  Crist  taught  us  moste  generaly  to  praye.  Bot 
profitable  applyinge  is  appropred  to  God,  as  he  moste  part 
merytes  aftir  j>at  men  ben  worthy.  And  so  hit  falles  oft  tymes, 
J)at  a  fer  straunge  mon  had  more  mede  of  foundynge  of  abbeyes 
and  chaimtryes  jjen  he  J>at  haves  founded  hom,  for  he  is  more 

a  The  variations  m  the  singing  of  the  mass,  which  the  different  religious 
orders  were,_and  still  are,  authorized  to  use. 


His  mass  is  the 
best  who  leads 
the  best  life. 


General  prayer 
is  better  than 
special. 


4^6 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


On  the  right 
posture  of 
mind  in  which 
to  receive  cer- 
tain state- 
ments. 


On  the  right 
way  of  answer- 
ing inquisito- 
rial questions. 


worthy.  And  ])is  fayth  shulde  move  men  to  sue  Crist,  and 
coveyte  noght  private  suffrages,  but  more  procure  treuly  aftir 
comyne  profite.  And  so  specialte  in  preyere  is  noJ?ing  wor]), 
bot  in  als  myche  as  hit  scharpes  to  preye  for  generale  ])inges; 
as,  when  a  man  preyes  for  a  certeyne  persone,  his  entent  shulde 
be  more  principaly  for  ])0  comyne  Chirche.  As,  when  men 
preyen  for  one  persone,  for  he  is  profitable  helpe  to  holy 
Chirche,  men  preyen  more  principaly  for  ]>at  holy  Chirche.  And 
])us  ypocrisye  of  freris  unables  hom  to  God,  sith  fei  schulde 
prively  lyve  hor  holy  lif,  and  bothe  by  worde  and  sygnes  schewe 
hor  lownes,  and  J?en  were  \o  servyse  of  masse  and  o}>er  doynge 
more  profitable  to  men  j^en  hit  nowe  is.  Bot  J?o  sacrament  j^at 
is  sacrid  in  Jjo  masse  is  nou]?er  better  for  one  prest  ne  for  ojjer. 
For  in  his  kynde  hit  is  bred,  noght  mendid  bi  \o  prest,  and  in 
]?at  ]?at  hit  is  Gods  body,  hit  is  ilike  gode,  whosoevere  sacres  hit. 

And  here  knowe  we  mony  fringes,  byne]?e  oure  byleve,  jjat  we 
shulde  graunte  hom,  ne  denye  hom,  ne  dowte  hom ;  bot  sup- 
pose hom,  gesse  hom,  or  hope  hom.  As  if  a  mon  asked  me 
whe]?er  ]?is  bred  were  Gods  body,  I  wolde  nou])er  byleve  ))at,  ne 
dowte  hit,  ne  denye  hit,  bot  suppose  ]>at  hit  were  so,  bot  if  I 
had  contrarye  evydence, — as,  if  I  had  evydence  ]?at  \o  prest  were 
not  sacred  of  God,  or  ])at  God  wolde  not  wirke  wi]?  hym  for  his 
yvel  lyvynge.  And  so  evere  worshippe  Gods  body  in  heven, 
and  }?o  sacrament  of  \o  auter  upon  a  stille  condicioun.  And 
so  what  ]?ing  ]?at  a  mon  myght  more  medefuly  do,  and  have 
more  medefully  mynde  on  Jjo  body  of  Crist,  schulde  he  do,  and 
in  caas  leve  heryng  of  masse.  Bot  for  \o  more  part,  heryng  of 
masses  scharpes  men,  and  moves  men  to  haf  medeful  mynde  of 
Crist.  And  so  if  \o  pope  asked  me  whej^er  I  were  ordeyned  to 
be  saved,  or  predestynate,  I  wolde  sey  \2X  I  hoped  so,  but  I 
wolde  not  swere  hit,  ne  ferme  hit  wi})Outen  condicioun,  ]?of  he 
grettly  punyscht  me;  ne  denye  hit,  ne  doute  hit,  wolde  I  no  wey. 

And  so,  if  prelates  opposed  me,  what  were  ])0  sacrament  of 
\o  auter  in  his  kynde, — I  wolde  sey  f>at  hit  were  bred,  }?o  same 
]?at  was  byfore ;  ffor  Jjus  teches  ]?o  gospel  ]?at  we  shulden  bileve. 
And  if  J?ou  aske  forj^er,  whej^er  hit  be  substaunse  of  material 
bred,  noujjer  wolde  I  graunte  hit,  ne  doute  hit,  ne  denye  hit, 
byfore  audytorie  ]>at  I  trowed  schulde  be  harmed  }?erby,  bot 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS, 


4^7 


sith^  jjat  I  supposid  or  reputid  jjat  hit  is  so.  And  J^es  prelatis 
J?at  wolde  wiynge  oute  anoj^er  absolute  answere,  faylen  bothe  in 
logik  and  divinyte,  and  schewen  horn  unable  to  examjoie  of 
heresye.  Ffor  it  falles  to  soche  men  to  teche  ]?o  bileve  by  suf- 
ficyent  foundynge,  and  eschewe  erroures.  As,  for  no  mon  con 
grounde  accydent  wijjouten  sugette,  no  mon  schulde  aferme 
J>at  Jjis  were  \o  sacrament.  And,  for  fewe  prelates  knowen 
accydentis  and  sugettis,  men  schulden  bywar  to  bringe  J>is  in 
Cristen  mennis  byleve.  Bot  accydente  wi]?outen  sugette  now- 
fer  knowes  mon  ne  God,  as  Austin  teches  and  resoun  proves. 
Bot  \o  fende  haves  blyndid  J?us  Anticrist  in  J)is  matir,  J)at  he 
contraryes  to  hymself,  and  knowes  not  hys  erroure ;  as  he  seis 
j>at  ]?is  sacrament  is  an  accydente  withouten  sugette,  or  elles  ]?at 
in  ]?is  sacrament  is  suche  an  accydente.  And  ^itte  he  con- 
traryes hymself,  ]?at  quantite  and  qualite  sugetten  o]?er  accy- 
dentis, and  everiche  part  Jjereof  Also  iche  part  of  )>is  accy- 
dente hafs  Crist  and  Cristis  body,  and  so  none  of  ]?ese  accydentis 
is  wijjouten  sugette. 

And  so,  if  J^ese  thre  poyntes  of  blaspheme  and  thre  kyndes 
of  heresye  were  fully  declared,  nouj^er  prelates  ne  freris  ]jat 
nowe  bisye  horn  fus  schulde  clerely  excuse  hom,  ]?at  ne  J>ei  ben 
suche.  Ffor  ])ei  undirstonde  omys  j)is  pointe  of  J)0  gospel, — 
When  ]?ou  art  cald  to  heven  reste  in  \o  laste  place,  and  kepe 
J)e  in  mekenesse  wij?outen  ypocrisye.  And  so  hit  is  likely  ]3at 
alle  J?o  bishopes  of  Rome  ]>is  thre  hundred  3ere  and  more  were 
fully  heretikes,  ffor  \€\  undirstonden  not  })is  J^at  Poule  teches. 
When  we  have  fode  and  hyllynge,  be  we  payed  of  J?is.  pere 
ben  mony  heresyes  of  folis  in  J?is  mater,  and  fole  wordis  shulden 
be  lafte,  and  not  to  longe  tretid.  Make  we  an  ende  of  f)is 
mater,  and  speke  we  of  o}>er  j?inges.  Ffor  somme  folis  j?er  be 
J?at  will  be  payrid  in  yvel,  and  no|?ing  amendid,  by  devoute 
wordes.  Bot  geder  we  })es  J?re  partyes  of  }>is  synne  of  blas- 
pheme, and  make  we  ]?ese  fautours  of  }>is  grett  synne,  and  make 
hom  as  blasphemes  in  Crist  and  his  seyntes.  And  as  anentis 
}>o  first,  \2X  is,  \o  sacred  ooste,  no  mon  schulde  here  hom,  ne 
grete  hom,  ne  suffer  hom  J?at  denye  \o  gospel,  in  ]?is  or  in  o])er 


Recapitula- 
tion.   How  the 
first  species  of 
blasphemy 
should  be  met 


perhaps  we  should  read  sey. 


438 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


The  second 
blasphemy. 


The  third  blas- 
phemy: letters 
of  fraternity 
should  be  done 
away  with,  and 
the  laity  cease 
to  support 
the  friars. 


matir.  And,  for  freris  and  oj^er  religious  ben  suspect  in  )>is 
heresy e,  men  schulden  not  comyne  wij?  horn  bifore  J?ei  schewid 
))0  fayth  by  sufficyent  wittenes,  and  with  a  wyse  asker.  Ow ! 
sith  everiche  parishe  chirche  hafs  mony  sacred  oostis  as  medi- 
cyne  to  }>o  soule  for  seke  parischens,  he  were  a  schrewid  leche 
J)at  wolde  not  telle  his  sugettis  of  what  kinde  were  \o  medycyne 
|)at  he  gyves  hom.  And  so,  if  we  loved  oure  feyth  and  Cristis 
lawe,  as  we  shulden  luf  if  we  wil  be  saved,  we  schulde  not  slepe 
J)us  in  J)is  cause,  bot  warly  wake.  Bot  negligence  of  Gods 
cause  shewes  )}at  we  hate  God.  And  cautels  of  blasphemes  ]?at 
perverten  oure  fayth  schulden  be  schaken  awey  by  scharp  dy- 
vynes.  For  l?es  folis  leeven  J?o  letter  of  )?o  gospel,  and  seyn  J^at 
we  schulde  not  aske  what  J?ing  J?at  is,  bot  trowe  \2X  J?ere  is  verey 
Gods  body.  Bot  J?o  gospel  telles  not  what  ]?ing  is  ])ere,  but  seis 
])at  }?is  brede  is  Cristis  owne  body.  For  wil  we  witten  }>at  in 
iche  knotte  of  a  stree  is  better  J)ing  j?en  Gods  body,  for  \o  holy 
Trinyte.  And  si]?  we  worschippen  not  soche  sensible  strees, 
and  worschippen  j)is  sacrament,  resoun  schulde  dryve  us  ]?at  hit 
is  better  J^ing  ]?en  oj^er  comyne  bodyes.  Bot  wil  I  wot  j?at  freris 
seyn  ])at  hit  is  werse  J?en  venyme.  Alle  men  schulden  thriste 
oute  J)is  roten  of  oure  faythe. 

As  to  J)0  secounde  blaspheme,  of  beggyng  of  J^es  freris, 
everiche  Cristen  mon  J?at  Ms  Jesus  Crist  schulde  crye  out  on 
hom  ])at  seyn  Crist  begged  ]?us,  sij)  J?at  hit  is  blasphemye  ageyns 
oure  God.  Alle  we  sey  ]?at  we  luf  Crist  moste  of  alle  ]?inge, 
bot  negligense  in  oure  dedes  wittenes  ]?o  contrarye.  And  I  am 
certayne,  at  ]?o  day  of  dome  schal  J)0  sothe  be  proved.  Who 
wolde  not  sey  |?at  he  were  fals  to  his  erthly  lord,  )?at  herde  him 
be  sclaundred  and  opunly  despised,  and  ^itte  wolde  nowJ?er 
reverse  hit,  ne  have  sorowe  in  his  hert  ?  Ow !  how  shal  men 
be  saved,  ))at  loven  better  erthely  ]?ing  J?en  fei  luf  oure  God 
and  oure  Lord  Jesus  Crist  ? 

And  to  J?o  |)ridde  blaspheme,  of  lettres  of  freris,  he  loves 
now[)er  God  ne  his  even  Cristen  }>at  ageynestondes  not  J>is 
heresye.  For  pei  blaspheme  in  God,  and  desseyven  Jjo  puple, 
and  harmen  homself  where  pei  myght  ellis  be  gode.  Bot  sith 
we  schulde  sue  Crist  in  maner  of  oure  lyvynge,  and  Crist  spake 
scharply  ageyns  })es  Pharisees,  we  mot  nedely  scharp  oure 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


429 


tounges  ageyns  ]?ese  freris ;  ffor  \o  erroures  \2X  \€\  have  ben  so 
longe  rootid  inne  wil  not  elles  be  avoydid,  ne  o]?er  men  excusid. 
But  sij)  Crist  keppid  charite  to  ]?ese  Pharisees,  he  were  not  a 
trewe  mon,  ne  suer  of  Crist,  J^at  wolde  not  speke  J)us  ageyns 
erroures  of  freris.  Owl  if  knyghtes  and  comynes,  and  alle 
Cristen  men,  wakid  to  Jjis  resoun  and  did  hit  in  dede,  si}?  no 
mon  schulde  susteyne  blasphemes  of  Crist,  and  si]?  ]?is  secte  of 
beggers  blasphemes  in  God,  alle  men  schulden  lette  hom  of 
hor  cursed  werkes.  And  more  esy  lettynge  con  I  not  se  bot 
])at  iche  Cristen  mon  gif  hom  no  bodily  gode,  bifore  Jjei  schewid 
wrytten  ])at  Crist  begged  so ;  for  ellis  \€\  are  suspect  of  opun 
blasphemye.  And  si)?  no  mon  schulde  gif  }>o  freris  gode,  bifore 
])is  cause  were  descided  bytwene  wyse  men,  God  schulde  or- 
deyne  his  servauntis  to  stonde  for  ]?o  treuthe.  And,  for  ech 
Cristen  mon  schulde  destrie  blasphemes,  ]?ei  schulde  seke  ])is 
oute  ]?at  regnes  in  freris.  pei  sey  ])at  God  haves  byheght  hom 
]?at  ])ei  schal  do  myracles  wijjoute  any  nowmbre  in  sacring  of  \q 
ooste.  Bot  certis  )?ese  myracles  may  ]?ei  not  teche,  as  ]?ei  may 
not  profit  to  \o  Chirche  of  Crist.  As  anentis  hor  chaffere  by 
lettres  of  fraternyte,  schulden  myghty  men  aske  hom  groundynge 
of  hor  sentense ;  and  so  of  hor  ordiris,  Jjat  \€\  J)us  preyse,  and 
seyn  \2X  \€\  passe  \o  ordir  jjat  Crist  gaf.  And  so  \€\  preyse 
hor  patrounes,  and  putten  Crist  byhynde.  Lord,  who  herde 
evere  a  more  blaspheme,  ]?en  ]?at  ydiotes  seyn  hor  patrounes 
schulden  passe  Crist !  Wil  I  wot  fat  Seynt  Poule,  for  reverense 
of  Crist,  durst  not  grounde  soche  ordiris  as  \o  folis  did.  Ne 
grucche  we  not  ]?at  ]?es  patrounes  ben  cald  ]?us  ydiotes.  For 
holy  wrytte  calles  disciplis  of  Crist  ydiotes  ^ ;  and  byleve  teches 
us  }?at  ]?ei  ben  nowe  seyntes.  Bot  of  holynesse  of  fese  patrounes 
may  trowe  who  so  wil,  for  byleve  nedes  not  to  trowe  J?at  Jjei  ben 
seyntis ;  bot  I  suppose  )?at  \€\  did  mony  foly  werkes  by  blynde- 
nesse  of  yprocrisye,  and  after  were  purgid,  and  so  \t\  ben  now 
in  heven,  as  God  vouchessafe.  And  so  iche  Cristen  mon,  if  he 
wil  be  saved,  most  hold  stiffly  wi}?  \o  lawe  of  Criste. 

a  In  Acts  iv.  13,  the  Vulgate  has  idiotae,  and  the  Wycliffite  versions 
ydiods. 


43° 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


On  the  apo- 
stasy of  the 
cler^,  both 
reg-ular  and 
secular. 


XXVI. 


DE  APOSTASIA  CLERI. 


[This  tract  is  printed  from  a  transcript  made  for  the  Delegates  by 
Mr.  French  from  the  only  known  MS.  in  the  library  of  Trinity  College, 
Dubhn,  (C.  V.  6 ;  CC  in  this  edition).  It  has  been  abeady  printed,  in  black 
letter,  by  Dr.  Todd,  in  his  Wycliffes  Three  Treatises  (Dublin,  185 1).  It 
seems  to  me  impossible  to  decide  whether  it  is  really  by  Wyclif  or  not. 
Bale  certainly  mentions  a  '  De  Apostasia '  in  his  Catalogue,  but  gives  no  first 
words ;  and  it  is  more  likely  that  he  was  referring  to  the  Latin  treatise  of 
that  name,  which  forms  part  of  the  Summa  Theologiae  (Shirley's  Catalogue, 
p.- 8)  than  to  the  present  tract.  The  style  has  a  general  resemblance  to 
that  of  Wyclif,  and  a  remarkable  expression  at  p.  440,  about  a  'lump  of 
talow  strangling  the  houndis,'  recalls  a  similar  expression  in  the  Sermons 
(vol.  i.  p.  247).  On  the  other  hand,  the  phrase  '  in  mong ',  for  '  among ',  is 
never  used  elsewhere  by  Wyclif  to  my  knowledge ;  and  the  frequent  use  of 
the  first  person  plural  looks  lilce  some  inferior  member  of  a  party  rather 
than  its  leader.  No  indication  whatever  helps  us  to  settle  the  date ;  all 
that  can  be  said  is,  that  as  the  subject  of  the  Eucharist  is  not  referred  to, 
there  is,  so  far,  some  ground  for  supposing  that  it  was  written  before  1381, 
the  year  in  which  Wyclif  began  publicly  to  impugn  the  received  doctrine.] 

Cap.  I. 

Si})  ilche  Cristen  man  is  holdon  to  serve  Crist,  and  who  ever 
faylij)  in  ]>is  is  apostata,  it  is  likliche  to  many  men  })at  ])e  mor 
part  of  men,  bi  her  viciose  lijf,  ben  combred  in  |)is  heresye. 
But  al  5if  kny^ts  and  alie  men  shulden  be  religiose,  neverj^elees 
spek  we  of  apostasy e  of  prests. 

pre  maner  of  prestis  fallen  in  )?is  synne.  pe  firste  is  peple  of 
privat  religioun,  ])e  secunde  is  })e  multitude  of  emperours  pre- 
latis,  j?e  l>ridde  is  prestis  wi]>oute  ))ise  two  firste.     We  shal  sup- 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


43^ 


pose  of  our  bileve,  J?at  ilche  man  }?at  is  ordeyned  of  God  to  be 
dampned  is  apostata  to  jugement  of  God,  as  \^  ri^t  resoun 
shewij)  of  |)e  apostasie.  And  5if  apostasie  is  stondyng  bihynde, 
hou  myche  stondij?  bihynde  ilche  siche  J>at  shal  be  dampned  ? 
mor  }?an  Goddis  derlyng  ]?at  shal  afterward  be  saved  wisliche, 
al  ^if  he  seme})  grevousliche  unkynde  for  ])e  tyme.  FferJ^ermor 
we  shal  suppose  j)at  bodyliche  abyte,  or  wantyng  J^erof^  makij? 
not  men  religiose  ney]?er  apostataes,  al  ^if  ]?ey  semen  siche  bi 
jugement  of  men ;  for  oonliche  charite  ]>at  sewi]?  it  makij?  men 
religiose,  or  of  Cristis  ordre.  But  it  is  knowen  bi  lawe  of  our 
God,  \2X  alle  j^es  bodiliche  signes  ben  straunge  fro  charite ;  for 
charite  stondij)  in  soule,  and  not  in  siche  signes.  But  Lord ! 
whe])er  weddyng  wi})  siche  signes  helpij?  to  holde  reiigioun  of 
Crist,  and  love  hym  of  hert  ?  sij?  it  is  certeyn  \2X  Cristis  reii- 
gioun stondi))  in  love  of  God  of  al  our  herte.  And  it  semej?  J)at 
siche  signes  drawen  fro  love  of  Crist  \o  }?at  setten  so  meche 
trist  in  hem,  and  bynden  hem  to  kepe  perpetuelly.  For  J^ey 
needen  a  man  to  take  heede  to  sensible  J?ing,  but  heede  to 
sensible  J^ing  wij^drawi}?  fro  God.  Also  oblishyng  of  men  un- 
freej?  hem  to  God ;  but  it  is  greet  oblishyng  to  be  bonde  to  per- 
petual kepyng  of  siche  maner  signes,  si]?  it  falli]?  ofte  Jjat  Goddis 
lawe  askij)  to  do  dedis  l?at  Crist  biddij?,  and  leve  siche  signes  ; 
and  so  byndyng  to  siche  signes  letti]?  fredom  of  Crist.  Also, 
si])  Crist  is  al  witty,  as  our  i€\\  techi])  us,  and  he  3af  us  not  siche 
signes,  but  raj)er  reprove]?  hem,  it  seme])  ]?at  ])is  ordre  aski]?  not 
siche  signes.  And  herfor  it  seme])  ])at  Crist  sei]),  J)at  kynrede  of 
hoordom  sekij)  siche  signes ;  and  J)is  is  a  cause  whi  signes  of 
J)e  old  lawe  shulden  ceese,  bi  fredom  of  J)e  comyng  of  Crist. 
Of  ])is  it  seme})  })at  signes  to  wiche  men  ben  oblishid  ben  not 
groundid  in  ]?e  lawe  of  grace,  but  ra])er  techen  us  to  leve  signes. 
And  cerimonyes  of  ])e  olde  lawe,  betere  }>an  J)es,  ben  tauht  to  be 
left  bi  lore  of  Poul. 

And  herfore  it  seme})  ]?at  privat  religiose  ben  hyndred  bi  her 
ordris  to  kepe  Cristis  lawe ;  al^if  it  falle])  })at  somme  men  ben 
beterid  bi  bynding  to  })ise  chargis,  ])at  ellis  wolden  be  wylde. 
But  al  3if  it  falle])  profyte  to  summe  men  to  be  bounde  to  a 
stake,  or  chargid  wi])  stones,  never])elees  religion  ]?at  wisdom 
ha])  5yven  us  byndi])  us  not  to  kepe  siche  rewlis,  for,  as  to  }/e  1 


Monasticism 
condemned  in 
g'eneral, though 
m  particular 
cases  it  may  be 
of  service. 


43^ 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


mor  part,  it  falli}?  Jjat  resoun  of  Goddis  law  shulde  occupie  men 
betere.  And  so,  5if  observaunce  in  lyves  of  fadris  profytede  to 
many  men  ])at  brou^te  hem  to  hevene,  never})elees  it  wer  a  pur 
open  folye  to  make  herof  a  rewle  for  al  and  for  ever.  For  God 
ha]?  ordeyned  som}?ing  to  profyt  for  oon  man,  and  |)at  same  ]?ing 
to  noye  for  ano]?er ;  and  ofte  to  ]?e  same  man  somj^ing  wer  good 
for  a  tyme,  and  somtyme  to  hymsilf  wold  J>at  ]?ing  noye.  And 
Jjerfor  he  ha]j  ^iven  witt  and  resoun  wij)  his  lawe  to  man,  to 
chese  what  wer  good  for  hym;  ne  it  may  not  be  fat  ^if  man 
fayle  not  to  God,  )>at  J?e  spirit  of  God  fayle  hym,  to  shewe  hym 
what  he  shulde  do,  betere  ]?an  J?ese  ^  ordris  can.  And  so  men 
}?at  oblishen  hem  to  kepe  siche  ordris,  or  ellis  to  founde  hem 
evere  to  laste,  semen  to  reverse  God  in  his  ordinaunce,  and 
turne  upsodoun  wisdom  of  kynde.  And  herby  Aristotle  ^  soylij? 
an  argument,  bi  whiche  it  my^te  seme  to  folis  }>at  kynde  failij?  to 
man,  si]?  it  ordeynej?  armur  and  defence  to  bestis,  and  to  man  it 
ordeyne]?  noon  siche  }>ing.  pis  philosophic  assoyli]?  l?is  folye  bi 
]>is,  ]?at  kynde  ha]?  ordeyned  to  man  bo]?e  wit  and  hondis,  bi  ]?e 
whiche  he  may  take  when  he  wole,  and  leve  when  he  wole, 
armur  and  o]?er  help  ]?at  is  meche  betere.  O,  whej?er  Crist 
knewe  not  clerliche  ]?e  profyt  J)at  come]?  of  privat  religions,  si]? 
he  left  hem !  It  seme]?  ]?at  al  siche  religion  smacchi]?  blasfeme 
in  shadewe  of  pride,  for  it  reversi]?  in  a  maner  ]?e  ordynaunce  of 
Crist.  And  ^if  ]?ei  seyen  ]?at  many  seynts  han  ben  in  )?is  ordre, 
certis  many  moo  han  ben  in  Cristis  ordre.  And  it  is  hyd  to  us 
whyche  of  hem  ben  seynts ;  and  si]?  it  is  hyd  to  ]?e  pope,  and  to 
al  his  covent,  confirmacioun  of  hym  maki]?  litel  fey]?;  but  it 
my^te  make  fey]?  to  hem  ]?at  knewen  his  revelacion ;  for  ]?e  popis 
autorite  maki]?  not  seynts  in  hevene.  And  so  martirdom,  wi]? 
hooli  lyf  after  Cristis  lawe,  maki]?  mor  evydence  ]?at  ]?is  is  a 
seynt.  But  si]?  we  shal  suppose  ]?at  many  holi  confessors  han 
ben  in  })ise  ordris,  }?at  nowe  ben  in  hevene,  two  ]?ingis  ben  to 
seye  of  lijf  of  siche  men.  Ffirst,  ]?at  ]?ei  lyveden  diverseliche  fro 
]?ise  newe  sects,  and  loveden  God  and  his  lawe,  and  leften  siche 
signes.     And  so  ]?ise  new  sects  shulden  kepe  mor  Cristis  reli- 

^  conected ;  ]//s,  CC. 

^  Aristot.  De  paribus  AnimaL,  lib.  iv.  cap.  lo.    (Dr.  Todd's  note). 

WYCLIF. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


433 


gion  ^if  )?ei  leften  her  rytis,  as  her  fadris  diden.  But  fer]?ennor 
we  shall  suppose  of  [nse  hooli  confessors  ))at  \€\  weren  contrit 
and  purgid  of  her  synnes ;  and  bi  ])is,  and  not  bi  rytis,  \€\  ben 
now  seynts.  As  blasfemye  of  Poul,  ]>at  he  pursewede  Crist, 
makij?  hym  not  seynt,  but  good  fat  he  dide  after.  But  to  trowe 
siche  canony5aciouns  is  lesse  )>an  bileeve. 


DE    DOTACIONE   ECCLESIE. 

Cap.  IL 

As  to  ))e  possessiouns  and  dowyng  of  clerkis,  bileeve  shulde 
teche  us  \2X  it  doi]>  hem  harm  to  kepe  Cristis  religioun,  and 
harm  to  lewid  men;  for  Crist  sei])  ])at  noo  man  may  be  his 
discipul  but  ^if  he  renunce  alle  siche  Jjingis.  And  hou  he 
shulde  renunce,  Cristis  lijf  techij?,  and  lif  of  hise  apostlis  \2X 
com  in  after  hym ;  and  ensaumple  of  siche  deds  expone]?  best 
Cristis  lawe.  And  J)us  bi  process  of  tyme  is  ]?e  Chirche  peyred, 
bi  turnyng  fro  Cristis  lawe,  and  bi  love  of  )?e  worlde.  And  her- 
for  sei]?  Poul,  ])at  coveytise  is  roote  of  all  yvelis  )?at  comen  to 
Goddis  Chirche.  And  comynge  inne  of  freris  ]?at  shulden 
quenche  )?is  synne  maki)?  it  mor  fervent,  as  watir  fier  of  smy])is. 
And  si]?  })ei  ben  apostataes  ]3at  gon  abac  in  Cristis  ordre,  few  or 
none  of  siche  prestis  ben  clene  of  ]>is  heresye.  For  |?ei  forsaken 
Crist  in  kepyng  of  his  lawe,  and  Crist  sei])  ])at  man  mot  kepe  it 
3if  he  love  hym.  But  si])  love  of  worldliche  })ingis  drawi]?  fro 
love  of  Crist,  hou  myche  is  love  of  prests  drawe  now  fro  God! 
Wantyng  of  workis  of  \q  gospel,  and  werkis  of  \t  world, 
dampne})  our  prestis  in  defaute  of  ])is  love.  And  3it  \€\  poudren 
blasphemye  in  among  ])is  apostasye,  for  \€\  seyen  ])at  \€\  haven 
mor  power  of  Crist  ])an  ever  he  wolde  ^ive  to  Petre  or  Poul. 
For  in  spiritual  power  J)ei  ben  even  wi])  him,  and  in  worldliche 
power  })ey  passen  hem ;  si])  Petre  sei])  he  havede  ne])er  silver  ne 
gold,  and  Poul  laborede  wi])  hise  hondis ;  and  so  her  power, 
gederid  togeder,  in  so  myche  passi])  power  of  Petre. 

And  5if  ony  man  sey]?  ]?at  our  prestis  haven  not  so  myche 
spiritual  power  as  Petre,  J)ey  wolen  curse  hym  and  dampne 

WORKS.      VOL.  III.  F  f 


On  the  evil  of 
Church  endow- 
ments. 


Prelacy  did 
not  exist  in 
primitive  times. 


434 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


and  might 
well  be  spared 
now. 


Against  those 
who  talk  about 
the  necessity 
of  order  and 
gradations,  we 
plead  simply 
the  authority 
of  Christ. 


h}Tii,  and  use  siche  power  ]>at  ney])er  Crist  ne  Petre  seme)>  to 
have  had;  siche  fals  power  feyne)>  Antecrist ;  and  J^at  may  be 
clepid  Luciferis  power.  But  sij)  ilche  power  is  of  God,  as  Poul 
sey)),  and  jjise  men  reversen  God.  as  her  lijf  shewi]?,  summe  men 
may  trowe  jjat  hem  faili]?  power,  and  ))at  ]?ei  feynen  falsliche  ])at 
J?ei  ben  vikeris  of  Crist ;  for  likliche  hem  wanti]?  to  be  })e  leeste 
membre  Jjat  Crist  ha]?  ordeyned  to  be  of  his  Chirche.  And  not- 
wijjstondynge  ]?is,  Grists  Chirche  shulde  live,  ^if  alle  siche  prelats 
wanteden  j^erinne ;  for  whoever  trowi]?  in  Crist,  and  lastij)  to  his 
lyves  ende  in  ))is  fei]?,  he  shal  be  saved  wij^outen  siche  prelatis  ; 
si])  in  tyme  of  apostlis,  and  when  ])e  Chirche  J^ryvede,  siche  pre- 
latis wanteden,  as  Goddis  lawe  techij?.  For  J^e  apostlis  weren 
felowis,  and  ilche  oon  sufiBsede  to  converte  J)e  peple  in  J^e  name 
of  Crist,  wi|)Out  autorite  borewid  of  ojjer.  But  God  forbede  ]?at 
lordschip  ^yven  of  j)e  emperor  shulde  chaunge  or  destrie  ])is 
lawe  of  Crist ;  for  Cristis  lawe,  al  ^if  it  be  contrarie  to  ))is  dow- 
yng,  is  mor  my^ty  and  groundid  in  resoun.  And  so  in  ]?is 
poynt  ben  heretiks  many  in  \e  world.  For  Petre  was  cheveteyn 
of  o]?er  apostlis  for  his  mekenesse  and  service  J)at  he  dide  to 
oJ?er,  and  not  for  his  lordship  ne  his  sterne  power. 

Cap.  III. 

But  her  grucchij?  J?e  world,  and  grenne}?  on  trewe  men,  and 
sei])  })at  ]5ei  ben  heretiks,  and  casten  destrie  al  holy  Chirche  and 
fey])  ])erinne.  Also  jjei  seyen  ])at  seculer  lordshipis  asken 
degrees ;  for  ^if  alle  weren  oon,  ])er  weren  noon  ordre,  but  ilche 
man  my5te  ylyche  comaunde  to  o])er,  and  so  seculer  lordship 
wer  fully  destryed.  Also  ])ei  seyen,  5if  })er  wer  noon  ordre  of 
popis  and  bishopis,  })er  shulde  be  noon  ordris  of  abbots  and 
priors ;  and  so  al  religioun  shulde  be  distryed ;  and  so  shulde 
perish  makyng  of  prests  and  doyng  of  sacraments,  as  holy 
Chirche  usi]).  To  assoyle  J)ise  dowtis,  men  moten  arme  hem 
and  pacientliche  dispose  hem  to  deye  for  Crist,  and  fals  not  ])e 
gospel  for  favor  of  men,  but  seye  fulliche  J)e  so])e,  for  Crist  is 
ever  present.  And  so  it  seme])  to  trewe  men,  jjat  ordris  of 
rehgioun  ])at  Crist  groundid  not  shulden  be  fordone,  for  Crist  is 
al  witty  and  al  sufficient  in  hise  werkis. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


435 


As  to  ))e  first  grucchyng,  shal  Antecrist  grenne  at  ]?e  day  of 
dom,  and  bete  togedre  wi})  hise  tee]?,  for  his  sharp  reprovyng  of 
sentence  of  ]?e  gospel.  For  jjenne  wo  shal  be  to  alle  siche,  ]>at 
clepen  good  yvel  and  yvel  good.  And  Zebedeus  sones  travel- 
eden  in  J?is  foly,  as  we  alle  done ;  and  askeden  bi  her  modir 
hey^nes  of  fe  world,  Jjat  ]?e  oon  my^te  sitte  on  l^e  oon  side  of 
Crist,  and  ]?e  oJ?er  on  \^  ojjer  syde,  in  his  kyngdom.  But  Crist, 
willyng  al  good,  ordeynede  hem  to  suffre  anoyes  in  ))is  world, 
and  bi  J)is  to  come  to  hey^nesse  in  hevene.  And  ]?us  ))ise  folis 
seyn,  ]?at  men  Jjat  ben  aboute  to  brynge  Cristis  Chirche  to  })e 
state  ])at  Crist  ordeynede,  ben  aboute  to  distrye  holy  Chirche. 
And  it  seme}>  j?at  ^if  Crist  com  in  his  owne  persone,  and  tau3te 
arid  comaundede  J^is  stat  to  be  holden,  he  shulde  be  holden  a 
fool  and  fals  heretik ;  and  3if  he  travelede  herto  he  shulde  be 
persewid;  for  so  doy)?  Antecrist  a^en  hise  membris,  ]?at  over 
softliche  seyen  his  sentence.  And  sij?  al  bileeve  is  in  j?e  gospel, 
and  we  travelen  and  worchen  J)at  J?is  gospel  wer  knowe  and 
kept,  it  is  openne  ]?at  we  wolden  destrie  but  heresies,  for  we 
wolden  destrie  errours  contrarie  to  J>e  gospel. 

As  to  Jje  secound,  we  seyn  ]}at  seculer  lordis  shulden  holde 
wi]?  J)is  sentence  of  \t  gospel,  and  mayntene  it  wi]?  my^t.  For 
in  mong  alle  }?e  men  ]?at  evere  weren  her  in  er]?e,  noon  heyede 
mor  ]3en  Crist  seculer  lordis ;  for  he  chees  to  be  bore  when  J)is 
lordship  florishede  moost  in  ]?e  empyr  of  Rome.  Crist  ^af 
tribute  to  \t  emperor ;  Crist  wolde  not  so  myche  lessen  seculer 
lordship,  Jjat  he  wolde  have  a  litel  hous  to  hyde  his  heved  inne ; 
Crist  comoundede  to  ^yve  })e  emperor  ]?at  was  hise;  and  to 
destrie  lordship  of  prestis  of  ]?e  temple,  for  seculer  lordship 
shulde  be  holde  bi  hjnnself.  And  Crist  norishede  }?e  tenaunts 
of  seculer  lordis;  he  helede  hem  and  fedde  hem,  and  pilede 
hem  not;  so  ]?at  he  ^af  hem  mor  bi  myracle  of  his  godhede, 
J?en  he  took  of  ]?e  world  wi]?  alle  hise  apostlis.  And  for  ]?ise 
sixe  kyndenessis,  bysyde  goostliche  suffragies,  ])ise  seculer  lordis 
han  be  to  unkynde  to  Crist.  And  soone  in  his  absence,  when 
he  was  set  in  hevene,  }je  emperor  reverside  ^  him,  and  fordide  his 


Christ  magni- 
fied the  autho- 
rity of  the 
secular  arm. 


^  corrected;  reverse,  CC. 
Ff  2 


43'5 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


In  the  true 
Church  the 
order  consists 
in  all  serving- 
and  loving 
one  another. 


ordynaunce,  and  makede  hise  bishopis  haywardis  a  of  jje  world, 
and  took  fro  hem  j^e  kepyng  of  Grists  sheep.  And  so  \t  last 
offiss  )?at  Crist  5af  to  Peter,  and  bad  hym  ]?ries  up  his  love  per- 
forme  )>is  offiss,  took  ]?e  emperor  fro  hym  ])at  sey})  he  is  Petris 
viker,  and  makede  hym  perpetuel  hayward  of  his  drit.  But,  for 
it  is  to  hard  to  kyke  a3en  Jje  spore,  wite  3ee,  seculer  lordis,  )?at 
))is  harme]?  50U.  For  it  takij?  awey  help  of  soul  fro  30U  and  fro 
50ur  peple,  and  to-terij?  ^our  lordvship  fat  5ee  tellen  myche  by, 
and  evere  shal  mor  and  more,  til  J?ise  unkyndenessis  ben  somdel 
amendid.  And  wite  ^ee  wel  ]>at  30ur  folye,  bi  whiche  ^ee  wenen 
to  plese  God,  shal  not  excuse  30U  to  God  at  ])e  day  of  dom, 
for  Crist  and  hise  lawe  shal  witnesse  a^en  30U.  And  sij)  Poul 
was  not  excusid  bi  fe  olde  lawe  of  persewyng  of  Crist  in  hise 
3onge  membris,  meche  mor  J^e  emperor,  ))at  bi  mannes  lawe 
persewede  ])e  soule  of  Crist  in  his  tendr  j  n  embris,  shal  not  be 
excusid,  sij>  he  drawij)  hem  to  helle. 

But  ferj)er  we  shulde  knowe,  ))at  seculer  lordship  Jjat  clerkis 
hanne  nou  smacchij>  imperfeccioun  on  many  maner,  and  comeJ> 
not  to  \e  perfectioun  of  ]>t  ordre  of  Crist ;  as  seculer  lorshipis 
asken  worldliche  degrees,  and  so  hey3nesse  in  worldliche  goodis, 
but  Cristis  lordship  aski]?  goostliche  degrees,  and  hey^nesse  in 
vertues,  ])at  God  oonliche  ^ive]?.  And  herfor,  when  stryf  of  ]?is 
was  in  mong  fe  apostlis,  Crist  determynede  }>e  cause  bi  word 
and  bi  dede.  Crist  puttede  a  ^ong  man  in  myddil  of  hem,  }>at 
was  meke  in  many  vertues,  and  seyde, — Whoevere  meki])  hym 
as  J>is  5ong  man,  he  shal  be  holden  mor  to  J^e  jugement  of  God. 
But  j)is  world  ha]?  put  awey  ]?e  sentence  of  Crist ;  for  alle  prestis 
and  seculers  seken  her  owen  goods,  and  ])at  is  a^eyn  ]>e  charite 
of  Poul.  And,  for  J?e  world  knowij?  not  hey3nesse  in  vertues, 
God  hymsilf  shulde  clepe  hise  servaunts  as  he  wolde,  and  leve 
)?e  worldis  maner  of  sensible  ))ingis.  And  so  ])e  rewele  of 
religioun  of  Crist  biddi)?,  )?at  ilche  man  obeshe  to  ojjer,  not  for 
J)e  world,  ne  for  worldliche  maundements,  but  in  as  myche  as 
i  biddij)  Goddis  wille.     And  ^if  a  best  bad  a  man  do  siche,  he 


'*    '  Hayward '    is    explained    by  is  to  look  that  they  neither  break, 

Phillips    {Neiu    World    of  English  nor  crop  hedges ;    from  the  French 

Words^  ]  662)  to  mean,  '  a  keeper  of  words   Hay    [haie\    a    hedge,    and 

tlie  common  herd  of  the  town,  who  Garde,  custody.' 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


437 


shulde  obeshe  to  beest  in  jje  name  of  God.  And  herfor  Goddis 
lawe  techi]?  hise  men,  J)at  God  obeshede  to  mannes  voys,  and 
Crist  obeshede  and  servede  to  Scarioth  ^. 

And  herby  we  may  see  an  onswer  to  Jje  Jjridde  resoun. 
Sequestre  we  al  mannes  lawe,  supposynge  Grists  ordynaunce ;  al 
J>e  drede  of  fiorishyng  of  men  of  Jje  worid ;  and  }?anne  it  sewij? 
})at  we  shal  graunte,  ]?at  alle  degrees  of  emperor  clerkis,  alle  |)ise 
religions  of  monkis,  chanomis,  and  freris,  shal  slepe  as  ]?ei 
diden  in  tyme  of  ]?e  apostlis.  For  alle  J)ise  semen  to  smacche 
worldliche  hey^nesse,  and  men  ben  clepid  to  degre  ]?at  God 
clepede  not,  and  Jjis  is  errour  and  synne  on  ilche  syde.  But 
never J?elees  Jje  ordre  of  Crist  shulde  be  ]?ehne  mor  perfi^t  {^an  it 
is  noon,  by  meddlyng  of  mannes  ordynaunce;  and  prests 
shulden  have  betere  ordre  in  ministryng  of  sacraments,  for 
Crist  wolde  leve  in  goode  prests  power  Jjat  holy  Chirche  needi)). 

And,  as  J^e  pope  feyne]?,  he  byndij)  to-day  and  lousij)  to- 
morewe;  and  so  in  byndyng  and  lowsyng  ben  many  fals 
gabbyngis.  And  J^enne  wyndis  of  treu]?is  shulden  blowe  awey 
))e  heresyes,  and  cler  ])e  eyr  of  holi  Chirche,  Jjat  is  now  ful 
troble.  penne  shulde  lyf  of  grace  come  doun  fro  God,  and 
ly^te  ilche  man  aftir  }>at  he  wer  worJ)i.  And  ]?enne  shulde  l>is 
blasfemye  be  blowen  awey,  \2X  grace  and  power  of  God  mot 
nede  first  come  to  ])e  prelat,  and  jjenne  be  departid  of  hym, 
how  evere  he  wolde  sille  it  in  mong  hise  suggets,  Jjat  nou3t  may 
be  wij)0ute  hym.  And  certis  it  wer  lesse  error  to  seye,  J>at  Jje 
bemes  of  Jie  sonne  crooken,  jjat  shynej?  freliche  in  bodyes  after 
jjat  Jjei  ben  disposid,  J^en  to  putte  })is  error  on  J)e  Sonne  of  ri3t- 
wisnes.  For  Crist  is  in  ilche  mannes  soule  ]?at  lovej)  hym 
owterliche,  and  needij)  not  ]?e  help  of  J?is  cursid  prelat ;  for  Crist 
may  not  of  his  ry3twisnes  }>us  accepte  persones.  And  )?enne 
shulde  grace  come  to  men,  as  hevene  scaterij?  reyn ;  but  now 
castij)  Antecrist  to  hepe  hise  disciplis,  so  J?at  ilche  may  strengjje 
o]jer  in  her  malice ;  as  ^if  hevene  of  oon  cloude  sende  gushyng 
of  watir,  and  overflowede  som  erj>e,  and  som  wer  left  drye.    pus 


a  It  must  have  been  such  expres- 
sions as  these  which  originated  the 
charge  against  Wyclif,  contained  in 
the  sixth  of  the  twenty-four  articles 


condemned  at  the  Council  of  Lon- 
don, that  he  maintained  '  Quod 
Deus  debeat  obedire  Diabolo.' 


If  this  order 
were  followed, 
prelates, 
monks,  and 
friars  would  be 
suppressed ; 


and  the  grace 
and  power  of 
the  gospel 
would  have 
free  course. 


438 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


Owing:  to  the 
wealth  which 
encumbers  her, 
heresy  and 
apostasy  are 
almost  univer- 
sal in  the 
Church. 


Crist  sente  hise  apostlis,  when  )?ei  weren  rype,  to  diverse  londis, 
to  sowe  wateris  of  wisdom,  and  closede  hem  not  in  cloysteris  as 
Antecrist  doi]?.  So  ^if  we  taken  heede  to  apostasye  \2X  goi|? 
evene  a^en  J)e  ordre  of  Crist,  j?er  ben  fewe  bisshopis,  posses- 
sioners,  or  frers,  Jjat  ]?ei  ne  ben  apostataes,  al  ^if  J?ei  holden  her 
sygnes.  For  take  we  heede  to  ]je  lyf  ]?at  men  first  ledden,  and 
to  ]?e  lyf  fat  men  leden  now ;  and  we  shal  fynde  ]?at  alle  fise 
ben  gon  abac.  And  si]?  ];ei  ben  as  myche  now  holdon  to  serve 
God,  and  sommwhat  mor  for  takyng  of  temporal  goodis,  it 
semej>  |?at  fei  ben  bounde  to  mor  }?en  ]?ei  may.  And  siche 
apostataes  marren  muche^  of  Cristis  ordre.  And  ]?us,  ^if  alle 
bisshopis  possessioners  and  freris  weren  wislyche  examyned 
whej?er  ]?ey  weren  heretiks, — yi  ]?ey  seyden  nay,  wifjoute  revela- 
cioun  fewe  men  or  none  weren  holde  to  trowe  hem ;  for  it 
seme]?  open  bi  her  wikkid  deds,  ]?at  }?ei  ben  apostataes  fro 
Cristis  religion.  But  siche  heretikis  wolen  blej^ehche  dampne 
o)?ere  men  of  heresyes,  for  here  witt  is  blyndid. 

Cap.  IV. 

Bi  })is  may  we  see  how  J)ikke  groweyn  eretikis  in  ]?e  rewme  of 
Englond,  and  in  o}>er  londis,  J?at  men  clepen  Cristen  men.  For 
^if  alle  symonyents  weren  markid  out  of  Cristendom,  and  alle 
apostataes,  wi]?  alle  blasfemes,  J)e  multitude  of  heretikis  wer  mor 
])an  }>ise  o})er.  For  ]?er  ben  fewe  prelats  now  in  ]?e  Chirche,  ne 
fewe  o]?er  men,  J)at  J?ei  ne  ben  heretiks ;  si]?  assent  to  heresie 
maki]?  an  heretik.  And  ]?erfor  we  supposen  ]?at  God  movede 
men  to  speke  now  of  heretikis,  to  make  hem  mor  knowen ;  for 
noon  man  doij?  mor  harm  in  batel  of  Crist.  For  ]?ei  stonden 
bihynde,  and  fy^ten  not  wij?  }?e  fend,  ne  wi]?  ]?e  world,  ne  wij? 
her  flesh,  as  Poul  sey]? ;  and  ]?is  is  cause  whi  ]?e  world  peyrej?, 
and  charite  of  many  cooldi]?.  pe  ground  of  J?is  malice  stondi]? 
in  prestis,  ]?at  ben  J?us  cooldid  wi|?  temporal  goods.  For  \ey 
shulden  be  capteynes  in  batele  of  Crist,  but  now  )?ei  ben  cheve- 
teyns  on  Antecrists  syde,  and  letten  bi  ypocrisye  oj^er  to  fy^te. 
And  ^if  fewe  trewe  men  wolden  worche  or  speke  a^en  ]?is  traterie 
J)at  is  in  Goddis  enmyes,  }?ey  quenchen  hem  as  heretiks,  bi 

^  corrected ;  meche^  CC. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


439 


cautel  of  ]je  fend ;  as  bishopis  diden  wij?  Crist  in  tyme  of  his 
passioun.  And  in  mong  alle  ]?e  malices  of  jje  fendis  werkis,  ]?er 
semej)  noon  mor  to  harme  Cristis  peple.  As,  5if  a  greet  lord 
shulde  be  susteyned  wij?  herbis  j^at  groweden  in  a  orchard,  and 
weren  ny^  rype,  ]?at  man  })at  come  into  J>is  orchard,  and  kyttede 
J?ise  herbis,  and  destriede  ]?e  rotis,  dide  to  myche  harm  to  peyr- 
yng  of  J?is  lord ;  and  specialliche  ^if  j^er  hele  sustynaunce  stood 
in  J?ise  herbes.  Goode  Cristen  men  ]>at  holden  Cristis  lawe  ben 
siche  herbis  to  folc  ])at  Jjei  dwellen  wi|) ;  herfor  Antecrist  letti}) 
siche  seed  be  sowen  or  growe  in  mong  Cristen  men.  And  to 
performe  J?is  malice,  Antecrist  ha]?  cast  to  be  knyttid  wi]?  kyngis 
and  use  her  power ;  and  })us  veneme]?  hymsilf  ]>e  lordis  and  Jie 
peple.  But  he  groundij)  not  in  Cristis  lawe  \t  deds  ]>at  he  doij), 
but  oJ?er  in  mennes  lawe,  or  glosyng  of  freris.  And  ^it  blynd- 
nesse  of  }?e  peple  norishi]?  her  enmyes;  for  love  of  God  is 
quenched  bi  blyndyng  of  fe  w^orld,  and  J)ise  fewe  Cristen  men 
J)at  haveden  som  ly3t  of  God,  ben  drawen  abac  bi  )>ise  apo- 
stataes.  And  certen  )?ei  ben  cowards  and  of  to  lytel  fey|>,  for 
^if  jpei  loveden  Crist  mor  ]jen  her  owen  lijf,  as  ]?e  gospel  techi]> 
hem,  ]?ei  shulden  putte  her  lijf  for  ]?e  lawe  of  Crist ;  and  ]?anne 
wolde  Crist  helpe  his  Chirche,  and  putte  siche  kny3ts  to  worship 
in  hevene,  and  glorifie  her  body  deed  for  Cristis  love.  But 
defaute  of  bileve  letti]>  ]?is  profyt^  and  specialliche  of  freris,  for 
J?ei  procuren  bisiliche  part  for  Antecrist,  and  sowen  ))ikke 
lesyngs  wij?  her  ypocrisie,  and  maken  Cristis  lawe  fade  bi  her 
fals  signes.  On  |?is  wyse  ]?e  fend  haj?  ben  many  day  abowte  to 
vencushe  Cristen  men  bi  Antecristis  clerkis ;  and  ))us  he  haj> 
drawe  many  to  his  lordship,  and  specialliche  bi  heretikis,  J?at 
parten  men  fro  Crist ;  and  ])is  shal  never  ceess  bifor  Cristis  lawe 
be  worshipid,  and  Antecristis  lawe  despisid  as  heresie. 

Lord  1  si}?  Crists  lawe  suj05ci)>  of  itself,  hou  lytil  shulden  men 
recche  of  Antecristis  lawe,  but  despise  persones  and  broUis  ]?at 
holden  JjerwiJ?!  ^\i  fow  wolt  wite  which  is  Antecristis  lawe, 
loke  you  what  letti]?  Cristis  lawe  to  be  holde  in  worship,  and  to 
be  performed  bisiliche  in  dede.  And  so  alle  ))e  lawis  of  ]?is 
newe  religiose  )?at  ben  not  well  groundid  in  J^e  lawe  of  Crist, 
semen  Antecrists  lawis,  and  lettynng  of  Cristis  lawe.  And  J?is 
newe  ordynaimcis,  ungroimdid  in  Jie  gospel,  helpen  Jje  fend, 


The  rules  of 

monks  and 
\    friars  are  part 
j    of  the  law  of 
j    Antichrist,  and 
I    will  not  serve 
■   them  at  the 
•   last  day. 
I 


440 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS, 


and  letten  ))e  lawe  of  Crist.  And  so  siche  prelats  shulden  be 
Cristis  houndis,  and  berke  bi  hise  lawe,  and  not  bi  lawe  of 
wolves.  Lord!  what  letti]?  J)ise  houndis  to  berke,  and  lede 
Cristis  sheep  aftir  his  lawe?  Certis  it  seme))  jjat  dowyng  of  ])e 
Chirche,  and  too  myche  worshypyng  of  Antecristis  lawe ;  for  a 
lumpe  of  talowe  stranglij?  ]je  houndis  a,  and  lettij?  hem  boj^e  to 
berke  and  to  byte ;  and  occupying  of  men  in  Antecristis  lawes, 
))at  speken  oonliche  of  worldliche  goods,  drawij?  fro  Goddis 
lawe,  and  makij?  to  love  ]?e  world.  But  si])  bileeve  techij?  us, 
J>at  at  J?e  day  of  dom  j^e  book  shal  be  opened,  and  ilche  of  us 
shal  wite  whejjer  we  han  loved  Crist  mor  ]?en  ony  oJ?er  ])ing,  and 
]?erfQre  be  jugid  to  hevene  or  to  helle,  hou  shal  we  ]>enne 
onswer  to  askynge  of  our  juge  ?  Wei  Y  woot  }>at  Crist  ha]? 
ordeynyd  men  to  live  in  his  lawe,  and  j^en  be  knowen  bifor 
many  juges,  whejjer  Jjei  haven  faverede  mor  Cristis  lawe  or  j^e 
worldis.  Worldliche  excusacioun  shal  not  ))enne  assoyve,  ne 
onswer  by  procuratorye,  ne  suttilte  of  werkis ;  but  ^if  we  ben 
coupable  we  shal  ]?enne  be  domb,  ne  alle  Jjes  newe  habitis  shal 
not  })enne  profyte ;  but  3if  we  have  fenne  bryde  clo])is,  we  shal 
for  evere  be  dampned.  pise  clojjis  ben  of  charite  J)at  evere 
more  shal  last :  and  her  is  an  ende. 

a  This  strange  expression  occurs  also  in  the  Sermons.    See  vol.  i.  p.  24.7. 


♦-=K^<g>»^<' 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


441 


XXVIL 
[SEVEN    HERESIES.] 


[The  text  of  the  following  tract  is  based  on  a  MS.  in  the  Bodleian 
Library, — Douce  274.  There  is  another  copy  of  it  at  the  British  Museum 
(Harl.  2385),  and  a  third  at  Dublm,  (Trin.  Coll.  Dub.  C.  V.  6).  Though 
not  mentioned  by  Bale,  its  authenticity  can  hardly  be  doubted,  both  on 
account  of  the  direct  evidence  supplied  by  the  Harleian  MS.  (see  no  tes  at 
the  beginning  and  end  of  the  tract),  and  because  the  style,  and  the  refer- 
ence to  previous  labours  in  the  same  field  (p.  443)  both  point  to  Wyclif  as 
the  author.  There  is  no  direct  evidence  of  date ;  but  as,  in  the  passage 
just  quoted,  frequent  previous  statements  of  his  doctrine  on  the  Eucharist 
are  spoken"  of  by  the  author,  it  is  probable  that  the  tract  was  composed 
quite  at  the  close  of  WycHf's  life,  in  1383  or  1384,  because,  as  has  been 
said  so  often,  he  did  not  begin  to  teach  that  doctrine  publicly  till  1381.] 


SEPTEM  HERESES  CONTRA  SEPTEM  PETICIONESa 

For  fals  men  multiplien  mony  bokes  of  )?e  Chirche,  nowe 
reendynge  byleve,  and  nowe  clowtyng  heresies,  ]?erfore  men 
schulden  be  ware  of  ]jese  two  perilles,  J?at  fals  men  pynchyn  in 
]?e  Pater  noster.  pai  say  furst,  ]?at  speciale  prayere  aplied  by 
hor  prelatis  is  better  })en  generale.  As,  one  Famulonim  saide 
of  a  frere  is  better  ]?en  a  Pater  noster,  wij?  ojjer  ]>inges  even ; 
iFor  j?o  Pater  noster  is  moste  generale,  and  ]je  Famulonim  moste 
special,  of  alle  |?e  prayers  )>at  God  heris.  But  we  schul  beleve 
J?at  no  prayer  is  worJ>e,  but  in  als  muche  as  God  hym  selfe  heris 
hit,  and  applies  ]?is  prayere  to  profite  of  )>e  man.  Lord !  whe]?er 
God  hym  selfe  wolde  gladlier  here  Jje  preyere  jjat  a  false  man 
hade  contreved  to  hym,  ))en  )?e  generale  preyere  J)at  he  hym 


»  The  Harleian  MS.  commences 
thus: — *Here  ben  sevene  heresies 


aftir  continued  of  false  prestis  a3en 
))e  Pater  Noster.    H  Wyclif.' 


Seven  heresies 
against  the 
Lord's  Prayer. 


I.  False  men 
say  that  special 
prayers  are 
more  potent 
than  general. 


442 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


.  The  second 
heresy,  against 
the  second 
petition,  makes 
bad  prelates 
naembers  of 
the  Church  or 
Kingdom  of 
God, 


%  The  third 
heresy  pre- 
tends to  know 
the  will  of  God, 
that  He  will 
certainly  save 
those  whom 
they  pray  for. 


selfe  made  ?  Wele  I  wote  ]?at  J)is  preyere  is  ful  of  witte  and 
charite,  and  conceves  alle  ]?e  gode  ]jat  a  man  schuld  aske  of 
God.  Hit  is  one  to  say  J»us,  and  to  heghen  Anticriste  over 
oure  Lorde  Jesus  Criste,  J)at  is  oure  alle  fader,  pe  generalte 
of  ])is  preyere  lettes  not  oure  Lord  God  to  here  syngulere 
personys,  aftur  jjei  ben  worj)i. 

SECUNDA  HERESIS. 

pe  secunde  heresie  of  )?e  secunde  askyng  sais,  J)at  }?ese 
prelatis  are  hedes  of  Gods  rewme,  for  fei  ben  hedus  of  holy 
Chirche  by  vertue  of  prelacie.  Ande  J?ese  freres  bene  men  of 
holy  Chirche,  J?at  wole  here  be  gladliere  hedes  of  holy  Chirche 
f»en  o])er  comyne  men.  Lord !  sij^en  God  and  iche  membre 
of  his  Chirche  bene  weddid  togedre,  as  oure  bileve  sais,  whej?er 
ony  of  J?ese  prestus  schul  be  dampned  in  helle  ?  Wele  1  wote 
]?at  none  schal  be  dampned  but  devellis ;  ande  if  ony  of  j?ese 
devellis  were  capteyne  of  his  Chirche,  ]?en  God  and  )?e  devell 
were  weddid  togedre.  But  as  oure  bileve  sais  ]?at  J?er  is  no 
comynynge  wi})  Crist  and  Belial,  ])en  ]?ai  ben  not  weddid. 
Herfore  schal  we  trowe,  as  holy  men  tau3t  of  two  thowsande 
^ere  byfore  ])at  Sathanas  was  bounden,  \dX  holy  Chirche  is  of 
J}0o  }>at  God  has  ordeyned  to  dwelle  wij?  hym  in  blisse,  of  what 
state  so  ])ai  be,  prestes  or  seculeres,  lordis  or  comyners,  ladies 
or  pore  wymmen,  ]?at  endles  loven  God.  And  so  some  partie 
of  jje  Chirche  regnes  above  in  heven,  and  summe  slepis  in  pur- 
gatorie,  and  summe  fey^ttes  here  in  erthe.  But  at  ]?e  day  of 
dome  schulle  alle  be  gedrid  togedir,  and  regne  in  heven  wi{) 
hor  spouse,  oure  Lord  Jesus  Crist.  So  if  J^at  prelatis  or  freris 
or  seculers  sewe  not  Criste  in  manere  of  hor  lyvynge,  }>ai  were 
never  Cristis  spouse,  ne  membris  of  his  Chirche. 

TERTIA  HERESIS. 

pe  thrid  heresie  of  fe  thridde  askyng  sais,  Jjat  Jjai  knowe  jje 
wille  of  oure  Lord  God  to  bringe  a  soule  to  heven  by  manere 
of  hor  preyyng.  But  certis  we  schul  trowe,  J)at  God  may  not 
be  moved  but  as  he  has  ordeyned  bifore  ]?e  worlde  was  made  ; 


CONTROVERSIAL   TRACTS. 


443 


and  aftur  a  man  deserves  while  he  lyves  here  schal  he  be 
rewardid  aftur  his  lyife,  ouJ)er  in  blisse  oJ?er  in  peyne,  notwith- 
stondynge  oure  preyere.  But  wel  I  wote  ])at  God  may  helpe 
soulis  in  purgatorie,  and  make  horn  schortliere  to  dwelle  ]?er- 
inne,  after  }?at  J^ei  have  made  horn  wortlii  for  ]>e  tyme  J)at  ])ei 
have  lyved  here.  But  v^e  schal  understonde  ]?at  God  acceptis 
J?e  lyfe  ]>B,t  men  lyven  here  wele,  ande  approves  hit  for  soulis, 
and  Jjeraftur  hit  is  medefulle  for  soules  J)at  bene  in  purgatorye. 
Ande  if  we  knowe  not  ]?e  privete  of  God,  ^it  neverjjoles  we  wote 
])at  hit  is  fully  ri^twysenes,  ]?at  prayer  of  a  man  ]>3,t  God  hath 
ordeyned  to  blisse  is  more  worthye  ]>en  a  thowsande  of  hom 
])at  schal  be  dampned.  Ffor  ]>e  furst  is  Gods  childe,  and 
ordeyned  to  have  his  blis,  )?e  secund  is  the  fendus  childe.  And 
pray  he  never  so  muche,  he  getes  not  ]?e  blisse  of  heven,  for 
he  makes  hym  not  worthi.  Ande  J)is  faithe  shulde  move  men 
not  to  selle  hor  prayers,  but  iche  man  life  bisili,  iche  aftur  ])e 
lawe  of  God ;  ffor  aftur  })at  a  man  deserves  in  his  owne  per- 
soyne  schal  he  be  rewardid,  in  heven  or  in  helle.  But  gode 
lyve  of  a  man  may  helpe  hym  ]?at  lyves  wi]?  hym,  to  amende 
his  owne  lyfe,  and  so  come  to  blisse.  And  so  private  almes 
done  syngulerlyche,  ]?at  Crist  hymself  tau^t  not,  dos  littel  gode 
or  none  to  donor  of  siche  almes  for  to  come  to  heven. 

QUARTA   HERESIS. 

pe  ferthe  heresie  of  J?e  ferthe  askynge  says,  ]?at  ]>e  sacrid 
ooste  is  no  maner  of  brede,  but  ouJ?er  nou^t,  or  accident  wi]>- 
outen  ony  sogett,  and  so  worse  ]>en  stones  or  ony  ofer  body. 
And  when  ony  suche  men  asken  l?e  sacrid  ooste,  }>ai  ^yven  hom 
worse  J?en  stones,  as  J)ai  falsly  feynen.  Ffor  J)is  were  a^eynes 
holy  writte,  as  Crist  hymself  sais.  Lordus  and  prelatus  con  not 
distroye  J?is  heresie,  ouj^er  for  hor  negligence,  or  for  ]>o  wiles 
of  Anticrist.  Lord !  if  J?ese  grete  lordus  wold  3if  J?ese  prestis 
no  gode,  ne  freris,  bifore  |?ai  schewid  her  bileve  in  ]>is  poynt, 
and  groundid  hit  in  Gods  law !  and  so  j?ai  my^t  come  to  bileve, 
and  knowe  j?ese  fals  heretikis.  We  have  offt  tymes  saide  ^  ])at 
Jjis  sacrid  ooste  is  verrey  Goddis  body  and  verrey  breede,  for 
so  sais  holy  writte,  and  seyntus  of  Crist  thowsandis. 
»  See  prefatory  notice. ' 


4-  The  fourth 
heresy  mEim- 
tains  that  the 
sacred  host  is 
not  bread  in 
any  sense. 


444 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


QUINTA.  HERESIS. 


S.  The  fifth 
heresy  clahiis 
for  the  Pope 
and  his  clertfy 
powers  of  ab- 
solution ivhich 
belong  to  God 
alone. 


pe  fyfft  heresie,  contened  of  Jje  fyfft  askynge,  says,  ])at  prestis 
have  powere  to  assoyle  men  of  syiine,  whom  ever  J)e  pope 
lymytes,  at  hys  owne  wille.  Ande  absolucions  and  indulgencis 
bothe  fallen  in  mannes  chaffare  by  byynge  and  sellynge ;  and 
so  men  may  lightly  for  money  be  assoyled  bothe  of  peyne 
and  of  synne,  be  j>ai  never  so  synneful.  But  oure  bileve  techis 
us,  ]?at  no  synne  is  for^yven  but  if  God  hymself  forgif  furste 
of  alle.  Ande  if  his  trewe  vicare  acorde  to  Gods  wille,  he  may 
assoyle  of  synne  as  vicary  of  his  God.  But  if  he  discorde  from 
juggement  of  his  God,  he  assoyles  not,  boste  he  never  so  muche. 
Ande  herfore  hit  is  nedeful  J)at  a  preste  have  two  keyes,  of 
powere  and  of  cunnyng,  to  acorde  to  Gods  wille.  Ffor  if  he 
want  J>is  connyng  he  noujjer  byndes  ne  assoyles ;  ne  hit  is  not 
byleve  J)at  ne  he  may  erre  in  ]>is.  Ande  amonge  alle  heresies 
or  blasphemyes  in  oure  Chirche,  J)is  is  one  ]?e  moste  J)at  men 
bene  deceyved  inne.  And  if  a  man  speke  herof  by  J?o  law  of 
God,  he  schal  be  prisoned,  or  done  to  deth  as  an  heretike. 


SEXTA  HERESIS. 


6.  The  sixth 
heresy  claims 
for  fhars  an 
extraordinary 
exemption 
from  tempta- 
tion. 


pe  sexte  heresie,  contened  of  J^e  sexte  askyng,  sais,  J?at  men 
of  private  religioun  bene  more  thikk  saved  }>en  men  J)at  kepe 
trewly  comyne  Cristus  religione ;  ffor,  as  })ai  say,  J>ai  have  helpe 
of  hor  owne  brejjer,  specially  in  houre  of  hor  deth,  of  body  and 
of  soule,  and  so  bene  not  lad  in  to  fendus  temptacioun.  But 
oure  bileve  techis  us  )?at  comyn  Cristus  religioun  passes  al 
religioun  of  J?ese  newe  ordris.  Lorde  !  whedur  we  schuld  trowe 
})at  Benet  and  Dominik,  or  Ffraunces,  schuld  passe  )?e  wise- 
dome  of  Criste  ?  Or  whedur  hit  be  wisedome  to  obeysche  to 
siche  prelatis,  and  leefe  Jje  wille  of  Crist,  l?at  is  God  and  ]?ine 
abbot.  Wele  I  wote  J?at  ]?e  Chirche  was  rewind  by  Cristis 
ordynaunce,  bifore  J^ese  ordris  coomen  inne,  better  J»en  hit  was 
sithen.  Ande  so,  sithen  }?ese  religiouse  dyen  in  J?is  false  triste, 
;  and  have  lyved  in  ypocrisie  for  ]?e  more  parte  of  hore  lyve,  hit 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


445 


semes  ]?at  suche  gone  prively  til  helle,  and  so  be  led  in  to  I 
fendus  temptacioun,  for  |)ai  ben  hardid  in  errour  of  hor  private  | 
ordris.  And  herfore  clepid  Crist  Nichodeme  fro  ])e  ordre  of  i 
Phariseus,  savyng  hym  and  destroyyng  of  hit.  Wi]?outen  doute  | 
J?o  ordynaunce  J^at  Crist  \ijai  selfe  ordeyned,  if  hit  were  holden  ! 
clene,  hit  were  J^e  beste  of  oj?er ;  flfor  Jjerby  in  ilke  degre  my3t  I 
iche  man  be  saved.  Ffor  ))en  wolde  charite  growe  more,  and  j 
envie  be  more  distroyed.  Thre  membris  of  |?e  chirche,  as  I 
prestis,  kny^ttus,  and  laboreris,  wolden  be  sufficient  T\d))Outen  ; 
more  diversite.     God  kepe  his  Chirche.     Amen. 


SEPTIMA   HERESIS. 


pe  sevent  heresie  and  \o  last,  ]?at  is  contened  of  J?e  sevent 
askyng,  sais,  J^at  if  we  wirke  by  counsel  of  pese  newe  ordris  }?at 
leven  Jje  ordynaunce  of  Criste,  we  schal  nedely  be  saved.     And 
herby  bene  men  lad  in  to  fendus  temptacioun,  and  wrappid  wi]? 
synne  ageyne  ])e  Holy  Goste ;  and  ]?is  is  J^e  werste  synne  J?at 
ever  may  falle  to  ony  man.     Wele  I  wote  \2X  freris  wold  not 
here  J^is  publischt  in  ]je  pepul,  for  fallyng  of  hor  ordre.     But 
sithen  it  is  not  groundid  in  bileve,  he  is  not  on  Gods  halve  )?at 
lettis  hit  for  freris.     Ande  we  schulde  trow  )?at  foundyng  of 
abbays  and  frerus  and  ^  lettys  mon  j^at  ne  ])ai  mowe  falle  in  J?e 
last  synne.      And  herfore   alle   maner   of  men  schuld  know 
Cristis   ordynaunce,   and  travaile  J?erfore  J?at  hit  were   clenly 
kept ;  for  hit  is  moste  light,  most  profitable,  and  moste  medeful.  j 
O  Lord !  if  al  ]>e  peple  in  Yngelonde  traveyled  in  alle  cuntreyes,  ! 
and  falsed  {je  kyngis  wille,  movyng  to  discordis  a^eynes  j?e  pes  ' 
of  Jje  rewme,  who  wolde  not  say  ])at  suche  a  peple  were  peril-  i 
ouse  in  Yngelonde  ?  mykel  more  if  newe  religious  be  skaterud  ; 
in  Cristendame,  and  gabben  on  ]?e  wille  of  Criste  J^at  is  oure  i 
kynge,  and  moven  not  to  pes  and  acorde  as  Crist  and  his  I 
apostilles   did.     What   wonder  is   hit,  )?ow  batellis   and   ojjer  i 
perellus   come,   ]?at   Crist   has   bifore   saide  ?      God   kep   his  ' 
Chirche  fro  fals   ypocrites   and  ungroundid   newe   statis,  not  ; 


7.  The  seventh 
heresy  main- 
tains that  friars 
and  their 
friends  are  pro- 
tected from 
evil. 


somethiDg  appears  to  be  omitted. 


446 


WYCLIF'S  WORKS, 


foundid  in  Crystes  lawe.  Wele  I  wote  fat  many  ^  say  ])at  monye 
of  horn  are  seyntus ;  but  nowJ?er  is  J)is  bileve,  ne  groundid  in 
resonea.     Omnis   plantacio  quam  non  plantavit  pater  mens, 
eradicabitur,  dicit  Dominus  in  evangelic  Johannis. 
Explicit  tractatus  qui  vocatur  speculum  vita  Christiane  b. 

^  corrected ;  the  MS.  has  may. 


a  The  words  '  groimdid  in  resone ' 
are  immediately  followed  in  the 
Harleian  MS.  by  'ut  patet  per 
Wyclif/  written  in  the  same  hand. 


^  The  pui-port  of  this  explicit  has 
been  fully  discussed  in  the  Intro- 
duction to  this  volume. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


447 


XXVIII. 

OCTO  IN    QUIBUS    SEDUCUNTUR 
SIMPLICES    CHRISTIANI. 


[The  text  of  this  short  piece  is  founded  on  a  transcript  from  the  Corpus 
MS.  296.  There  are  two  other  copies  known,  both  of  which  are  at  Trinity- 
College,  Dublin ;  of  these  one  is  imperfect  at  the  end.  Bale  includes  this 
tract  in  his  list  of  Wyclif's  works,  though  giving  it  the  erroneous  title, 
whence  derived  it  is  impossible  to  say,  of  '  De  Episcoporum  Erroribus.' 
There  is  no  means  of  fixing  its  date  vidth  accuracy.  It  is  vigorously- 
written,  and  I  am  disposed  to  regard  Wyclif  as  the  author.] 


pEEE  ben  ei^te  Jjingis  bi  whiche  simple  Cristene  men  ben 
disceyved,  ]?at  ben  |?es  ei^te ;  holy  Chirche,  lawe,  religion, 
obedience,  cursynge,  )?e  goodis  or  ri3t  of  holy  Chirche,  maunde- 
ment  and  conseil,  dedly  synne  and  venyal. 

Fiirst,  whanne  men  speken  of  holy  Chirche,  Jjei  undirstonden 
anoon  prelatis  and  prestis,  monkis  and  chanouns  and  freris, 
and  alle  men  ]?at  han  crownes  ^  ]?ou5  ]?ei  lyven  nevere  so  cur- 
sedly a5enst  Goddis  lawe, — and  clepen  not  ne  holden  seculeris 
men  of  holy  Chirche,  ]?ou3  ])ei  lyven  nevere  so  trewely  after 
Goddis  lawe,  and  enden  in  perfect  charite.  But  ne])eles  alle 
])at  schullen  be  savyd  in  blisse  of  hevene  ben  membris  of  holy 
Chirche,  and  ne  moo.  And  Crist  seij?,  and  Austyn,  and  Cry- 
sostom,  and  many  moo  seyntis,  for  non  of  alle  ])es  schal 
perische  wi|jouten  ende,  as  Crist  himself  seij?.     And  so  comynly 


Eight  sources 
of  deception 
for  simple 
Christians. 


I.  By  the 
Church,  people 
understand  the 
clergy  only. 


°-  That  is,  all  men  that  have  the  tonsure. 


448 


< 


2.  By  law, 
people  under- 
stand human  ^ 
laws,  not  the 
law  of  God. 


3.  By  religion, 
they  under- 
stand the  rules 
of  monastic 
orders,  not  the 
pure  religion  of 
Christ. 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 

J)0  ]?at  ben  clepid  men  of  holy  Chirche  ben  enemyes  l?erof,  and 
synagoge  of  Sathanas,  and  }o  J)at  ben  membris  of  holy  Chirche, 
as  ben  good-Cristene  men  J)at  kepen  Goddis  hestis,  ben  not 
holde  men  of  holy  Chirche,  but  aliens  ]?erfro.  And  Jjus  we 
demen  foliliche  more  bi  signes  }>at  ^  men  han  maade,  who  ben 
men  of  holy  Chirche,  ]?an  bi  goode  lif  and  endeles  lastynge  in 
charite,  bi  whiche  God  biddi])  us  deme  wisly  and  ri3tfully. 

Also,  whanne  men  speken  of  lawe,  anoon  men  taken  it  of 
mannis  lawe,  and  not  of  Goddis  lawe,  as  ^if  mannis  lawe  were 
more  worj^i  and  more  principal  ]?an  Goddis  lawe.  And  }>is 
fordo)?  muche  ]?e  reverence  and  studiynge  of  Goddis  lawe.  For 
herefore,  and  for  worldly  wynnynge  and  worschipe,  men  lerne 
mennis  lawis,  as  ]?e  popis  and  emperouris  and  kyngis,  and 
studyen  not  Goddis  lawis,  J?at  techen  virtues,  and  to  suffren 
myschiefis  and  dispitis,  and  to  wynne  ])e  blisse  of  hevene.  And 
herfore  God  and  his  lawe  and  virtuous  lif  ben  unknowen  and 
dispisid,  and  synne  and  cursednesse  norisched  and  meyntened, 
and  many  men  rennen  to  helle,  and  fewe  gon  to  hevene. 

Also,  whanne  men  speke  of  religion,  anoon  ]?ei  undirstonden 
religion  maad  of  synful  men  wi]?  many  errouris,  and  not  of  J?at 
holy  religion  j)at  Criste,  God  and  man,  made  hymself  for  his 
apostils  and  prestis;  alle  and  ^if^  religion  founde  of  synful 
men,  wi)?  pride  and  ypocrisie,  were  betre  ]>an  ]?e  clene  religion 
in  his  clene  fredom  ]?at  Crist  made.  And  ]>us  \ti  J^at  holden 
Cristis  clene  religion,  as  prestis,  wi}>outen  cloutynge  to  of  er- 
rouris of  foolis  and  synful  men,  ben  holden  seculer  men,  or 
seculer  prestis,  jjou^  J)ei  kepen  nevere  so  wel  J?e  gospel,  and 
teche})  it  frely  and  trewly,  as  Crist  and  his  apostils  diden.  But 
^if  })ei  han  a  newe  habite,  founden  of  mannis  folye,  and  have 
maad  singuler  profession  to  synful  men,  and,  in  cas,  to  fendis, 
]3ei  ben  holden  men  of  religion,  j;ou5  ]?ei  ben  nevere  so  proude, 
coveitous,  envyous,  lecherous,  or  o]?ere  synnes.  And  )?us,  for 
pride  and  ypocrisie,  )?es  newe  religions  fordon  ))e  reverence  and 
\e  name  of  Cristis  clene  religion,  and  maken  ))at  it  is  holden 
for  noon,  as  ^if  foolis  or  synful  men  wolden  fordon  Goddis 


^  coiTCCted  from  pan  in  the  MS. 
^  Meaning  '  as  if.' 


WYCLTF. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS, 

makynge.  And  so  \t\  seyn  prively,  })at  synful  men  ben  more 
my^tty,  more  witty,  and  fullere  of  charite,  J^an  ne  was  Jesus 
Crist,  to  teche  a  perfitere  weie  to  hevene  ]jan  evere  Crist  dide 
himself.  For  sij)  Crist  was  endeles  my^tty,  endeles  witty,  and 
endeles  ful  of  charite  to  save  mennis  soulis,  what  schulde  lete 
him  to  teche  fe  best  religion  of  prestis,  si)?  in  hem  hangij?  moche 
]>e  good  lif  and  techynge  of  J?e  peple  ?  Whejjer  Crist  bi  a  ]30u- 
sand  ^er  and  more  tau^te  nevere  to  his  apostils  and  o]?ere  prestis 
j)e  beste  religion,  to  serve  him  inne  and  to  plese  him,  but  to  kepe 
])is  til  now,  wij?inne  j)ese  two  hundrid  ^ere^,  whanne  Sathanas 
was  unbounden,  as  Seynt  Jon  sei}?  in  \q  Apocalips,  and  ^it 
telde  nevere  in  J?e  law  of  grace  who  schulde  bigynne  }>es  newe 
periit  religion,  ne  whanne  it  schulde  come.  Of  J?is  may  men 
see,  J)at  o)>er  Crist  was  unmy^tty,  unwytty,  or  not  ful  of  charite  to 
^eve  ])e  best  religion  to  apostlis  and  o]?ere  prestis ;  or  ellis  j?es 
newe  reHgious  ben  foolis,  takynge  \^  worse  religion  maade  bi 
errors  of  synful  men,  and  levynge  ])e  beste  religion  and  most 
perfit  and  most  li^t  and  most  siker,  made  of  Jesus  Crist. 

Also  whanne  men  speken  of  obedience,  anoon  it  is  take  for 
obedience  maad  to  man  ful  of  synne  and  unkunnynge,  and  not 
for  obedience  to  do  Goddis  hestis ;  as  ^if  obedience  don  to  )?e 
conseil  or  biddy nge  of  a  synful  creature,  were  more  wor])i  ]?an 
obedience  don  to  comaundement  or  conseil  of  God.  And  ]?us 
new  ypocritis  seyn  J^at  it  is  more  medful,  aftir  unkunnynge  pro- 
fession, to  do  after  j?e  biddynge  of  synful  man,  or  errors  of  a 
fool,  and,  in  cas,  of  a  devel  of  helle,  ]>an  to  do  after  J?e  hestis  or 
conseihs  of  God.  And  ]?us  ]?es  new  ypocritis  wij?  here  newe 
obedience  distroien  obedience  of  Goddis  lawe,  and  comyn  lawe 
of  men,  and  chargen  only  here  owen  obedience  founden  of 
hemself.  For  bi  Goddis  lawe  eche  man  owij)  obeische  to  o}>er, 
in  as  moche  as  he  techej?  him  Goddis  wille  and  good  lif;  and 
specialy  to  bischopis,  j)at  han  cure  of  alle  men  in  here  diocese 
bi  charite  and  comyn  lawe.  But  )?e  new  religious  dispisen  }-is, 
and  seyn,  pou  art  not  myn  ordynarie ;  and  geten  hem  exempcion 
fro  bischopis  and  o]?ere  men,  J^at  schulden  distroie  here  synnes 


449 


4.  By  obedi- 
ence, they  un- 
derstand mere 
monastic 
obedience. 


ft  The  Franciscan  Order  was  first 
founded  by  St.  Francis  of  Assisi  in 
1 209  ;  the  date  of  the  institution  of 

WOBKS.       VOL.    ill.  G  g 


the  Dominicans  or  Friars  Preachers 
is  a  little  later,  1217. 


45° 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


5.  By  cursing, 
men  under- 
stand mere 
church  ban- 
nings  and 
anathemas,  not 
the  curse  of 
God. 


6.  By  the  riches 
and  rights  of 
the  Church, 
men  under- 
stand temporal 
riches  and 
rights  only. 


and  norische  virtues.  And  J)us  ]?ei  ben  exempt  bi  gold  fro 
God,  trewjje,  and  charite,  and  only  bounden  to  here  synful 
potestatis,  and,  in  cas,  to  fendis ;  and  herefore  jjei  holden  hem 
most  perfit,  for  jjei  forsaken  alle  good  perfeccion. 

Also,  whanne  men  speken  of  curs,  anoon  it  is  taken  for 
mannis  curs,  and  not  for  Goddis  curs,  as  ^if  ^  mannis  curs  were 
more  principal  and  more  wor]?i  J?an  Goddis  curs.  And  here- 
fore  foolis  clepen  Goddis  curs  ]?e  lesse  curs,  and  mannis  curs 
]?e  more  curs  a,  as  ^if  synful  man  were  more  ]>an  God  Al- 
my^tty.  And  herbi  folis  dreden  more  mannis  curs,  ]?at  is  un- 
ri^tful,  and,  in  cas,  of  devyl  in  helle,  Jjan  ])e  moste  ri^tful  curs  of 
God  Almy^tty,  for  trespassynge  a^enst  his  comaundementis. 
And  herefore  folis  ben  so  blente,  J)at  for  drede  of  mannis  curs 
]?ei  leven  Goddis  hestis,  and  done  Jje  contrarie  of  hem,  and  so 
rennen  into  Goddis  curs.  And  ]?ei  dreden  more  a  synful  man, 
and,  in  cas,  quyk  devel,  )?anne  Almy^tty  God  in  Trinyte.  For 
j^ei  levej)  ]>e  hestis  of  God  undon,  for  drede  of  mannis  curs, 
and  don  a  wrong  heste  of  man,  and,  in  cas,  of  a  devel,  to  plese 
him ;  and  ]>us  J?ei  fallen  fro  bileve  and  hope  and  charite.  For 
Crist  teche]?  in  ])e  gospel,  whanne  men  ben  cursid  wrongfully 
for  the  treujje  of  God,  ]?an  God  himself  blessij),  and  ])an  mannis 
curs,  ]?at  is  onri^tful,  do}>  moche  good  to  him  Jjat  suifre}>  it 
mekely  and  paciently.  And  j?ei  loven  not  God  of  alle  here 
herte,  J>at  wolen  not  suifre  for  his  treuj^e  and  his  love  a  veyn 
blast  of  a  fool,  and,  in  cas,  of  a  devyl,  j)e  whiche  harmej?  hem 
not,  but  doJ>  hem  moche  good,  ^if  J)ei  lasten  stably  in  trew]?e  of 
mekenesse  pacience  and  charite. 

Also,  whanne  men  speken  of  goodis  of  holy  Chirche,  or  ri^t 
}>erof,  anoon  it  is  taken  for  worldly  goodis,  and  not  for  goodis 
of  virtue,  or  for  worldly  ri^t  to  plede  and  curse,  and  stryve  for 
ti)>es  and  chirchis,  and  ofere  prophetis  of  worldly  muk,  and  not 
for  fv^i  to  lyve  vertuous  Hf  in  good  pacience  and  pees  and 
charite,  and  to  suffre  gladly  wrongis  peynis  and  disceitis,  for  to 
kepe  virtuous  lif,  ]?at  is  betre  }>an  al  j^is  world ;  as  3if  stynkynge 


^  corrected;  the  MS.  has  andy.f  as. 


=^  See  the  introductory  notice  to  '  The  Grete  Sentence  of  Curs/  page  267 
of  this  volume. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


451 


muk,  or  drit,  or  worldly  goodis,  were  betxe  ]?arL  pacience  charite 
and  oj^ere  virtues.  And  so  ypocritis  clepen  ]?e  worldly  lord- 
ischipis  ]>at  prelatis  han,  a^enst  Goddis  lawe,  bo]?e  old  and  newe, 
and  a^enst  Cristis  lif  and  his  apostilis,  ]?e  patrymonye  of  Jesus 
Crist  don  on  jje  cros,  for  to  fere  seculer  lordis  to  taken  a^en 
here  owen  goodis,  and  governe  hem  ri^tfally,  and  to  brynge 
clerkis  to  Cristis  owene  ordynaunce.  And  ^it  ])at  bryngynge 
a^en  is  nedeful  bo]?e  to  lordis  and  clerkis,  for  ellis  }?ei  ben  bo]?e 
out  of  charite,  ^if  ]?ei  may  redresse  ]?is  \vrong  don  to  Crist  and 
his  ordynaunce,  and  don  up  here  kunnynge  and  my^t.  And 
J?us  ri^t  of  worldly  goodis  is  magnyfyed  overmoche  and  falsly, 
and  ri^t  of  virtues  and  grace  and  virtuous  lif  is  not  set  bi,  as  ^if 
]5e  Chirche  were  wrecchidly  groundid  in  worldly  muk,  and  not 
in  vertues  and  goode  lif.  But  certis  holy  Chirche  is  sect  in 
virtues  and  good  lif;  but  certis  Anticristis  chirche  is  set  in 
pride  coveitise  and  ofere  synnes,  and  most  settij?  bi  worldly  muk 
and  pride,  a^enst  Crist  and  his  apostilis. 

Also  whanne  men  speken,  a^enst  prelatis  and  religiouns,  of 
Cristis  povert,  mekenesse,  and  o]?ere  virtues,  j^ei  seyn  ]?at  J30  ben 
conseilis  of  Crist,  and  not  comaundementis.  And  ferfore  ]?e 
bischop  of  Rome,  J^at  is  most  contrarie  to  Cristis  techynge  and 
lif,  may  dispense  as  he  wole;  }>at  J)0U5  men  bynden  hemself 
nevere  so  stronge  to  ]?is  povert  and  perfeccion,  and  ^it  may  vel  a 
don  it  in  dede,  Jjei  ben  not  holden  to  fulfille  it,  whanne  Crist 
^evej)  hem  ]?erto  my^t,  witt,  wille,  and  grace, — for  Anticrist  ha]? 
feyned  to  dispense,  a3enest  Goddis  wille,  and  a5enst  here  owen 
avowe  and  profession.  And  in  })is  Jjei  seyn  ]?at  it  is  betre  to 
lyve  in  siche  worldly  astaat,  )jan  in  clene  povert  of  Crist  and 
his  apostilis ;  for  J?is  dispensynge  mot  be  fro  ]je  lasse  perfeccion 
to  J?e  more  perfit  lif,  for  eUis  J?ei  weren  peired  a3enst  God,  and 
J>erto  hade  nevere  creature  undere  God  power  ne  leve.  And 
over  ]jis  newe  religions  seyn,  )?at  ))ei  ben  more  perfit  ]?an  o]?er 
prestis,  J)at  kepen  presthod  wi]?  fredom  of  ])e  gospel,  as  Crist 
ordeynede  it,  for  Jjei  kepen  bojje  Goddis  hestis  and  conseilis. 
But  certis,  howevere  J)ei  bynden  hem  to  )?e  conseilis,  J?ei  kepen 


^  vel  must  be  for  wel.      '  And  in  addition  carry  out  their  vow  well  in 
practice.' 

Gg  2 


7.  Mischievous 
distinctions 
between  the 
precepts  and 
the  counsels  of 
the  Gospel. 


452 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


In  truth,  what 
is  of  counsel  to 
some,  is  of 
precept  to 
others. 


8.  Dangerous 
and  unautho- 
rized practice 
of  distinguish- 
ing between 
mortal  and 
venial  sins. 


evele  J?e  comaundementis,  and,  in  cas,  kunnen  hem  not.  And 
it  is  grete  folye  to  bynden  hem  to  ]?e  more,  whanne  ]?ei  kunnen 
not  and  kepen  not  ]je  lasse. 

But  it  seme]?  j)at  it  is  ypocrisie  J)at  Jjei  seyn,  for  every  con- 
seil  of  Crist  is  to  sum  man  and  sum  tyme  a  precept.  As, 
whanne  God  ^eve]?  a  man  knowinge  J>at  J)is  conseil  is  Goddis 
wille,  and  my^t  and  wille  and  wisdom  to  governe  him  ])erinne, 
jjan  }>is,  J?at  is  conseil  to  summe  oJ?ere,  is  a  precept  to  j^is  man ; 
for  ellis  he  love))  not  God  of  al  his  herte,  al  his  Hf,  or  wille,  of 
alle  his  mynde  and  alle  his  my^ttis.  But  many  han  ]?e  name 
of  religious,  for  worldly  pride  and  sikernesse  of  welfare  to  \e 
body,  and  not  for  devocion  of  holy  Hf  and  peyneful.  And 
summe  ben  disceyved  in  ^ongjje  bi  ^eftis  and  false  bihestis,  and 
grucchen  evere  aftirward;  and  jjes  kepen  neij)er  preceptis  ne 
conseilis;  but  ^if  J)at  symonye  be  wel  sou5t,  ))ei  ben  heretikis 
in  \Q  bigynnynge,  in  J>e  myddil,  and  fe  ende  of  here  lif.  Ffor 
whoevere  entre]?  into  rehgion  more  for  worldly  pride  or  covei- 
tise,  or  lustful  lif  of  his  body,  })an  for  holynesse  of  lif,  to  sue 
Crist  and  his  apostilis  in  penaunce  and  wilful  povert,  he  do]? 
symonye,  and  ])an  he  is  an  heretik. 

Also  whanne  men  speken  a^enst  synne,  anoon  })ei  seyn,  J^ou^ 
]?is  be  synne,  ^it  it  is  venyal,  and  not  dedly,  and  venyals  ben 
waschen  awey  wi]?  preieris  of  a  Pater-noster,  wij)  hali  watir,  wi)) 
pardon,  wij>  bischopis  blissynge,  and  many  oJ?ere  li^tte  weies,  as 
men  feynen.  But  trewe  men  seyn,  Jjat  })ei  knowen  not  in  ])is 
lif  wi]?  revelacion  whiche  is  venyal  and  whiche  is  dedly,  and  jjes 
termes,  venyal  and  dedly,  ben  founden  up  of  newe  men,  wi))Outen 
auctorite  of  holy  writt,  and  Jjerfore  Jjei  ben  suspect.  For 
certis  it  stondi]?  not  algatis  after  mannis  dom  in  J)is  matere. 
For  many  tymes  a  man  deme]?  j)at  }?is  synne  is  venyal,  and  God 
demej?  }?at  for  ]?is  synne  J)is  man  schal  be  dampnyd,  and  also 
a3enward.  And  so  manye  opynyons  ben  founden  of  newe 
men,  whiche  synne  is  dedly  and  whiche  venyal,  }>at  unnejie  ony 
man  undirstondij?  anoj^er  of  hymself.  But  it  cordi})  most  to 
holy  writt  resoun  and  proprete  of  word,  J?at  J?is  synne  is  dedly 
for  whiche  a  man  schal  be  dampned  in  helle,  and  alle  oj^ere  ben 
venyals ;  and  j?anne  it  is  reservyd  to  God,  to  wete  wiche  is 
dedly  and  which  is  venyal.     But  allagatis  a  man  most  first  be 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


453 


purged  of  dedly  bifore  )?at  ony  venyal  ben  for^oven ;  and  sij? 
no  man  wot  where  hymself  be  out  of  dedly  synne,  it  is  a  pre- 
sumpcion  to  seie  ]?at  his  synne  is  but  venyal.  And  as  to  par- 
dons, and  haly  watir,  and  blyssyngs  of  bischopis,  it  is  a  fejoied 
J)ing,  for  pride  of  statis  and  covetise  of  worldly  muk,  and  to 
blynde  ))e  peple,  and  to  make  hem  over  litel  to  drede  synne. 
perfore  do  eche  man  his  bisynesse,  to  flee  alle  manere  of  synne, 
and  to  have  grete  sorowe  and  lastynge  for  his  synnys,  and 
mynde  on  Cristis  ri5t^visnesse  and  wisdom,  to  ponysche  and 
knowe  ]?e  foulnesse  of  synne,  and  on  Cristis  passioun,  dej),  and 
mercy,  to  for^eve  synnes  for  verrey  repentaunce.  And  putte 
ech  man  his  fuUe  trust  in  Goddis  mercy,  and  in  his  owen  goode 
lif ;  and  not  in  false  pardons,  ne  vanytees,  )>at  men  graunten 
aftir  mennys  de|>,  for  love  of  money.  For  sich  japis  availen 
not,  but  disceyven  men  J?at  trusten  in  hem  for  evere.  As  a 
man  is  in  charite,  kepjnige  ]>e  hestis  of  God,  so  Crist  ^eve}? 
hym  part  of  alle  goode  dedis  as  he  is  wor])i,  and  nei)?er  more  ne 
lesse  schal  he  have,  for  no  creature  undere  God. 


454 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


XXIX. 

[ON     THE     TWENTY-FIVE 
ARTICLES.] 

[Dr.  Shirley  could  not  have  observed,  when  he  included  this  Lollard 
rejoinder  to  charges  brought  against  the  sect  in  his  catalogue  of  Wyclif  s 
works,  that  the  same  heads  of  charge,  in  a  Latin  version,  are  given  in 
Knyghton  under  the  year  1388,  and  that  their  vindication  could  not  there- 
fore have  proceeded  from  Wyclif,  who  died  at  the  end  of  1384.  After 
describing  the  opening  of  parHament  in  the  Febmary  of  1388,  the  arrest 
of  the  judges  which  immediately  followed,  and  the  impeachment  of  Vere, 
Archbishop  Neville,  and  the  rest  of  the  king's  friends,  Knyghton  goes  on 
to  say  that  'his  diebus*  the  Wycliffites,  *  qui  et  LoUardi  dicti  sunt,'  con- 
tinued to  pour  forth  their  eiTors  with  infinite  clamour,  heat,  and  pertinacity. 
Of  these  errors,  he  says,  some  are  here  inserted,  while  others  which  have 
been  noted  already  are  here  repeated.  Then  follows  a  list  of  twenty-five 
points,  which  substantially  agi-ees,  point  for  point,  with  the  list  in  the 
present  treatise,  the  order  only  being  slightly  different.  He  [then'^^  states 
that  the  Lords  and  Commons  petitioned  the  king  to  take  measures  for  the 
extirpation  of  these  errors,  and  that  the  king  did  so,  but  ineffectually, 
'  because  the  hom:  of  correction  was  not  yet  come.' 

The  treatise  had  been  transcribed  for  press  before  I  had  found  out  all 
this;  otherwise  I  should  hardly  have  included  a  piece  clearly  not  written 
by  Wyclif  in  the  contents  of  this  volume.  Yet  the  historical  interest  of  the"^ 
piece  is  sufficient  to  make  me  not  regret  its  appearance,  to  say  nothing  of 
its  own  merits  as  a  vigorous  piece  of  writing,  which  are  certainly  con- 
siderable. 

The  date  of  composition,  if  we  take  ICnyghton's  account  of  the  circum- 
stances under  which  the  articles  were  'put  upon'  the  Wycliffites  to  be 
correct,  must  have  been  either  in  1388  or  1389,  for  the  articles  were  not 
framed  till  1388,  and  Pope  Urban,  who  is  mentioned  as  the  reigning  pope 
in  the  first  article,  died  in  1389, 

The  work  named  in  Bale's  Catalogtie  under  the  title  'Super  Impositis 
ArticuHs '  may  have  been,  as  Dr.  Shirley  conjectured,  this  very  treatise. 
But  this  remains  quite  doubtful ;  for  to  '  imponere,'  or  '  put  upon '  a  party 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


455 


or  an  individual  the  maintenance  of  certain  errors  was  the  phrase  in 
common  use  (see  Fasc.  Ziz.) ;  and  it  was  a  process  continually  going  on 
until  the  Lollard  movement  was  suppressed;  so  that  the  *  articuli'  of  Bale 
might  have  been  something  quite  different. 

The  text  is  founded  on  the  only  known  MS.,  Douce  273,  in  the  Bodleian 
Library.] 


pESE  BENE  ])0  POYNTUS  J?AT  WOELDELY  PBELATIS  AT  J)0  SUG- 
GESTIONS OP  FBERUS  PUTTEN  ON  POEE  CsiSTEN  MEN,  AND 
WHAT   })AI    GRAUNTEN   ANDE   WHAT    \M   DENYEN. 

1.  po  firste,  J?at  ]>is  pope  Urban  J?e  sixte  bere]>  not  ]?e  strenght 
of  Seint  Petur  in  erjje,  but  ])ai  affermen  hym  to  be  son  of  Anti- 
criste,  and  ]?at  no  verrey  pope  was  fro  fo  tyme  of  Silvester 
pope, 

2.  Also  byschopus  ande  freris  putten  on  pore  men  J)at  ])ei 
seyne,  Jjat  \o  pope  may  not  graunte  ony  indulgencis,  ne  ony 
o\ex  bischopis,  ande  ]?at  alle  men  tristynge  in  sooche  indulgencis 
ben  cursid. 

3.  Also  prelatis  ande  freris  putten  on  pore  men  ]?at  }>ei  seyne, 
]?at  ]30  pope  may  not  make  canons,  l>at  is,  reulis,  or  decretalis, 
or  constituciouns ;  ande  if  he  make  ony,  no  man  is  holden  for 
to  kepe  hem. 

4.  Also  bischopis  ande  freris  putten  on  pore  men  ])at  Jjei 
seyne,  }?at  of  onely  contricione  of  hert  al  synne  is  done  awey, 
wi]?outen  schrifft  of  moujje ;  ne  J?at  schriift  of  moufe  is  nedeful, 
5e,  where  plenty  or  leyser  of  a  preste  may  be  hadde. 

5.  Also  bischopis  ande  freris  putten  to  pore  men  ]?at  J^ei 
seyne,  ])at  ymages  of  Cristis  crosse,  of  ])0  crucifixe,  of  Jjo 
blessid  Vergyne  Mary,  ande  of  ojjer  seintis,  in  no  manere  bene 
worjji  to  [be  ^]  worschipid,  but  ]?at  alle  men  worschypynge  in 
ony  manere  ]joo  ymages,  or  ony  peyntyngus,  synnen  and  done 
ydolatrie;  and  ]?at  God  dose  not  ony  myracul  by  hem;  and 
]?at  alle  men  goynge  pilgrimage  to  hem,  or  manere  worschip- 
pynge,  or  putting  lighttis  or  ony  devociones  bifore  Jjoo  ymagis, 
ben  cursid.  - 

^  supplied  conjeclurally. 


Twenty-five 
articles,  con- 
taining the 
chief  LoUard 
opinions,  as 
imputed  to  the 
sect  by  the 
bishops. 


45^ 


WYCLIF'S  WORKS. 


6.  po  sexte  tyme,  prelatis  ande  freris  beren  upon  pore  men 
))at  \€\  seyne,  Jjat  alle  prestus  ande  dekenes  ben  holden  for  to 
preche  \o  gospel  openly  by  reson  of  ordur  taken,  J)of  ]>ei  have 
not  pepul  ne  cure  of  soulis. 

7.  po  sevent  tyme,  prelatis  and  frerus  beren  upon  symple 
men  ]?at  ]?ei  seyne,  fat  nou]?er  cursynge  of  pope  ne  of  byschop 
byndus. 

8.  Also  prelatis  and  frerus  beren  upon  symple  men  ]?at  I?ei 
seyne,  jjat  hit  is  not  to  beseche  to  seyntis  for  to  pray  for  lyvynge 
men,  ne  \o  Letany  is  not  to  be  seid.  SoJ^ely  \€\  affermen  ])at 
God  may  do  alle  ]?ingis  wi)?oute  hem,  ne  hit  is  not  bileve  ])at 
])ai  bene  seyntus  whom  we  clepen  seintus;  but  J?ai  prechen 
mony  of  hem  for  to  be  in  helle,  whos  halidayes  J)0  Chirche 

halowes  here  in  erj^e^ ne  men  owen  not  for  to 

byleve  ne  stonde  to  J?o  canonysynge  of  \o  seyntes  made  by  ]?e 
courte  of  Rome  in  ])is  part. 

21.  Also  byschopis  and  freris  putten  to  pore  men  ]?at  \t\ 
seyne,  J>at  \o  holy  Trinity  in  no  manere  schulde  be  worschip- 
pid,  fygurid,  fourmed,  ne  peyntid,  in  ]?at  fourme  by  whiche 
comynly  hit  is  peyntid,  by  al  ])0  Chirche  of  God. 

22.  Also  prelatis  and  freris  putten  to  pore  men  Jjat  \€\  sejoie, 
J>at  hit  is  not  leeflfuU  to  a  preste  for  to  sette  to  hire  his  bysynes 
or  werkes. 

23.  Also  byschopis  curatis  and  frerus  putten  on  pore  men 
]?at  J?ei  seyne,  J>at  no  persone,  ne  vicare,  ne  prelate,  is 
excusid  fro  personele  residence,  to  be  made  in  ]?er  benefices, 
in  dwellynge  in  servyces  of  bischopis,  or  of  archebyschopis, 
or  of  \o  pope. 

24.  Also  prelatis  ande  prowde  curatis  and  freris  putten  to 
pore  men  {jat  J?ai  seyne,  \2X  persones  and  vicars,  not  seyynge 
masse,  ne  mynystrynge  sacramentis  of  holy  Chirche,  bene 
worJ?i  for  to  be  removed  and  o]>er  for  to  be  ordeyned  in  hor 
stede ;  for  })ai  bene  unwor]?i,  and  wasters  of  })0  Chirchis  godis. 


a  A  leaf  is  wanting  in  the  MS. 
here,  containing  the  points  or  heads 
from  the  ninth  to  the  twentieth. 
The  reader,  however,  can  easily 
supply   them  for  himself  from  the 


commencements  of  the  several 
chapters  in  which  the  points  are 
discussed.  The  words  ne  men  .  .  . 
171  \is  part  foim  the  conclusion  of 
the  twentieth  point. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


457 


25.  Also  byschopis  and  freris  putten  to  pore  men  J)at  \qi 
seyne,  ]>at  men  of  J?o  Chirche  schulden  not  ride  on  so  stronge 
horses,  ne  use  so  mony  jewellis,  ne  precious  clo}>es,  ne  delicate 
metus,  but  renounce  alle  ]?inges  and  ^yve  hem  to  pore  men, 
goynge  on  feete,  and  takynge  stafes  in  hondes,  receyvynge  \o 
state  of  pore  men,  in  5yvynge  ensaumple  of  holynes  by  ]?eire 
conversacione. 

To  ]?ese  poyntes  pore  men  onsweren  by  autorite  of  holy 
writte  and  of  seyntus,  and  by  open  dedis  of  men  jjat  may  not 
be  denyed ;  makynge  ]?is  protestacione,  ]?at  if  ])ei  erren  in  ony 
poynt  of  J?eire  onswerynge,  J^ei  submytten  hem  to  be  correctid 
openly  to  ]?o  kynge  and  his  chivalrye  and  Jjo  clergye  and 
comyns,  ^e,  by  dej^e,  if  hit  be  justly  demed  lawefulle. 

POINT   L 

Furste,  {?at  ]?is  pope  Urban  \o  sixte  beres  not  strenght  of 
Seint  Petur  in  erjje,  but  ]>ai  afFermen  hym  to  be  \o  son  of  Anti- 
criste,  ande  fat  no  verrey  pope  was  sij)  \o  tyme  of  Silvester 
pope. 

Here  Cristen  men  seyne  pleynly,  J)at  whatever  pope  or  ojjer 
preste,  in  maner  of  lyvynge  or  techynge  or  lawis-makynge,  con- 
trarius  Crist,  is  verrey  Anticrist,  adversary  of  Jesus  Crist  and 
of  his  apostlis,  ande  of  alle  Cristen  pepul.  Sees  inwardely,  alle 
5e  Cristen  pepul,  \o  meke  life  of  Jesus  Crist,  pore  and  symple 
to  Jjo  worlde,  and  ful  of  brennynge  charite,  and  puttyng  hym" 
selfe  to  penaunce  and  travayle  in  prechynge  and  prayinge, 
and  willeful  schedynge  of  his  precious  blode,  for  to  make  pes 
and  charite  and  for  to  save  mennes  soules.  Ande  sees  ^e  \o 
open  lyif  of  popes,  how  proude  ]>ai  bene,  J?at  Cristen  kyngus 
schal  kysse  })er  fete,  and  wij)  jjer  fote  j)ai  schal  kroune  \o 
emperoure,  ]?er  lorde  and  founder,  ande  J?at  emperours,  barfot, 
leden  openly,  as  men  sayne,  ])er  bridelis  a,  and  fat  all  men  fat 
schal  wif  hem  speke  schul  kisse  fer  fete,  and  calle  hem  moste 
holy  faderis,  and  moste  blessid  and  moste  mercyful  and  gracius. 
And  loke   whefer  fis  be   contrarie  to   Cristis  mekenes,   fat 


a  Such  a 
Venice,    on 


scene    took    place    at 
the  reconciliation  be- 


tween the   Emperor   Frederic  Bar- 
barossa  and  Pope  Alexander  III. 


I.  That  Pope 
Urban  is  the 
son  of  Anti- 
christ, and  no 
true  Pope. 


458 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS, 


weysche  his  disciplis  feete,  and  coome  not  for  to  be  served 
but  to  serve  ojjer  men,  and  to  gif  hys  lyife  for  redempcioun 
of  mony.  And  he  coome  not  to  seche  his  owne  glorie  by 
manhed,  but  in  alle  J)ingus  to  do  \o  wille  of  his  Fadir  of  heven. 

po  secunde  tyme,  See,  5e  Cristen  peple,  ]50  willeful  poverte 
of  Jesus  Crist,  hov7  he  hade  nou^t  by  worldly  lordschipe  one 
howse  where  he  my^t  reste  his  heved,  but  lyved  by  temporale 
almes  of  Mary  Mawdeleyne  ande  o]?er  holy  wymmen,  as  \o 
gospel  sais.  Ande  see  ^e  wisely,  whe]?er  oure  popis,  makyng 
stronge  palayces  wi}>  pore  mennus  lyvelodis,  wij?  al  ])er  glorie 
of  richesses  and  jewelis,  acorden  wi]?  J)is  porenes  of  Criste. 

po  thrid  tyme,  See,  ^ee  Cristen  pepul,  ]?o  charitabul  lyif  of 
Crist,  ande  loke  whe]>er  oure  popis  contrarien  hym.  Where  he 
was  moste  bisye  in  spirituale  occupacione,  J^ese  popis  bene 
most  bisy  in  delynge  of  beneficis  to  hem  ]?at  moste  muck 
br)niggen  or  worldly  favour.  Where  Criste  willefuUy  gafe 
tribute  to  J?o  emperoure,  Jjese  popis  robben  Cristis  rewmes  by 
))0  furste  frutes  of  mony  ]?owsande  poundis,  by  manyschynge 
of  suspendyng  and  enterdytynge  of  londis.  Where  Criste 
mekely  travelid  wij?  grete  penaunce  upon  his  fete  for  to  preche 
\o  gospel,  |)ese  popes,  more  ]?en  emperoures,  resten  in  palaycis 
chargid  wi)>  pretious,  in  ]?er  feete  and  in  al  Jjer  stynkynge 
carione,  ande  prechen  not  \o  gospel  to  Cristen  men,  but  crien 
ever  aftur  worldly  glorye  and  riches,  and  make  newe  lawes  for 
to  magnyfie  fer  worldly  state,  ]?at  Crist  and  his  apostlis  durste 
never  do.  Where  Crist  gafe  his  precious  blode  and  lyif  for 
to  make  pes  and  charite,  jjese  popis  maken  ande  mayntenys 
werre  ]?oroweout  Cristendame,  for  to  hold  ]?er  worldly  state, 
moste  contrarie  ageyne  Crist  and  his  apostlis,  ande  herto 
spenden  ])0  almes  of  kyngis,  and  oppressen  Cristen  rewmes  by 
newe  subsidies.  And,  J)at  is  werst,  j?ai  senden  indulgencis^ 
foundid  as  j)ai  faynen  on  Cristis  charite  and  his  dethe,  to  sle 
alle  men  contrarie  to  ]?eire  lustis^.      Certis  J)is  semes  contra- 


a  In  writing  thus  the  writer  might 
have  had  in  his  mind,  either  the 
expedition  of  Bishop  Spencer  to 
Flanders  in  1385,  or  the  crusade 
against  the  king  of  Castile,  indul- 
genced  and  preached  in    England 


by  Urban's  order  in  1386,  in  favour 
of  John  of  Gaunt,  who  had  \dews 
on  the  crown  of  Castile.  See  the 
curious  fragment  of  a  sennon  in 
Fasciculi  Zizaniorum  (Rolls  publi- 
cations), p.  506. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS, 


459 


rious  to  Crist  and  his  lovers.  Seynt  Robert  Grosthede  sais 
]?at  fis  court  is  cause,  welle,  and  begynnynge  of  destruccione 
of  Cristendame,  and  loser  of  al  ]jo  worlde.  Ande  trewly,  if  ]?ai 
be  ]>us  contrary  to  Crist  in  lyvynge  and  techyng,  as  J)er  open 
dedis  and  J?o  world  crien,  {>ai  ben  cursid  heretikis,  manquellars 
bodily  and  gostly,  Anticristis,  and  Sathanas  transfigurid  into 
aungelis  [of  ^]  li^t.  Ande,  as  J)is  wor])i  clerk  Grosthede  proves, 
ande^  certis  no  man  is  verrey  pope  but  in  als  myche  as  he 
sewis  Crist ;  and  in  so  myche  Cristen  men  wole  do  aftur  hym, 
ande  no  more,  for  alle  bulles  and  censuris,  for  no  creature 
of  God. 

POINT  IL 

Also  bischopis  and  freris  putten  on  pore  men  ]?at  ]?ai  sayne, 
J?at  \o  pope  may  not  graunt  ony  indulgencis,  ne  ony  o]?er  bis- 
chopis, ande  ]?at  alle  men  tristyng  in  suche  indulgencis  ben 
cursid. 

Cristen  men  seyne  ]?at  j^ese  indulgencis,  by  maner  as  J?ai 
bene  tied  in  writyng,  done  mykel  harme  to  Cristen  soulis 
and  sowneh  erroure  ageynes  fo  gospel.  Ffor  Crist  ne  his 
apostlis  never  usid  suche,  ande  ^it  ]>ai  tau^ten  al  j^at  was  nedeful 
for  salvacioun  of  mennes  soulis.  Also  };ese  indulgencis  maken 
men  for  to  bileve  not  to  ]?eir  crede,  Jfifor  if  )?ai  bileveden  \o 
comunyng  of  seintus,  J>at  is,  J)at  iche  man  in  charite  has  part  of 
Cristis  passione  and  of  alle  \o  meritis  of  ilk  seint,  as  \o  crede 
techis,  J^ai  wolden  not  coste  so  muche  aboute  dede  lede,  and 
suffer  Jjer  pore  neyghbouris  in  so  open  mescheif,  and  renne  to 
Rome  wij?  pore  mennus  lyvelode.  Also  Jjo  pepul  bilevej?  more  to 
suche  dede  bullis  J?en  to  Cristis  gospel,  for  ])ai  bileven  to  have 
more  Jjonke  of  God  for  spendyng  of  ]?er  money  at  ]?o  ordy- 
naunce  of  |?o  pope,  ]?en  to  spende  hit  on  pore  men  as  Crist 
biddis  in  \o  gospel. 

3it  J?ese  indulgencis  bene  fals,  for  so  mony  )?owsand  of  ^eris 
as  fai  speken  of  schul  never  be  bifore  j?o  day  of  dome,  and 
after  ]?ai  serven  of  nou^t.  Also  a  synneful  man  in  J)ese  indul- 
gencis presumes  more  ]?en  Crist  and  his  apostlis  wrou5ten  in 
erthe,  and  maken  hem  hey^er  )}en  God.     Ffor  God  gyves  none 

^  supplied  conjecturally.  ^  ^j^^le  ande. 


2.  That  the 
Pope  may  not 
grant  indul- 
gences, and 
that  those  who 
trust  in  them 
sire  cursed. 


460 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS, 


indulgencis  from  everlastyng  peyne,  no  but  til  hym  J)at  fynaly 
endis  in  charite ;  and  jjis  synful  man,  graunter  of  })is  pardomi, 
grauntis  to  mony  oj^er  by  his  owen  techynge.  By  ]?es  bullis 
riche  men  drede  nout  to  synne,  ande  miche  wynnynge  and 
worldly  glory  is  goten  to  worldly  prelatis  by  hem.  Ande  ]?ese 
pardomis  bene  not  grauntid  generally  for  fulfillyng  of  Goddis 
hestis  and  werkis  of  mercy  to  moste  nedy  men,  as  Crist  biddis, 
but  for  syngulere  cause  and  synguiere  place,  as  if  Anticrist 
wolde  be  chefe  lorde  and  parter  of  Cristis  passioun,  and  martir- 
dame  of  seintis,  and  over  holy  werkes.  perfore  iche  man  do  verey 
penaunce  for  his  synnes,  kepe  Goddis  hestis,  ande  do  werkis  of 
charite ;  ande  ^e  schul  have  parte  of  alle  Gods  dedis  in  al  holy 
Chirche,  als  myche  as  Gods  mercye  and  ri^twisenes  wille,  fof 
alle  popis  ande  her  bullis  were  fynally  laide  to  slepe.  Ande  more 
Jjen  a  man -disserves  by  gode  lyif  ending  in  charite  schal  he 
never  have,  for  alle  \o  bulHs  in  erthe. 


3.  That  the 
Pope  may  not 
make  canons 
nor  decretals ; 
and  if  he  does, 
no  one  is 
bound  to 
keep  them. 


POINT  III. 

Also  prelatis  and  freris  putten  on  pore  men  ])at  ]>ai  sayne, 
\2X  \o  pope  may  not  make  canouns,  j)at  is,  rewlis,  or  decretalis, 
or  constituciouns ;  ande  if  he  make  ony,  no  man  is  holden  for  to 
kepe  hem. 

Here  Cristen  men  seyne,  Jiat  no  pope  may  make  lawfully  ony 
lawe  contrary  to  \o  gospel,  ne  superfine,  ne  by  his  lawes  with- 
drawe  men  fro  studiyng  ne  kepynge  holy  writte,  ne  sette  more 
bisynes  ne  prys  by  suche  newe  lawis  J)en  by  \o  gospel  of  Jhesu 
Criste.  If  he  do  ageynes  j?ese,  he  is  cursid  of  God  ande  of  alle 
his  seintis.  Ande  no  man  schulde  receyve  suche  lawes,  nou]?er 
for  lyve  ne  dethe.  Ande  sithen  ]?e  popis  lawis  semen  ful  but 
contrary  to  hem  self,  and  olde  lawes  made  of  holy  men  con- 
trary to  newe  decretalis,  made  of  synful  men  for  worldly  powere 
and  godis,  in  suppressing  of  kynges  state  and  destroyynge  of 
obediens  of  prestis  to  lordis,  )>at  God  commaundid  ful  myche, 
Cristen  lordis  schulden  J?erfore  avyse  of  J>ese  lawes,  jjat  venyme 
coome  not  in  under  coloure  of  holynes,  lest  Jjo  ordynaunce  of 
Crist  in  holy  lyvynge,  trewe  techynge,  and  gostly  occupacioun, 
be  destroyed  or  hyndrid,   ande   Anticristis  ordynaunce,   and 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS, 


461 


worldly  pompe,  and  worldly  occupacioun  of  his  proude  prestis, 
and  robbyng  of  comyns  by  fals  statutis  and  customys,  be  mag- 
nified into  destniccione  of  Cristis  religione.  And  si)?en  mennes 
wittis  bene  febler  J?en  elder  seintis  wittis,  and  oure  lyve  myche 
schorter,  and  holy  writte  so  depe  of  understondyng,  and  ever 
nedeful  and  profitable,  whi  ]?en  schul  Cristen  men  be  chargid 
wi|?  so  mony  statutis  of  worldly  prestis,  J^at  J?ai  may  nout  knowe 
holy  writte  for  studying  of  hem?  Ande  if  ))ai  fayle  in  one 
poynt  of  J?ese  newe  statutis  made  of  covetouse  men,  ))ai  schal 
be  more  punischid  J)erfore  }?en  for  brekynge  of  alle  Goddis  hestis. 
Si})en  mony  of  jjese  newe  lawis  of  worldly  prestis  bene  contrary 
to  Gods  wille,  and  lewid  men  witten  not  whiche  ])ai  bene,  ande 
also  }>ai  done  away  \o  fredame  of  Cristis  gospel,  ande  oppressen 
Cristen  men  wrongefully,  hit  nedis  ]?at  Cristen  men  entermete 
hem  not  of  hem,  for  dred  of  gostly  veneme,  til  Jjai  bene  fully 
declarid,  but  holde  hem  to  J?o  gospel  and  Goddus  commaund- 
mentis,  to  werkis  of  mercy,  and  iche  man  do  treuth  and  charite 
iche  one  til  o]?er. 

POINT  IV. 

Also  bischopis  ande  freris  putten  upon  pore  Cristen  men  Jjat 
\2X  seyne,  j>at  of  onely  contricione  of  hert  al  synne  is  done 
away,  wij^outen  schrift  of  mouth,  ne  Jjat  schrift  of  mouth  is 
nedeful,  ^he,  where  plenty  or  leyser  of  a  preste  may  be  hade. 

Here  Cristen  men  seyne  boldily,  j^at  verrey  contricion  of  hert, 
])at  is  never  wiJ?outen  speciale  grace  of  God  and  charite,  does 
away  alle  synnes  bifore  done  of  J)at  man  ]>at  is  verrey  contrite, 
\oi  alle  prestus  nowe  in  erthe  were  unborne.  Ande  wijiouten 
verrey  contricione  is  no  remissione  of  synne,  what  ever  men 
blabiren.  Moreover  confessione  made  by  mouthe  to  a  wise 
preste  of  lyvynge,  ]jat  boJ?e  can,  and  for  grete  charite  techis  \o 
treuthe  of  Gods  dome,  dos  muche  gode,  and  to  suche  hit  spedis 
fat  men  schewe  hor  lyif.  Ande  certis  confessione  made  to  a 
vicious  preste,  unknowynge  holy  writte,  hauntyng  his  ofiice  fro 
worldly  wynnyng  more  })en  for  charite  to  save  mennys  soules, 
J)0  suyng  of  his  counsel  dos  miche  harme,  and  ledis  mony  soulis 
to  helle.  Ande  sithen  comynly  alle  grete  prelatis  been  ful  of 
symony  and  covetise,  wrong  wastyng  of  pore  mennes  lyvelode, 


4-  That  true 
contrition  does 
away  sin,  and 
oral  confession 
is  unnecessary. 


46z 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


S.  That  the 
worship  of 
images  is  un- 
lawful and 
accursed. 


ande  cursid  man-quellers  for  defaute  of  trewe  prechyng,  sechyng 
|)eir  worldly  glory  more  ]jen  salvacion  of  Cristen  soulis,  }>at  is 
ful  perilouse  to  constrayne  lewde  men  to  sewe  J)er  counseile, 
and  leefe  cunnjoig  prestis  and  clene  of  lyif,  doyng  \er  office 
aftur  \o  heste  of  Crist  als  fer  as  mannes  dome  stretchis ;  sithen 
he  ]?at  slees  hymselfe  has  no  charite  of  o]?er. 

Ande  ]?is  poynt  comys  ofte  by  Jjer  newe  decretalis,  a^eyne  \o 
olde  decre  made  of  Seint  Austenn,  and  grounde  of  holy  writte 
and  resoun.  Certis,  as  holy  prestis  of  lyvynge,  and  cunnynge 
of  holy  writte,  han  keyes  of  heven,  and  bene  vicars  of  Jesus 
Crist,  so  viciouse  prestis,  unkonnynge  of  holy  writte,  ful  of 
pride  and  covetise,  han  keyes  of  helle  and  bene  vicaris  of 
Sathanas,  deceife  mannes  soules  by  feyned  jurisdiccione  of 
Anticrist.  Ande  sithen  ]?ese  new  lawus  of  confessioun  done 
away  ]?o  liberte  of  Cristis  gospel  and  resoun,  and  bene  horde  of 
synne,  and  mayntenyng  of  alle  pride  and  cursidnes  boj^e  of 
clerkis  ande  lewid  men,  hit  is  nede  j?at  men  do  verrey  penaunce 
for  her  synnes,  and  triste  to  Cristis  presthode  }>at  never  may 
faile,  and  seke  trewe  prestis  ande  witty  of  Gods  wille,  and  do 
aftur  hem  in  als  muche  as  J?ai  teche  Goddis  dome,  and  no 
ferjjer  for  no  creature. 

POINT  V. 

Also  bischopis  ande  freris  putten  to  pore  Cristen  men  ))at  J^ai 
seyne,  J^at  ymagis  of  Cristis  crosse,  of  \o  crucifixe,  of  ]?o  blessid 
Vergyne  Mary,  and  of  ojjer  seintus,  in  no  maner  bene  worjji  to 
be  worschipid,  but  ]?at  alle  men  worschipynge  in  ony  manere 
)?oo  ymagis  or  any  payntyngus,  synnen  ande  done  ydolatry,  and 
Jjat  God  dose  not  ony  myracle  by  hem,  and  \2X  alle  men  doynge 
pilgrimage  to  hem,  or  ony  manere  hem  worschipynge,  or  put- 
tyng  lighttis  or  ony  devocions  bifore  ]?oo  ymagis,  bene  cursid. 

Here  Cristen  men  seyne,  J)of  ymagis  my^tten  be  sufferid  for 
lewid  men,  in  defaute  of  prechyng  ]?at  prestis  schulden  do, 
noJ?oles  ymagis  ]?at  representen  pompe  and  glorie  of  ])0  worlde, 
— as  if  Criste  hade  bene  crucified  wi}>  golden  clojjis  ande  golden 
schone,  and  as  hys  pore  apostilis  hade  lyved  in  worldely  glory, 
and  ojjer  seintes  also,  and  herinne  haden  plesid  God, — ^bene 
false   ymagys  and   bokis   of  heresye  wor]?i   to   be  destroyed, 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


463 


nomely  when  )jo  lewid  pepul  honouris  hem  for  God  and  seyntis, 
and  done  more  honour  to  hem  Jjen  to  God  and  Cristis  body. 
And  as  J?o  nobul  kyng  Ezechye  distroyed  fo  neddur  of  bras  when 
\o  peple  did  ydolatrie  j^erby,  noutwi})Stondynge  J>at  {?at  same  ser- 
pent was  made  by  Moyses  at  Gods  biddyng,  myche  more  ]?ese 
false  ymagis  made  of  synnefull  men,  sifen  noufer  God,  ne 
Crist  by  his  monhede,  gafe  never  commaundement  to  make 
Jjese,  ne  counseile,  ne  his  apostilis  in  al  holy  writte.  perfore 
Cristen  men  schulden  worschip  \o  holy  Trinite  and  seintis,  ande 
not  })ese  ymagis,  as  Seint  Gregorie  techis  in  his  registre  a. 

A  !  grete  blyndenes  is  in  \o  pepul,  ]?at  ]>ai  costen  so  myche 
aboute  a  roten  stock,  ande  ofFeren  faste  ]?erat,  and  suffren  a  pore 
man,  verrey  ymage  of  \o  holy  Trinite^mad  of  God  hymselfe, 
for  to  lye  in  muche  mescheif,  and  seken  not  hym  to  helpe  hym 
by  ]?er  powere;  sij^en  God  commaundus  l?is  upon  peyne  of 
dampnacione,  and  of  ]?at  o}?er  ofifrynge  he  never  bad  ne  coun- 
seylid  in  holy  writte.  Hit  semes  ]?at  }>is  offrynge  to  ymagis  is 
a  sotile  caste  of  Anticriste  and  his  clerkis,  for  to  drawe  almes 
fro  pore  men,  and  cumber  worldly  prestis  with  muck,  ]?at  \2x 
nou|?er  know  God  ne  hemselfe,  but  maken  sacrifise  to  Sathanas 
by  glotony,  lecherye,  pride,  slouthe,  envie,  and  many  o})er 
synnes.  For  j>ai  ben  verreyly  wode,  if  ony  trewe  man  teche  \o 
hestis  of  God  and  werkis  of  mercy  to  ony  nedy  man,  for  defaut 
of  whiche  werkis  men  schul  be  dampned  wijjouten  ende.  Certis, 
]?ese  ymagis  of  hemselfe  may  do  nou]?er  gode  ne  yvel  to  mennis 
soulis,  but  ]?ai  my^tten  warme  a  mannes  body  in  colde,  if  ]jai 
were  sette  upon  a  fire,  ande  Jjo  silver  ande  jewelis  upon  hem 
wolden  profite  to  pore  men,  and  \o  waxe  for  to  li^t  pore  men 
and  creaturis  at  fer  werke.  If  men  wille  have  ymagis  of  tre  or 
stone  or  o]?er  wyse  payntid,  be  J)ai  suche  j?at  techen  \o  povert 
ande  peynus  of  seintis,  and  forsakynge  of  worldly  vanite  after 
Cristis  lyve  and  his  seintis,  and  ]jen  let  Jjo  waste  coste  of  ymagis 
be  delud  ferth  fully  to  pore  men,  ande  not  to  stockis  ne  to 
stonys,  ]?at  never  have  honger  colde  ne  Jurist,   ne  to  riche 


a  Gregory  the  Great  (Epistles, 
IX.  105,  and  XL  13)  forbids  that 
images  should  be  adored,  but  re- 
proves those  who  broke  them,  ap- 


prehending such  adoration.  He 
speaks  of  them  as  the  books  of  the 
unlearned. 


464 


WYC LIE'S  WORKS. 


-  6.  That  all 
priests  and 
deacons  are 
bound  to 
preach  the 
gfospel, 
■whether  they 
have  cure  of 
souls  or  not. 


Mai.  iL  7. 


bischopis  munkis  and  riche  prestis,  ]?at  have  myche  waste 
tresoure,  and  wasten  pore  mennes  lyvelode  to  ]jer  dampnacione, 
if  ])ai  ben  nout  founden  doyng  verrey  penaunce  ]?erfore.  And 
]jen  many  ymagis  made  of  hem  schal  sone  cees,  and  y mages  of 
J)0  holy  Trinite  be  worschipid  and  holpen. 

POINT  VI. 

Also  prelatis  and  freris  beren  upon  pore  men  )?at  ]?ai  seyne, 
\2X  alle  prestis  ande  dekenys  bene  holden  for  to  preche  \o  gospel 
openly,  by  resoun  of  order  taken,  \oi  Jjai  have  not  pepul  ne 
cure  of  soulus. 

Here  Cristen  men  seyne  stedefastly,  ]?at  iche  preste  ande 
deken  is  holden  by  ])0  ordynaunce  of  Jesus  Criste  for  to  preche 
J)0  gospel  to  Cristen  peple,  boJ>e  by  ensaumple  of  holy  lyfe,  and 
faithful  ande  sadde  techynge,  ande  willefully  suffer  tribulacion 
))erfore,  if  hit  come  not  for  worldely  savour  and  wynnyng  of 
muck,  but  princepally  for  Jjonke  of  God  and  love  of  savyng  of 
Cristen  soulis,  \oi  al  he  do  no  symony  for  a  benefice  upon 
synneful  mennes  departyng.  Ande  if  a  symonyent  bischop 
5yve  hym  not  lettre  of  newe  licence,  for  ]>o  autorite  of  God  ande 
charge  taken  of  hym,  by  his  grace  dispendyug  in  charite,  his 
cunnyng  is  ynogh^e  for  to  do  his  office,  ]?of  a  worldely  preste 
cry  oute  a^eynes  holy  writte  ande  charite,  blasphemyng  ]?at  a 
trewe  preste  schal  not  do  mercy  ne  charite  to  his  bro])er  wi])- 
outen  his  lettre  and  leeve,  as  if  he  were  Goddis  mayster,  and 
fat  men  schulden  more  obeysche  to  hym  and  his  cursid  blas- 
phemy, ))en  to  God  Almy^tty  and  his  ri^tful  commaundement  of 
charite.  In  J^o  olde  law  dekenys  crieden  ]jo  commaunde- 
mentus  of  God,  ande  in  \o  newe  lawe  Jjai  prechid  \o  gospel,  as 
Seint  Steven  and  o)?er.  Also  in  J?o  olde  lawe  bo]?e  Cristen 
kyngus  and  hethen,  as  Josias,  Nabugodonosor,  ande  o])er,  prech- 
iden  God  ande  his  myraclis ;  myche  more  prestis,  aungelis  of 
God  by  })er  office,  as  God  seis  by  \o  prophete  Malachie,  schulde 
preche  \o  gospel.  Ande  Crist  bad  his  disciplis  preche  |?o  gos- 
pel to  iche  creature ;  ande  by  \o  same  gospel  ])at  prestis  have 
autorite  for  to  make  \o  sacrament  of  \o  auter,  J^at  is  verrey 
Cristis  body,  by  Jjo  same  gospelle  han  prestis  autorite  for  to 
preche.     And  als  generaly  as  J)ai  have  ))at  one,  als  generally  j?ai 

WYCLIF. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS, 


4^5 


have  J)at  ojjer.  Also  ]?o  two  ande  seventy  disciplis  hadden 
powere  for  to  preche,  and  jjerto  Criste  sende  hem,  in  whom 
alle  prestis  bene  understonden,  as  holy  doctouris  ande  comyne 
lawe  wdtnessen.  Also  Seint  Gregore  techis  m  his  Pastorallis  ^ 
and  in  )?o  comune  lawe,  ])at  who  ever  comes  to  prestehode  takis 
]?o  voyce  of  a  crier  for  to  crye  bifore  ]?o  dome,  and  ellis  he 
stiris  ]?o  wrathe  of  God  a^eynus  hymselfe.  Seynt  Jerome  sais 
on  \o  Sauter,  )>at  every  preste  verrey  owes  to  have  schewing  of 
Gods  worde,  fat  he  teche  alle  men.  Also  Seinte  Austyne  upon 
J)0  gospel  of  Jon  seis,  ]?at  everiche  Cristen  man  schal  drawe  fro 
synne  whom  ever  he  may,  by  worde,  by  monestynge,  by  chas- 
tysynge,  if  fo  charite  of  God  be  in  hym.  Ande  to  ]?is  acorden 
Crisostome  ande  mony  ojjer.  Lo !  worldly  prestis  for  J^eire  pride 
ande  covetise  willen  nout  suffer  Gods  aungelis  to  do  his  mes- 
sage, leste  ])eire  heresie,  symony,  and  cursidnes  were  knowen, 
but  rajjer  willen  make  alle  men  dampned  in  ))at  J)at  in  hem  is, 
for  mayntenyng  of  Jjer  heresie. 

POINT  VII. 

Also  prelatis  ande  freris  beren  upon  symple  men  J)at  ]>ai 
sayne,  J?at  nouj^er  cursynge  of  pope  ne  of  bischop  byndes. 

Here  Cristen  men  witnessen  hardily  Jjat  no  wrongeful  curse 
of  ony  prelate  in  erthe  byndis  aneyntys  God.  But  when  ]?ai 
cursen  wrongefully,  stondynge  pacience  and  charite  in  hym  ]?at 
is  cursid  of  hem,  he  is  blessed  of  Almy^tty  God  in  Trinite  and 
alle  his  seintis.  And  no  creature  of  God  may  harme  ])is  mannes 
soule  {)us  stondynge,  ne  pyne  his  body  no  but  to  his  sovereyn 
glory,  ande  blis  wiJ?outen  ende.  Over  ]?is  we  seyne,  jjat  no  man 
schuld  bere  fals  wittenessynge  ageynus  his  broj^er,  seyynge  hym 
cursid  whom  God  and  alle  his  aungellis  blessen,  by  evydence  of 
man,  for  kepyng  of  his  lawe,  ]?of  a  synneful  a  ^  prelate  openly 
reverse  Gods  dome  by  his  lettre  cursynge  hym.     Ffor  no  faith- 

^  dele  a. 

a  S.  Greg.  Reg,  Pasioralis,  Pars  I,  accedit :  ut  ante  adventum  judicis 
cap.  4.  '  Praeconis  quippe  officinm  qui  terribiliter  sequitur,  ipse  scilicet 
suscipit,    quisquis    ad    sacerdotimn       clamando  gradiatur.' 

WORKS.      VOL.    III.  H  h 


7.  That  neither 
papal  nor  epi- 
scopal anathe- 
mas are  bind- 
ing. 


466 


WrCLIF'S  WORKS. 


8.  That  to  pray 
to  the  Saints  is 
superfluous, 
and  that  many- 
so-called  saints 
are  now  in 
hell. 


fal  Cristen  man  may  wi]?drawe  charitable  commynyng  and  helpe 
in  Gods  cause  for  blaspheme  lettres  of  covetouse  prelatis,  when 
he  knowis  no  notable  defaute  in  his  broker,  but  perceyves  pleyne 
treuth  and  gode  resoun,  \2X  his  bro]?er  spekis  and  mayntenys. 
perfore  no  trewe  Cristen  man  schortly  wil  renne  into  Goddis 
curse  for  a  blaste  of  Sathanas,  ne  for  worldly  Jjanke  and  flat- 
eryng  of  Anticristis  clerkis. 

POINT  VIII. 

Also  prelatis  and  freris  beren  upon  pore  symple  men  l?at  J?ei 
seyne,  J^at  hit  is  not  to  beseche  to  seintis  for  to  pray  for  lyvynge 
men,  ne  \o  Letany  is  to  be  seide.  Sothely  Jjai  afifermen  ]>at 
God  may  do  alle  ]?ingis  wijjouten  hem,  ne  ]?at  hit  is  bileve  ))at 
J?ai  bene  seintis  whom  we  clepen  seintis,  but  ])ai  prechen  mony 
of  hem  for  to  be  in  helle  whos  halidais  Jjo  Chirche  hallowis  a. 

Here  Cristen  men  seyne  ]?at  \o  maner  of  prayynge  ]?at  Crist 
tau^t,  for  to  pray  to  God  for  hys  worschipe  to  be  encresid  and 
for  commyne  profite  of  holy  Chirche,  is  bettur  ))en  ony  o]?er 
manere  founden  of  synneful  men  for  syngulere  affeccione.  No- 
]?oles  men  may  wele  pray  to  o]?er  seintis,  J^at  }>ai  be  meenys 
bytwixe  Crist  ande  hem,  in  als  muche  as  hit  stiris  hem  to  love 
more  God,  and  no  for)?er,  so  |?at  ])ai  know  wele  J?at  no  seint  in 
heven  may  graunte  ony  J^inge,  ne  spedis,  ne  but  as  God  grauntis 
hit  furst.  Ande  nouj^er  God  ne  alle  his  seintus  willen  heren 
men  for  no  rabul  of  wordis,  ne  curiouse  florischynge  in  ryme, 
ne  but  aftur  ]?er  holy  desire  and  charite  ande  gode  lyve,  for  ]?er 
aftur  God  lokys.  Ande  sithen  God  is  moste  my^tty  for  to  helpe 
us,  moste  witty  in  knowyng  what  is  spedeful  to  us,  and  lovyng 
for  to  3yve  us  ]?at  us  moste  nedis  and  helpis,  and  no  seint  may 
do  ony  ]?inge  wi}>outen  his  leeve,  and  he  a  Jjousande  folde  more 
redy  to  here  and  helpe  ))en  ony  creature,  hit  were  no  grete 


a  This  opinion,  that  many  who 
are  called  saints  are  in  hell,  the  hold- 
ing of  which  by  the  sect  the  writer  of 
the  tract  does  not  dispute,  indicates  a 
later  stage  of  development,  and  is 
enough  of  itself  to  show  that  Wyclif 
was  not  the  author.  WycHf's  opin- 
ion, repeated  in  various  places  of  his 


works,  was,  that  many  who  are  called 
saints  had  done  wrong,  e.g.  the 
founders  of  the  Mendicant  orders, 
but  that,  as  they  had  probably  re- 
pented before  their  death,  they  might 
charitably  be  supposed  to  have  got 
to  heaven. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS, 


467 


perile  if  we  directen  oure  prayers  to  God  onely,  as  Crist  and 
his  modur  diden,  and  his  apostilis,  and  tau^ten  us  to  do  so ;  fifor 
onely  God  may  do  alle  |?inge  withouten  hem,  and  ]?ai  mot  nedis 
pray  for  us,  so  J>at  we  serve  God  trewly,  for  alle  hyngus  in  hym. 
And  no  doute  Cristen  men  m.y5tten  be  saved  by  J?at  feith  }>at 
Criste  tau^t  in  kep3nig  of  his  hestis,  ]?of  ])ai  be  not  chargid  iche 
^ere  wij?  newe  articlis  of  bileve  and  newe  servyce,  for  ]?o  olde 
\2X  God  ordeyned  is  ynogh3e.  Ande  a  thowsand  jjowsandis  bene 
moo  seintis  in  heven  )?en  we  kanonysen  in  \o  kalendar ;  and 
sijien  popis  and  prelatis,  as  fer  dedis  openly  schewen,  ben  un- 
connyng  in  holy  writte  and  holy  lyife,  proudely  lyvynge,  fulle  of 
fleschly  affeccions  and  covetise,  by  fals  wittenessis  ]>ai  moone 
sone  be  deceyved  in  canonysynge  of  sum  riche  man.  Ffor 
comynly,  if  ony  trewe  man  wille  impugne  or  contrary  ]?eire 
worldly  life,  ande  telle  out  feire  cursidnes  to  \o  pepul  as  God 
biddis,  J)ai  wil  not  canonyse  hym  j?ow  he  dye  in  \\%  poynt,  ande 
be  never  so  fervent  in  charite,  as  hit  felle  of  Robert  Grosthede  a. 
How  gloriouse  a  cause  he  had,  ande  pleyne  treuthe,  and  comyne 
profite  of  holy  Chirche,  and  what  gloriouse  bokis  he  wrote, 
more  J?en  any  oJ?er  grete  seintis  of  J)is  londe,  to  comyne  profite 
of  al  Cristendame  ! 

Certis,  ]?is  court  wil  enforce  hit  to  dampne  by  cursynge  or 
prively  murthur  trewe  men  ))at  tellen  \o  treuthe  of  prestehode, 
gromidynge  hem  upon  Criste  ande  his  lawis,  schewynge  \o 
state  of  kyngis  ande  lordis,  how  falsely  hit  is  borne  doune  by 
ypocrisy  and  blaspheme  power  of  Anticristis  clerkis.  perfore 
Cristen  men  wilen  bileve  to  Criste  ande  to  his  lawe  and  holde 
hem  seintis  |)at  ben  expressid  in  holy  writte,  ande  alle  ojjer  sup- 
pose bynethe  [bileve]  ^,  as  ]?ai  han  evydence.    Ffor  ]?ese  worldly 

^  supplied  conjecturally. 


»  Foxe,  in  his  Acts  and  Monu- 
ments, quotes  largely  from  Ranulf 
Higden,  Matthew  Paris,  and  the 
author  of  the  Flores  Historiarum, 
on  the  subject  of  the  denial  of  cano- 
nization by  the  court  of  Rome  to 
Robert  Grosthede,  and  the  marvel- 
lous apparition  of  the  holy  bishop 
to  Innocent  IV,  who,  being  fright- 
ened out  of  his  wits,  desisted  from 
the  design   which  he   had   formed 

H  h  2 


of  having  Robert's  bones  exhumed. 
What  such  stories  really  show  is  the 
strength  of  the  nascent  principle  of 
nationality,  which  made  English 
monks  of  the  thirteenth  and  four- 
teenth centuries  uphold  and  honour 
then*  brave  countiyman,  who  had 
stood  up  manfully  against  the  innu- 
merable encroachments,  knaveries, 
and  exactions  of  the  Roman  Curia. 


No  trust  can 
be  reposed  in 
the  power  that 
now  canonizes. 


468 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


9.  That  tithes 
should  not  be 
paid  to  bad 
pnests,  nor 
money  given 
for  churching, 
or  masses  for 
the  dead. 


clerkis  may  crie  l?at  a  grete  seint  is  dampned,  for  he  contraries 
Jjer  lustis,  ande  ])at  a  cursid  fende  ])at  died  in  open  heresie  is  a 
grete  seint  in  heven,  for  he  was  frend  to  hem  or  enrichid  hem. 
When  prestis  ande  clerkis  weren  bisye  in  studyynge  of  holy 
writte,  and  forsoken  worldly  pompe  and  vanite,  and  lyveden  in 
mekenes,  sympulnes,  charite,  and  gostily  travaile  aftnr  Cristas 
techynge,  hit  was  grete  evydence  ]?at  God  schewid  to  hem  who 
was  saved.  But  nowe,  hem  turned  alle  to  J>o  worlde  and  pride 
and  covetise,  men  dreden  lest  God  suffer  \o  fende  to  disseyve 
hem  in  mony  dedis  ]?at  |?ai  done ;  as  cronyclis  schewen  ]?at  ]?at 
one  pope  canonyses,  anoJ?er  dampnes,  and  a5eynward;  ande 
holy  writte  wittenessis  ]?at  Anticrist  schal  deceife  by  false 
myracHs  hem  j^at  hadde  no  charite  ande  trewthe.  perfore  hit 
is  no  poynt  of  bileve  ]?at,  if  ]?ai  done  or  seyne  ony  ))inge,  ]>at  God 
approves  hit. 

POINT  IX. 

Also  prelatis  ande  freris  putten  to  Cristen  men  })at  )>ai  seyne, 
hit  ys  not  to  gife  dymes  to  a  persoun  beyng  in  dedely  synne,  ne 
offryngus,  ne  devociouns  of  money  owen  to  be  made  in  puryfy- 
ingis  of  wymmen,  ne  in  halowynge,  ne  in  syngynge  of  massis 
for  dede  men. 

pis  poynt,  as  mony  o)?er  ande  almoste  alle  ]?er  poyntus, 
bene  medelid  wi)?  lesyngus.  Wherfore  Cristen  men  seyne 
pleynly,  \2X  if  hit  be  knowen  ]?at  persouns  comen  to  ))er 
benefices  by  symony,  or  lyven  in  notary  fornicacione,  or  done 
not  ])er  offices  by  ensaumpul  of  holy  lyife  in  trewe  prechynge, 
but  couchen  in  lordis  courtis  wrappid  wij?  seculere  ofi&ces,  ande 
contynuen  openly  in  j^ese  cursidnessis,  men  schulden  not 
receyve  hem  for  persouns,  ne  gif  to  hem  tythis,  leste  })ai  bene 
acursid  for  consent  ande  mayntenynge  of  o}>er  open  synne. 
For  if  }?ai  bene  symonyens  ]>ai  bene  heretikis,  cursid  of  God 
and  alle  his  seintus,  as  Gods  lawe  ande  mannes  lawe  wittenessen 
in  many  placis.  For  if  J^ai  be  open  lechouris,  l?o  lawe  forbedis 
hem  to  say  a  masse,  and  j?o  pepul  is  forbiden  in  \o  same  lawe 
])at  jjai  here  not  Jjer  masse,  ande  ))at  suche  prestis  take  no  part 
of  ]?o  chirche  godis,  as  ]?er  owne  lawe  wittenessis  %  wij)  gode 

*  See  ante,  p.  224. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


469 


resoun  and  grounde  of  holy  writte.  And  if  )?ai  lyven  proudely, 
wi])drawyng  techyng  of  Gods  worde,  wrappyng  hem  in  secu- 
lere  offices,  ]>ai  bene  cursud  and  manslears  ande  thefis  ande 
ravynouris,  as  Goddus  lawe  ande  mannes  ande  resoun  mtte- 
nessen;  as  Seynt  Austyne,  Gregore,  and  mony  moo  proven. 
Ffor  if  he  is  cursud  J?at  wi|7holdis  ony  dewte  of  holy  Chirche 
\2it  God  commaundis,  muche  more  }>ai  bene  cursid  |)at  wi]?- 
drawen  ensaumple  of  holy  lyife  ande  trewe  techyng,  si})en 
J>is  is  moste  dewte,  ande  moste  medeful  and  nedefnl,  and  beste 
meene  to  helpe  holy  Chirche.  Mony  bokis  bo})e  of  Gregore 
and  Austen  seyne  playnely,  J>at  ]?e  schepard  slees  Cristen  soulis, 
when  he  is  stille  and  cries  not  ageyne  her  synnes.  Ande  Ysaie 
sais,  ]?at  suche  bene  doumbe  houndus  J?at  may  not  berken. 
And  Seint  Austeyne  in  ]?o  comyne  lawe  sais,  fat  suche  a  bischop 
is  ra]?er  an  unschamefast  dogge  ]?en  a  bischop.  Cristen  men 
schulden  have  fredome  in  al  ]?er  doynge  nowe  to  offer  or  leve, 
whefer  ]?eire  conscience  redid  by  Goddis  lawe  ande  resoun 
thynkis  beste ;  and  ]?ai  schulden  not  be  constrayned  for  a  blynde 
devocioun  or  worldly  schame,  for  to  bringe  money  to  hem  ]?at 
jjai  knowen  for  to  have  no  nede,  ande  for  to  waste  pore  mennys 
lyvelode  in  tavernys  and  rybawdery,  and  suffer  ]?er  neyghburis 
in  myche  meschefe,  and  J?ai  hemself  endette  hem  for  siche 
ofFrynge. 

POINT  X. 

And  prelatis  and  freris  putten  to  symple  men  Jjat  J?ai  seyne, 
]?at  \o  pope,  cardynalis,  archebischops,  bischopis,  archedekenys, 
denys,  and  alle  grete  personys  of  j)0  Chirche,  bene  cursid. 

Here  Cristen  men  committen  J?is  to  Goddis  dome  and  to  J?er 
owne  conscience,  and  to  wise  demyng  of  \o  pepul,  whe|?er  J?ai 
bene  cursid  for  ]?er  symonye,  pride,  covetise,  ravayne  of  pore 
mennys  godis,  levyng  of  prechynge,  and  for  lecherye,  glotony, 
and  cursid  lesyngus,  and  manquellyng,  bo]?e  of  mannus  bodies 
and  soulis.  po  grete  clerk  Grosthede  proves  by  holy  writte  and 
grete  resone,  in  a  sermone  ]?at  he  prechid  in  Rome,  and  gafe 
hit  written  to  }?o  pope  and  mony  cardynalis,  and  in  mony  moo 
sermones,  )?at  fo  pope  wij?  his  courte  was  cause  ande  grounde 
of  alle  yvelis  in  ]?o  Chirche,  not  onely  for  he  distroyed  nout 


10.  That  the 
wliole  hier- 
archy of  the 
Church  is 
accursed. 


470 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS, 


open  errouris,  when  he  is  moste  bounden  ]?erto,  and  best  may, 
but  also  for  he  makis  unable  curatis,  l?at  bene  lesars  of  ^o 
worlde.  Also  \o  pope  pursues  more  cruely  Jesus  Crist  in  his 
membris  }?en  kyng  Herode  and  Jewis,  |?at  diden  nayle  hym  on 
jjo  crosse.  Also  ]?o  pope  settis  more  pris  by  temporale  dritte 
J}an  by  mannys  soulis,  ande  by  seculere  frendeschipe  and 
favoure  of  fleschely  love  J^en  by  J?o  blode  and  deth  of  Goddis 
Son,  J?at  was  rannisome  for  mannes  soules.  And  he  techis  alle 
seculere  lordis,  and  alle  j)0  world,  for  to  do  \o  same  cursidnes. 
And  curatis  ]?at  prechen  not  J)0  gospel,  wij)  clene  lyvyng  and 
for  love  of  mannes  soules,  bene  dede  in  hemself,  slears  of 
mennys  soulis,  Antecristis  heretikis,  and  Sathanas  transfigurid 
into  an  aungel  of  ly3t,  and  )?at  Jjai  bene  more  abomynable  to 
God  and  to  J?o  court  of  heven  fen  ])0  cursudde  synne  of  So- 
dome,  ]?at  for  hidouse  synne  sanke  into  helle.  pis  clerk  proved 
playnly  alle  ]?ese  scharpe  poyntis,.  ande  mony  moo ;  ande  al  J>a 
popis  court  couth  not  say  nay  by  holy  writte  and  reson ;  and  if 
hit  be  nowe  werse  ]?en  hit  was  Jjen  in  his  tyme,  so  myche  ]?ai 
bene  more  cursud.  Avyse  hem  wele  how  hidousely  God  by  his. 
prophet  cursis  wayward  curatis,  and  how  playnely  Seint  Jerome, 
Gregore,  and  Austyne,  and  nomely  Seint  Bernarde  and  Grost- 
hede,  crien  out  on  ]?er  open  heresies,  and  deme  |;ai  }>en  hem- 
selfe  whe]?er  })ai  bene  cursid  or  nay.  Hit  semes  playnly  fat 
Judas  was  not  so  cursid  as  fai,  for  ravayne  of  pore  mennys 
lifelode  done  under  coloure  of  holynes  passis  fo  crueltie  of  alle 
robbers,  as  Seint  Jerome  wittenessis  in  his  epistilis,  and  Bernard 
also;  and  for  fai  betray  en  mony  fowsandis  of  soulis  to  fendys 
of  helle,  for  to  be  devourid  of  hem  in  everlastynge  dethe,  for 
temporale  avaunsyng  of  sum  one  man,  where  Criste  Gods  Son 
died  moste  payneful  deth  for  ich  one  of  hem,  as  Grosthed 
^vittenessis  in  ]?o  same  sermone.  And  Judas  knowlachid  his 
trespas,  and  restorid  ]?o  money  falsly  taken ;  but  fese  prelatis 
contynuen  in  fer  heresies  and  blasphemyes,  and  restoren  not  to 
pore  men  }>er  godis  taken  by  extorsioun.  And  if  ony  trewe 
man  for  Gods  sake  crie  a^eynes  fese  heresies,  fai  pursuen  hym 
to  dethe  by  lesyngis,  and  murtheren  hym  wifouten  open 
onswere,  lest  J)0  pepul  conceyve  f>o  trouthe  of  Gods  lawe  and 
amende    hem.     pis   cursidnes    did   not   Judas,   ne   Nero,   ne 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


All 


Julianus   apostata,   ne   Mathamet,   ne    Sergius   \o  munck,  his 
techer. 

Wherfore  if  })ai  amenden  hem  not  in  J^is  worlde  by  verrey 
penaunce  ande  satisfaccioun,  ]?ai  schui  be  depper  dampned  ])en 
Judas  Scarioth,  as  hit  semes  by  mony  resouns.  Wherfore  now 
Judas  may  wele  fourme  a  pleynt  of  disherytyng  of  his  ri^t  and 
possessione  a3eynes  worldly  prelatis.  Ffor  a  ]?owsand  5 ere 
ande  more  Judas  was  in  possessione  of  ]?is  name,  Judas  werst 
marchaunt  ^ ;  but  as  J?ai  done  more  traytory,  and  undur  coloure 
of  more  frendschip,  after  moo  beneficis  receyved  of  God,  so  }?ai 
bene  werse  marchaundis.  perfore,  lest  Jjai  fey3ten  in  helle  wij? 
Judas  and  alle  develis,  ande  J^ai  wi]?  hem  a3eynewarde,  hit  semes 
by  sum  skille  f>at  f>ese  symonyens  bene  warse  j^en  Lucifer  if  ]?ai 
amenden  hem  not,  for  ]?ai  bene  warnyd  by  his  peyne,  j?at  he 
was  not  bifore.  Also  ]>ai  synnen  of  malice  wittyngly,  as  he  did, 
ande  bene  in  state  of  medeful  penaunce  if  }>ai  wil  accept  hit,  j)at 
he  was  not,  ne  never  schal  be.  Also  }?ai  bene  lower  of  kynde 
])en  he,  and  in  myssese  Jjat  he  was,  and  )?ai  wil  be  aboven  God, 
where  he  desirid  to  be  even  to  God.  Also  Criste  is  mannes 
broJ?er,  and  suffrid  bitter  deth  for  man,  jjat  he  dide  never  for 
Lucifer.  Also  for  littel  penaunce  ande  schort  tyme,  if  men 
willen,  he  wole  forgyve  alle  ))er  synnes  ande  bringe  hem  to  \o 
blis  of  heven,  and  ]>erto  grauntis  us  longe  tyme,  ]?at  he  dide 
never  to  hym.  Also  he  made  us  to  his  awne  ymage  and 
lickenys,  J?at  we  never  rede  of  aungeL  Also  })ese  symonyens 
drawen  moo  soulis  to  synne  and  to  helle  by  J>er  cursud  lyfe, 
ande  felle  censuris,  and  sotile  tirauntry,  J?en  alle  \o  devehs  of 
helle  schuld  do  wijjouten  hem.  Mony  of  ]?ese  resouns  makis 
Seint  Austyne,  for  to  prove  \o  gretnes  of  mannes  synnes.  Pre- 
latis, here  deme  ^ee  and  wrastulis  ^ee  who  schal  be  mayster,  for 
trewly  ^ee  have  mony  resouns  to  agregge  ^oure  synne,  whiche 
has  not  Lucifer  ^oure  page,  in  tourementynge  of  Cristus 
children. 


^  For  instance,  in  the  first  of 
St.  Bernard's  Sermons  In  Qoena 
Domini  he  says,  *0  Juda  infelix,  o 


discipule  pessune,  mercator  nequam ! 
Tibi  coena  parabatur,  et  a  te  dator 
coenae  tradebatur.' 


inasmuch  as 
they  make 
worse  and 
more  wicked 
bargains  than 
Judas  him^self, 


472 


WFCLIF-S  WORKS. 


II.  That  no 
man  can  be 
saved  who  does 
not  renounce 
all  property. 
A  false  charge ; 
what  the  sect 
really  does  say. 


POINT  XI. 

Also  prelatis  and  freris  putten  to  symple  men  ]?at  ]?ai  sayne, 
)?at  no  man  schal  entur  into  \o  kyngdame  of  heven  but  if  he 
forsake  all  })inges,  in  gyvyngQ  hem  to  pore  men  onely,  sewynge 
Jesus  Crist  in  J)0  manere  of  hem. 

Here  is  open  lesyng  made  for  hate,  for  to  make  alle  men 
fey3t  ageynes  \o  treuthe  of  Jesus  Crist.  But  not  for})i  Cristen 
men  seyne  boldly,  ]?at  no  man  schal  entre  into  J)0  blis  of  heven 
but  if  he  love  God  and  his  lawe  more  ]?en  al  erthly  gode  and 
his  owne  lyife,  ande  make  restituccione  of  wronge-goten  godis 
upon  his  powere,.  and  lyve  in  trewe  meknes  and  charite,  and 
helpe  his  pore  neygheburis  at  nede  as  he  may  resonably,  and 
dye  in  ])is  charite,  ]>at  he  wolde  rajjer  be  hongud  quarterid  and 
brent,  anide  a  Jjowsande  tyme  lesen  his  lyif,  if  he  my^t,  ra|)er  ]?en 
one  breke  ony  commaundement  of  God,  or  ellis  he  loves  not 
God  over  alle  ])inge.  Seculere  men  may  have  worldly  godis 
ynowe  wijjouten  noumber  to  us  ^,  so  J>at  J>ai  gete  hem  trewly, 
and  spende  hem  to  Gods  honoure  and  furtherynge  of  treuthe 
and  helpe  of  J?er  Cristen  brejjur,  and  jjat  J)ai  sufFre  not  Anti- 
cristus  clerkis  to  distroyen  seculere  lordschipis,  and  rob  ]?er 
tenauntis  by  feyned  jurisdiccion  of  Anticrist.  But  prestis  moten 
lyf  in  symplenes,  and  forsake  ])0  worlde,  and  trewly  teche  Cristes 
gospel,  ande  knowleche  hem  servauntis  of  alle  men,  and  lyve  in 
grete  travaile,  penaunce,  and  holy  devocione,  and  do  satis- 
faccione  for  fier  owne  synnes  and  |?o  peple  bo])e,  if  J^ai  schal 
come  to  heven.  But  J^ai  wolde  algatis  be  lordis  of  ])is  worlde, 
a^eyne  Crista  and  his  lawe,  and  drawe  alle  men  for  to  holde 
ageynes  Gods  treuthe,  lest  })ai  be  brou^t  to  \o  meke  and  pore 
and  charitable  lyvyng  of  Crist  and  his  apostilis.  But  no  drede 
Anticrist  and  his  proude  clerkis  schal  downe  wi}?  Jjer  pride,  and 
|30  treuthe  of  Jjo  gospel  be  knowen  ande  kept  and  worschippyd, 
mawgre  alle  J)0  develis  of  helle,  and  alle  j?er  false  mynystris; 
ffor  Anticrist  in  his  moste  pride  schal  sodeynly  be  brou^t  to 
grounde. 

»  according  to  us,  in  our  opinion. 


CONTROVERSIAL   TRACTS, 


473 


POINT  XII. 

Also  preiatis  at  Jjo  suggestion  of  freris  beren  upon  pore  men 
|?at  ))ai  seyne,  J?at  a  man  or  wouman  offrynge  to  a  preste  a  peny, 
axynge  \o  masse  for  to  be  songen  for  hym,  bo]?e  ]?ai  and  jjo 
preste  so  receyvyng  }?o  peny  bene  acursid. 

Here  is  playne  lesynge  by  malice  put  on  pore  men.  But  Cristen 
men  seyne,  J>at  a  man  offrynge  at  \o  masse  schal  not  purpose  for  to 
bye  hit,  ne  desire  more  part  ]?eroff  to  hymselfe  ]?en  to  anoJ?er  pore 
man,  more  wor)>i  aneyntis  God,  for  he  were  out  of  charite  and  a 
symonyen  and  an  heretik.  If  \o  preste  be  a  devoute  man 
and  clene  of  lyfe,  ^yve  hym  frely  what  hym  nedis  upon  J)i 
state,  and  if  J)OU  se  ])at  hym  nedis  not,  or  be  a  cursid 
schrewe,  dele  \\  peny  to  a  pore  man  fat  has  nede,  and  oc- 
cupie  J>e  in  forjjinkynge  of  J?i  wickyd  lyif,  havynge  mynde  of  \o 
stronge  peynus  of  helle,  wi]?  ]?o  gretenes  of  Goddis  mercy  and 
J}0  hy^e  blis  of  heven.  And  turne  ]?e  clenly  to  Goddis  heestis, 
werkus  of  mercy  wij?  poyntis  of  charite ;  and  all  gode  prestis 
in  erthe,  and  alle  gode  men  and  wymmen,  and  aungelis  and 
seintus  of  heven,  prayen  for  J)e  evermore. 

POINT  XIII. 

Also  preiatis  and  freris  beren  upon  pore  men  J)at  )?ai  sayne, 
]?at  alle.  ]?inges  amonge  clerkis  schulden  be  comyne. 

Here  Cristen  men  sayne,  J^at  alle  }>ingis  J?at  clerkis  have  bene 
pore  mennes  godis,  and  \o  clerkis  ben  not  lordis  of  hem  but 
procuraturis,  as  Gods  lawe  and  mannus  law  wittenessen.  Ande 
clerkis  schulden  holde  hem  apayde  wi}>  fode  ande  helyng,  as 
Seint  Poul  sais.  Seint  Bernarde  sais  ^  What  ever  Jjou  haldes 
to  J?e  of  \o  auter,  over  a  streyte  lyvelode  ande  symple  cloJ?ing, 
hit  is  not  ]?ine  but  is  oJ?er  mennes,  hit  is  thefte,  hit  is  sacrilege. 
Ande  efte  Bernarde  sais,  Seye,  ^ee  bischoppis,  what  dos  golde 
in  ^oure  bridel.?  hit  dryves  not  away  cold;  ^oure  bestis  gone 
honourid  wij?  gemmys,  precius  stonys,  and  jewelis,  ande  oure 
sidis  bene  nakid,  seyne  pore  men.     pai  bene  oure  godis  J>at  ^ee 


12.  That  for 
a  man  to  offer 
money  for  a 
mass  brings 
a  curse  both 
on  the  giver 
and  on  the 
receiver. 


13,  That  the 
property  of  the 
clergy  ought 
to  be  in  com- 
mon.   As  to 
property,  the 
sect  really 
holds  with 
St.  Bernard. 


a  S.  Bern. EpisL  //.(Opera,  Paris 
1586).  'Denique  quicquid  praeter 
necessarium  victum    ac    simplicem 


vestitnm  de  altario  retines,  tuum  non 
est,  rapina  est,  sacrilegium  est.' 


474 


14.  That  the 
clergy  ought 
not  to  have 
temporal  pos- 
sessions. 


Num.  xvni.  20. 


WYCLIF'S  WORKS, 

wasten,  and  we  \o  heritage  of  Crist,  bou^t  wi]?  his  blode,  and  we 
hongryn  ande  Jjmsten  ande  ben  nakyd.  Hit  is  cruely  drawen 
away  from  us  ]?at  ^e  wasten  in  ^oure  pride.  Two  yvelis  comen 
Jjeroff.  We  sufferen  myche  meschefe,  ande  in  ^oure  wast  ^e 
sleen  us,  and  ^e,  doyng  vanite,  peryschen  jjerfore,  as  Seynt 
Jerome  sais;  ffor  to  receyve  J^inge  for  to  ^yve  to  pore  men, 
and  ony  J>inge  wifdrawe  {jerofF,  passis  J?o  cruelte  of  alle  robbers. 
See  3ee  ]?erfore,  prelatis  and  abbotis,  j)at  han  mony  godis  of 
30ure  founders  for  to  spend  in  hospitalite  of  pore  men,  and 
wastynge  hem  in  pompe  and  glotonye  and  feestus  of  riche  men, 
how  strongely  ^e  bene  acursud  of  God  and  of  alle  his  seintus, 
and  traytouris  to  ^oure  founderus,  and  robbers  and  monquellers 
of  Cristen  men.  How  hidousely  schal  pore  men  crye  a^eynnys 
50W  at  domesday  for  50ure  cursid  synnes!  perfore  make  ^e 
nowe  alle  ^oure  godis  comyne  to  pore  men  in  nede,  and  lyve  in 
penaunce,  prayer,  ande  holy  teching  in  dede  and  worde,  leste 
Crist  dampne  ^owe  for  traytouris  and  monquellers  and  scheders 
of  his  blode  for  ^oure  unpityuousnes. 

POINT  XIV, 

Also  byschopis  and  freris  beren  symple  men  on  hande  |?at  })ai 
sayne,  ]?at  hit  is  a5eynes  holy  writte  ])at  clerkis  have  temporale 
possessiones. 

Here  Cristen  men  tellen  only  holy  writte,  and  autorites  of 
grete  seintus,  wij?  sum  maner  of  reson.  In  \o  iiij  boke  of  holy 
writte  God  seis  J)us  to  Aaron  and  o]?er  prestis ;  In  \o  londe  of 
hem,  ]?at  is,  in  J)0  childer  of  Israel,  ^e  schal  welde  no  ))ing,  ne 
^e  schul  have  part  amonge  hem ;  I  ])i  part  ande  J)ine  heritage 
in  J)0  myddel  of  j?o  sonnys  of  Israel.  SoJ^ely  to  \o  sonnys  of 
Levy  I  gafe  alle  \o  tithys  of  \o  sonnys  of  Israel  into  possessione, 
for  \o  servyce  by  which  jjai  serven  to  me  into  J?o  tabernacle  of 
})0  bond  of  pes.  Ande  aftur  hit  sewys,  pai  schal  welden,  or  have 
in  possessione,  none  o|>er  ]>inge,  but  be  apaide  wi]?  oflfrjmge  of 
tithes,  which  I  have  departid  into  \o  uses  of  hem,  and  neces- 
saries. In  \q  fifte  boke  of  holy  writt  God  seis  }>us ;  Prestis 
and  dekenys,  and  alle  J?at  bene  of  \o  same  lynage,  not  haf  parte 
and  heritage  wij?  }?oo  o]?er  men  of  Israel,  ]?at  is,  wij)  princis  and 
comyns,  for  })ai  schal  eete  sacrifices  of  \o  Lord  ande  offryngus 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS, 


475 


of  hym,  and  ])ai  schal  take  none  o]?er  |?inge  of  possessione  of 
]3er  bre}?eryn ;  for  sothe  ]?o  Lord  hymselfe  is  J?o  heritage  of  hem, 
as  he  spake  to  hem.  By  j?o  prophet  Ezechiel  God  seis  ]?us, — 
Sojjely  heritage  schal  none  be  to  hem,  I  ]?o  heritage  of  hem ; 
and  5e  schal  not  ^yve  to  hem  possessione  in  Israel,  I  forsothe 
\Q  possessione  of  hem.  By  Israel  is  undnrstonden  alle  Goddis 
peple ;  for,  as  Seint  Poule  sais,  jjese  ]?ingus  bene  writen  for  us. 
Ande  as  clerkis  taken  tithes  amonge  Cristen  men  by  virtue  of  ]?is 
iawe,  myche  more  })ai  schulden  abstene  hem  fro  o]?er  posses- 
siouns  of  ]?er  bre]?erin,  for  \o  generale  forbedyng  of  God  Al- 
my^tty ;  sithen  Crist,  God  ande  man,  and  alle  his  apostilys  kept 
hem  fro  seculere  lordschip,  as  \o  gospel  sais.  Crist,  God  and 
man,  seys  in  \o  gospel,  j?at  \o  servaunt  is  not  more  J)en  \o  lord, 
ne  \o  disciple  aboven  }>o  maystur.  But  Jesus  Crist  hade  not 
by  worldly  lordschipe  whereupon  he  schuld  bowe  his  heved; 
jjen  Cristen  prestis,  disciples  of  Crist  and  servauntus  of  hym, 
schulden  not  be  so  grete  worldly  lordis  aboven  ]?er  mayster. 
Ande  God,  Lord  of  alle  creaturis,  Jesus  Crist,  seis  to  his  dis- 
cipHs,  perfore  so  eche  of  30W  ])at  schal  not  renounce  alle  }?ingus 
j?at  he  has  in  possessioun  may  not  be  my  disciple.  And  how 
j?is  renounsynge  schal  be  done,  \o  pore  lyfe  of  Crist  and  of  his 
apostilis  schewis  pleynly.  Lord!  sithen  Petur  and  his  felawis 
my^tten  not  be  apostihs  of  Criste  til  jjai  haden  forsaken  nettis 
and  botys,  5he,  and  Jjer  kyndely  fader,  how  may  oure  hy^e 
prestis  take  \o  state  of  apostilis,  and  be  grettur  worldly  lordis 
J7en  erlis  ande  dukis,  kyngus  unklis  ande  kyngus  sonys,  in  \o 
riches  ^  londe  of  Yngelonde. 

Seint  Poule,  ravyschid  to  \o  thrid  heven,  ^yves  a  generale 
rewle  to  prestus,  saying  ]?us  a3eynus  covetise  of  \o  worlde,  We, 
havynge  fode  and  wij?  what  J?ingus  we  be  hiled,  be  we  apayde. 
Lordel  sithen  Crist  and  alle  his  apostilis,  so  wele  doyng  J?er 
offices,  haden  nevermore  ne  never  ordeynden  no  but  a  pore 
iyfelode  to  hem  ))at  preche  ]?o  gospel,  who  maken  oure  presfus 
worldly  lordis  and  chefe  governouris  of  alle  worldly  officis  ande 
nedis  in  \o  rewme  ?  and  ))ai  J>erJ)orowe  doumbe  fro  prechyng 
and  spirituale  occupaciouns.  No  wonder  Jjerfore  if  \o  rewnne 
be  yvul  govemyd,  si]?en  \o  chefe  governouris  ben  symonyens, 

^  So  BB ;  read  richeste. 


The  lowliness 
of  Christ  and 
the  apostles 
contrasted 
with  modem 
practice. 


476 


WrCLIF'S  WORKS. 


Luke  xxii.  24. 


Matt.  XX,  25. 


The  clergy 
have  nothing 
to  do  with 
secular  em- 
ployment. 


heretikis,  cursid  of  God  and  of  alle  holy  Chirch  wi|)Outen  cesyng. 
Seint  Petur  seis  to  alle  prestis,  Fede  ^e  }>o  folke  of  God  ])at  is 
amonge  ^owe,  not  by  constreynynge  but  willefully,  for  cause  of 
love  of  soule-wynnyng^  not  as  beyng  lordis  in  clergy,  but  be  ^e 
made  fourme  or  ensaumple  of  inwitte  or  wille  j^at  is  meke  ande 
symple,  as  Crist  was,  si]?en  Seint  Petur,  more  ]?en  alle  |?o  popis 
aftur  hym  in  Rome.  And  God  in  Seint  Petur  forbed  prestis 
for  to  be  lordys  in  j)0  clergye.  Whi  bene  J^ese  hye  apostotaas 
clepid  generally,  My  lorde  of  Caunturbury,  of  Yorke,  and  oj^er  ? 
Lorde !  sithen  men  bene  acursid  doynge  a3eynys  \o  popis  lawe, 
as  his  symonyens  blaberen,  how  cursid  ben  ])ese  Luciferys  chil- 
dren, so  openly  doynge  a^eyn  just  lawe  of  Crist  chef  pope,  and 
of  Seint  Petur,  and  of  Cristen  bileve !  ^\t,  when  stryfe  was 
made  amonge  Cristis  disciplys  who  of  hem  schuld  be  sene  for 
to  be  more,  Jesus  saide  to  hem,  Kyngis  of  folkes  lordschipen, 
or  bene  lordis  of  hem,  and  }?ai  J^at  have  powere  on  hem  bene 
clepid  wel-doyng,  or  ^yvyng  benefitis.  For  sothe  ^e  not  so,  but 
he  J)at  is  more  in  ^owe  be  he  made  as  ^onger,  and  he  ^at  is 
biforegoar  be  he  as  a  servaunt.  And  by  Mathewe  Crist  seis 
]?us,  5e  witten  for  princis  of  folkis  lordschippen,  or  ben  lordis 
of  hem,  ande  }>ai  f>at  bene  more  haunten  powere  into  hem.  Hit 
schal  not  be  so  amonge  ^owe ;  but  who  ever  schal  willen  for  to 
be  made  \>o  more  amonge  ^owe,  be  he  ^oure  mynyster,  and  who 
ever  schal  willen  to  bene  furste  amonge  30we  be  he  ^oure  ser- 
vaunte ;  as  ]?o  Son  of  man  come  nout  to  be  served  but  for  to 
serve,  and  ^yve  his  lyfe  redempcioun  for  mony  ^. 

Alias  !  how  durne  worldly  prestis  take  so  grete  lordschipe 
upon  hem,  si]?en  Crist  so  playnly  forbedus  hit,  ande  tellis  by  his 
owne  ensaumpul  ]>o  servyse  and  mekenys  of  hem  ?  How 
stronge  heretikis  bene  f>ai,  ]?at  maken  lordis  for  to  swere  to 
mayntene  hem  in  her  open  erroure,  a^eyne  ]>o  gospel  and  lyvyng 
of  Crist.  5it  Seint  Jerome  writis  expressely,  ande  hit  is  sette  in 
decrese^,  J>at  clerkis  schulden  be  taken  fro  worldely  officis. 
And  in  tokyn  of  doynge  away  alle  temporaltees,  clerkis  bene 
schaven  \o  hede,  and  schul  have  no  jjinge  but  dymus  and  of- 

a  These  translations  do  not  very  ^  The  88th  Distinction  of  the  first 

closely    resemble    either  Wycliffite  Part  of  the  Decretum  of  Gratian  is 

version,  but  are  nearer  to  the  older  very  full  and  explicit  on  this  subject, 
than  to  the  later  one. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS.  477 

fryngus,  as  dekenys  in  \o  olde  lawe.  Seint  Bemarde  in  a 
sermone  of  apostilis  seis,  \2X  a  preste  havynge  temporale  pos- 
sessione  schal  nout  have  Goddis  part.  And  \q  grete  clerk 
Origene  and  Seint  Jon  Chrysostom  holden  Jjo  same  way.  Seint 
Bede  says  in  a  pistil  to  Enberthe  archebyschop  of  5orke,  Jjat 
J)0  ^yfFtus  of  kyngus,  ^yfing  temporaltees  to  prestis,  were  moste 
foltische  a.  An  aungel  cried  in  j?o  ayer  when  \o  chirche  of  Rome 
was  dowyd  with  halfe  \o  empiry,  };at  J)is  day  venym  is  sched 
into  \o  Chirche  of  God,  treuly  seynge  J?o  pride  symony  ande 
tiramitry  in  \o  Chirche  sprungen  fro  })at  tyme,  and  leevynge  of 
spirituale  occupacione.  Cursid  venym  has  strangelid  almoste 
all  Cristen  pepul.  Certis  as  seculere  schuUen  not,  whilis  J)ai 
bene  lordis,  take  presthode  ande  ri^ttis  annexid  ]?erto,  myche 
more  prestis,  ande  nomely  in  state  of  pore  apostilis,  as  bischopis 
faynen  hem  to  be,  schullen  not  take  seculere  lordschip  and 
powere  annexid  to  \o  state  by  Gods  ordynaunce ;  sij?en  Crist 
commaundus  in  \o  gospel,  3elde  ^e  to  \o  emperoure  \qo  ]?ingus 
J)at  bene  of  \o  emperoure,  and  to  God  j?oo  J?ingus  \2X  ben  of 
God.      Ande  no  man  depart  J?at  ])inge  ]?at  joyned  no  worldly 

preste excuse^  his  heresie  of  possessions  havynge 

by  })is,  j>at  Jesus  Crist  was  a  kynge,  as  ]?o  prophet  and  j?o  gospel 
wittenessen ;  for  Crist  was  kynge  of  alle  creaturys  by  his  god- 
hede,  and  by  his  manhed  gostly  kynge  for  to  governe  soulis 
ande  virtues,  ande  never  worldely  kynge.  For  \o  gospel  sais, 
Of  his  kyngedame  schal  be  none  ende ;  ande  in  \o  gospel  of 
Jon  he  seis,  My  kyngedame  is  not  of  j?is  worlde.  Ne  no 
worldly  preste  excuse  his  heresie  of  possessions-havynge  by  his 
ypocrisie,  Jjat  ]?ai  bene  not  lordis  of  ]?er  godis,  but  onely  procu- 
ratouris;    }>at  j?ey  spenden  treuly  upon  pore  men,  as  resoun 

1  So  the  passage  stands  in  BB.     It  may  be  restored  thus :  Ande  no  man 
depart  ^at  \>inge  pai  [God  ha]?]  joyned.     [Ande]  no  worldly  preste,  &c. 

"  'Whdit  Bede  seems  to  deprecate,  piivileges  which  exempted  them  from 

in  the  Epistle  to  Egbert  Archbishop  taking  any  part  in   the   burden   of 

of  York  (Gallandii  Bibliotheca,  vol.  national  defence,  than  the  grant  of 

xiii.   p.    261)    here   referred    to,  is  temporalities  to   the   clergy  in  the 

rather  the  foundation  of  sham  monas-  ordinary  sense  of  the  words.     The 

teries,  built  by  laymen,  and  occupied  whole   Epistle   is   veiy  remarkable 

in  part  by  them  and  in  part  by  bad  and  interesting,  and  throws  a  strong 

monks  who  had  been  expelled  from  light  on  the  condition  of  society  in 

real  monasteries,  endowed  also  by  Northumbria  in  the  year  735. 
the  ruling  powers  with  lands,  and 


47« 


Wr CLIP'S  WORKS. 


The  laity  ought 
to  strip  the 
clergy  of  their 
wealth  and 
temporal 
power. 


ande  nede  axen.  Let  al  j?o  worlde  deme  wisely  by  J)er  open 
dedis,  ande  tirauntry  on  retenauntis,  ande  sittynge  in  parlement 
above  grete  lordis,  seyynge  )?at  no  parlyment  may  be  holden 
wij}0uten  hem,  whe))er  ))is  be  feyned  ypocrisie  or  treuth.  Lorde ! 
sijjen  Jesus  Criste  al  witty,  j?at  couthe  best  depart  temporale 
godis  to  pore  men,  wolde  not  take  \o  kyngedame,  as  \o  gospel 
sais,  j?ow  \q  pepule  wolde  for  love  have  ravyschid  hym  ))erto, 
(and  5it  he  was  verreyly  son  of  kyng  David,  and  my^t  not  erre 
in  ony  doyng),  how  fen  durne  ])ese  erthly  moldy- warpis  take  so 
grete  burthen  of  worldly  dritte  upon  hem  ?  si)?en  ]?er  wittes  ben 
Jjinne,  j)er  strynthe  littel,  }>er  tyme  schort,  to  study  ande  teche 
holy  writte,  to  lyve  in  prayer  and  devocione,  and  visite  seke  men 
in  soule.  Lorde !  whej?er  \2i  cun  better  j)en  Criste,  and  bene  more 
my^tty  for  to  do  temporale  and  spirituale  office  togedir^  })at  one 
of  ]jes  is  an  open  fole  and  a  cursid !  Loke  ^e  lordis  who  hit 
is,  sij?en  ^e  schullen  recken  of  \o  governaile  of  \o  Chirche. 

5it,  si]?en  Cristis  apostilis,  freschly  fulfiUid  wij)  wisedame, 
strenght,  and  charite  of  \o  Holy  Gost,  wolden  nout  be  occupide 
aboute  money  redy  at  Jjer  fete,  for  to  dele  hit  to  pore  men  J^ere 
redy,  but  ^ave  hem  to  prechynge  of  Gods  worde  and  prayere, 
as  holy  writte  wittenessis,  what  blyndenes  of  covetise  stiris  f>ese 
ydiotis,  unmy^tty  and  fer  lowere  in  charite,  to  marre  hem  wi]? 
so  myche  drit,  more  fen  alle  Cristis  apostilis  dursten  ?  Whefer 
of  fese  'two  bene  folis  and  wode,  byhold  wisely,  ^e  lordis,  for  3e 
beren  fo  swerde  prineepaly  for  to  distroye  errouris  in  fo 
Chirche.  Certus,  Crist,  God  Almy^tty,  durste  never  take 
worldly  office  ande  suche  dome  upon  hym,  as  \o  gospel  sais,  for 
J?en  he  had  robbid  ]>o  emperoure  of  his  lordeschipe,  a^eyne  his 
owne  techynge.  What  spirite  dryves  )?es  Anticristis  to  seculere 
office,  ande  to  wlappe  hem  in  seculere  nedis,  ande  leve  fer  spirit- 
uale office  undone  ?  Certis  hit  semes,  Sathanas,  for  pride  and 
covetise,  and  mayntenynge  of  fer  cursid  heresies,  blyndis  hem 
in  payne  of  fer  synne,  til  God  take  vengeaunce  at  onys  upon 
hem  and  alle  fer  fautouris.  Ware,  ^ee  lordus,  lest  God  take 
vengeaunce  on  50W  and  ^oure  pepul,  for  sufFrynge  and  maynten- 
ynge of  f ese  heresies ;  sif en  God  has  ^yven  ^owe  f o  swerde  for 
to  mayntene  his  lawe,  and  bitaken  his  Chirche  to  ^oure  powere, 
and  grete  kyndenes  schewid  to  50we  in  groundyng,  worschip- 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS, 


479 


pyng,  and  conferming  ^oure  state,  and  made  alle  men,  prestis 
ande  ojjer,  sogett  J>erto.  He  schal  aske  stray te  reckenyng  of 
30we,  how  yt  ha%^e  govemyd  his  Chirche.  perfore,  as  ^e  wil  be 
saved  bifore  God,  distroyes  Anticristis  tirauntry  in  his  ypocritis, 
and  mayntene  ^oure  state  in  })at  fourme  ]?at  God  made  hit,  ande 
bringis  prestus  to  J)0  meke  ordynaunce  of  Jesus  Criste,  and 
helpe  50ure  selfe  and  30ure  pore  tenauntis  wij?  \q  waste  godis 
to  whichee  heretikis,  havyng  \q  nome  of  prelatis  and  prestis, 
makyn  sacrifise  to  Belial,  by  pride,  covetise,  glotony,  leccherie, 
symonye,  and  alle  cursidnessis.  Ande  if  ^ee  wil  nout  do  ]?is 
ri^twisenes  purely  for  \o  love  of  Crist,  |?at  has  done  to  50W  so 
mony  benefetys,  ^oure  londe  and  ^oure  pepul  schal  be  conquerid 
of  enmyes,  ande  ^ee  ^oure  self  dampned  wi})0uten  ende.  And 
5if  56  wille  for  pure  love  do  }>is  ri^twysenes,  ^e  schal  gete  pleyne 
remyssion  of  alle  ^oure  synnus,  so  J?at  3e  kepe  50W  clene  aftur. 
And  for  J?is  mercy  doynge  schall  come  to  30W  propperte  of  lorde- 
schip,  and  pes  and  riches  in  erthe,  and  at  jjo  furrest  in  heven, 
wij)0uten  ende.  Ande  if  ^e  dyen  in  J?is  poynte,  stondyng  clene 
entente  to  Goddus  honoure  and  comyne  amendyng  of  Cristen- 
dame,  wi]?  paciens  and  charite  bitaking  all  to  governaunce,  and 
5e  doyng  ^oure  bisynes  upon  ^oure  connynge  ande  powere,  trewe 
God  wil  accept  ^owe  for  his  trew  martiris  and  bre]?erin  of  Cristis 
passione,  and  crowne  30W  in  heven  wi]?outen  ende. 

POINT  XV. 

Also  prelatis  prestis  and  freris  putten  upon  pore  men  J^at  ]?ai 
sayne,  \2X  Goddis  office  or  servyse  ben  not  to  be  songun  wij? 
note,  and  J?at  God  delytes  not  in  suche  manere  songe. 

Here  Cristen  men  sayne  pleynly,  J)at  Criste  and  his  apostilis 
prayden  devoutly  wiJ>outen  siche  songe,  and  ]?ai  never  tau^tten 
in  worde  ne  dede,  ne  openly  counseiled  in  holy  writte  to  ]?is 
songe,  ande  myche  more  |?ai  never  chargid  man  herwi]>  in  al 
holy  writte.  perfore  prestis  schulden  bisye  hem  to  cunne  ande 
teche  holy  writte  in  worde  and  dede,  and  be  in  devoute  pray  ere 
m  spirit  and  treuthe,  as  Crist  and  his  apostilis  diden,  and  not 
fulfille  \o  eeris  of  hem  and  of  J?o  pepul  wi]?  cryynge  of  ])inge  \2X 
noujjer  j)ai  ne  )?o  pepul  understoden,  as  3yf  jayes  and  pyes 
chatiriden;    and  ^it   })ai  understonden  iche  one  o]>er  in  )?eire 


15.  That 
church  music, 
as  now  prac- 
tised, is  not 
acceptable 
to  God. 


480 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


Ancient  autho- 
rities (juoted 
against  it. 


kynde.  Lorde !  whej^er  ])is  songe  dispose  men  for  to  under- 
stonde  \>o  sentence  of  holy  writte,  and  for  to  mourne  for  Jjer 
synnus,  or  ellis  to  pride,  vanite,  daunsyng  and  lecchery,  wi]? 
vayne  spendynge  of  tyme.  <,  Seint  Austyne  sais  in  a  boke  of  hys 
Confessione  ^,  Als  ofte  as  )>o  songe  delitus  me  more  ]?en  J?o 
J)inge  ]?at  is  songun,  I  knowlache  me  for  to  have  synned  hor- 
ribly. Loke  ^e  lordus,  ]?at  schulden  lif  justely  ande  devoutely, 
sechynge  grace  of  God  to  reule  ^owe  and  ^oure  pepul  aftm^  )?is 
lawe,  whefjer  }?es  proude,  ful  of  covetise  and  envie,  ben  in  ])is 
case  or  nay.  Loke  whej^er  ]?ai  lyven  in  glotonye,  drunkennes, 
and  leccherie,  for  jolite  of  ])er  chauntynge ;  ande  ]?en  what  ever 
heriyng  of  God  ])0  tunge  sounys,  ])0  life  blasphemys  God  ^,  as 
Seint  Austyne  sais  on  J)0  Sauter.  Seint  Poule  biddus  us  synge 
and  say  psalmus  in  oure  hert  to  \o  Lord.  Seint  Jerome  in  a 
Pistile  to  Ephesyanys,  as  ]?o  lawe  wittenessis  c,  seys  ]?is,  Here 
]}is  J^inge,  3onge  waxen  men,  here  ]?ai  to  hor  office  of  seying 
psalmus  to  God,  if  bytaken  in  J?o  Chirche,  ]?at  hit  is  to  be 
songen,  not  in  voyce,  but  in  hert ;  nej^er  Jjrotis  ne  chekys  bene 
to  be  anoyntid  wi]>  medicyne,  in  manere  of  foule  songis,  ]?at 
swete  notis  of  spectaclis  or  taverne  songis  be  herde  in  \o 
Chirche.  perfore,  as  Seint  Gregore  techis  in  \o  lawe,  dekenys 
and  mynystris  of  J)0  auter  schuUen  not  chaunt  ne  syng  but  rede 
\o  gospel ;  and  if  ony  man  do  J^era^eyns,  Gregori  cursus  hym. 
Hit  semes  J)0  dekenys  and  prestus  han  als  much  nede  in  oj?er 
chirchis  for  to  do  kepe  clene  lyife,  and  do  \o  office  ordeyned  of 
God  and  of  ]>o  apostilis,  as  in  Rome ;  })en  })0  same  state  and 
peyne  schuld  be  in  oj^er  chirchis  as  J>ere,  si}>en  }>is  statute  has 
grounde  in  holy  writte  and  resoun ;  and  als  myche  or  more  J?is 
songe  lettis  dekenys  ande  mynystris  of  J30  auter,  in  o]?er  placis  as 
in  Rome,  fro  clennes  of  lyife  and  prechyng,  and  almes  dedis 
])at  God  biddis. 

3it  Seint  Jon  Crisostome  on  Mathew  ^  where  Criste  biddus 


"  See  above,  p.  228,  note. 

^  See  above,  p.  223,  note  b. 

'^  Decret2i7n,VQ.YS  I,  Dist.  92,  Can.  i. 
•  Audiant  haec  adolescentiili ;  audi- 
ant  ii,  quibus  psallendi  in  ecclesia 
officium  est;  Deo,  non  voce,  sed 
corde   cantandum ;    nee  in   tragoe- 


dorum  modum  guttur  et  fauces  dulci 
medicamine  liniendae  sunt,  ut  in 
ecclesia  theatrales  moduli  audiantur 
et  cantica.' 

'I  See  S.   Chrys.    Horn.    XX.   in 
Matthaeum. 

WYCLIF. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


481 


)?at  we  shul  not  speke  much  in  prayer  as  hej)en  men  done, — 
soj^ely  f>ai  wenen  ]>at  \2x  bene  herde  in  ])er  muche  speche, — jjere 
sais  Seint  Jon,  ]>at  thre  grete  harmys  comyn  of  prayer  wi}?  crye, 
ffurste  ]>at  men  ]?us  ^  cryinge  byleven  not  J?at  God  is  present  in 
iche  place,  and  siche  crie  lettis  ojjer  men  fro  prayer,  and  \o 
crier  schewis  to  oJ)er  men  sumtyme  jjat  nedis  not  ne  spedis. 
Lord !  whejjer  ])is  sotile  and  swete  knackyng  to  \o  eeris  makis 
us  to  praye  wij?  sorowes  ])at  mowne  not  be  tolde  oute  ?  On  J)is 
maner  \o  Holy  Goste  askis  for  us,  as  holy  writte  techis,  J)at  is, 
as  Seint  Austyne  and  ojjer  seintus  declaren,  \o  Holy  Goste 
makis  us  to  pray  wiJ?  suche  mournyng,  ande  \o  prayer  ]?at  he 
makis  in  us  ys  arettid  to  hym,  sij^en  he  is  princepale  doar 
JjerofF,  and  we  dulle  instrumentis  of  hym.  Lorde  1  whe]?er  ])is 
chauntyng  of  Kyries,  Sanctus,  and  Agnus,  wij?  Gloria  in  excelsis 
and  Patrem  ^  maken  ]?at  men  heren  nout  j?o  wordis  but  onely  a 
sowne !  makus  men  to  have  savoure  in  |?ese  dytees,  })at  schuld 
stire  hom  to  moste  compunccione  for  synnes,  and  to  most  de- 
vocione  for  hy^enes  of  ]>o  Trinite,  ]?at  is  touchid  in  Sanctus,  and 
bitter  passione  ande  stronge  benefices  of  Criste,  touchid  in  Pa- 
trem, wi]?  huge  unkyndenes  and  horribul  traytory  of  synnes, 
touchyd  thryes  in  Agnus  Dei.  As  he}?en  men  skorned  \o  sab- 
batis  of  Jerusalem  in  fjer  conquestis,  for  synnes  of  prestis  and 
lordis  and  comyns,  as  Jeromy  weylej?,  myche  more  oure 
enmyes,  fendus  of  helle,  seynge  om*e  halidayes  wi]?  j^is  nyse 
knackyng,  J>at  fiUus  \o  eeris  ande  spoylus  J?o  soulus  fro  virtues, 
wiJ?  over  muche  costlewe  pride,  glotony,  ande  leccherye,  wiJ) 
false  o]?is,  scorne  us. 

Ande  al  J?o  court  of  heven  has  abhomynacion  of  oure  lewed 
halowynge;  ffor  we  halowen  to  oure  wombe  ydelnes  and 
Sathanas,  and  done  werste  werkis  of  synne  in  dispysynge  of 
Almy^tty  God  and  alle  his  lovers.  Lorde!  sifen  we  be  so 
febie  of  witte,  febul  of  bodily  my^te,  and  of  ful  schort  tyme, 
ande  holy  writt  so  harde,  and  plentynouse  of  swete  sentences  to 
whichee  God  byndus  us  sore,  what  resoun  is  hit  to  bynde  us  to 


»  The  Kyrie  Eleison  and  Gloria 
early  in  the  mass,  the  Sanctus  just 
before  the  canon,  and  the  Agnus 
Dei  before  communion.     But  what 

WOSKS.      VOL.    III.  1 


is  the  Patrem  ?  Probably  the  prayer 
beginning  '  Qui  pridie  quam  patere- 
tur,'   for   in  it  the  word  'Patrem' 


Matt.  vi.  7. 


Rom.  viii.  26, 


Against  the 
multiplication 
of  hallowings 
and  cere- 
monies. 


4^2 


WYCLIF'S  WORKS. 


Against  the 
rule  compelling 
priests  to  use 
the  Sarum 
ritual,  and  to 
say  their  office. 


newe  songe  and  newe  serymonyes  of  dyverse  uses  al  day,  l>at 
we  never  mowe  do  boj^e  togedur?  Ande  si]?en  synne  is  so 
playne,  and  more  encresid  herby,  and  we  bounden  upon 
payne  of  dampnacioun  for  to  preche  ande  crye  holy  writte 
a^eynes  \o  fendis  ooste,  when  a  drunken  preste,  in  luste  ande 
welthe  of  ))is  lyife,  has  syngulere  affeccion  to  a  man  or  a  cause 
for  temporale  dritte,  all  prestis  in  j^at  diocise  schul  be  gnarid 
wif>  a  newe  ^ock  or  cerymony  ever  more;  and  none  ende  is 
made  of  suche  serymonyes,  pat  tarien  mennys  conscience,  and 
letten  hem  fro  better  occupacione. 

3it,  J)0w  Salisburye  use  may  sumtyme  occupie  wele  summe 
slowe  wrecchis,  hit  is  no  reson  to  bynde  alle  prestis  }>erto,  or  to 
suche  anojjer,  when  God  sturis  hym  to  studye  and  teche  holy 
writte,  ]?at  is  muche  better,  or  for  to  mourne  for  })er  synne,  ande 
hertly  occupie  hem  wi}>  ]?o  Pater  Noster.  For  God  seis  not  Jjat 
he  is  blessid  ]?at  syngus  or  knackus  swete  notis,  ne  fat  kepis  J)0 
ordynale  of  J?is  cerymonye  or  ]?is,  but  he  is  blessid  ]?at  ny^t  and 
day  ])inkis  in  j?o  lawe  of  God,  J^at  is,  for  to  understonde  hit  and  lif 
}>eraftur,  and  teche  hit  trewly,  and  willefully  suffer  tribulacione 
for  f>o  gospel  in  savynge  of  mennus  soulis,  as  Criste  and  his 
apostilis  diden.  Lorde !  whe]?ir  a  congregacione  of  drunken 
prestis,  in  lustis  of  \o  worlde  and  of  J)er  balyes,  con  ^yve  a  better 
reule  of  occupacione  to  prestis  Jjen  Criste  and  his  apostilis  diden? 
or  ellis  wille  })ai  charge  hem  wif)  so  myche  chauntynge  ande  so 
mony  cerymonyes,  J?at  prestis  mowe  not  fulfille  \o  charge  and 
office  of  Crist,  J?at  is  beste,  moste  esye,  ande  moste  siker  for 
prestis  and  alle  lewed  peple?  perfore  synge  we  in  hert  by 
holy  desire,  seyyng  psalmus  by  clene  werkis  and  heryyngus  and 
ympnus  to  God  for  his  large  5iftus  of  mercy,  wi]?  brennynge 
chaiite  in  studyynge  understondynge  and  techynge  holy  writte, 
ande  receyve  we  resonable  customs  made  of  men  in  als  miche 
as  })ai  helpen  us  to  J^is  grete  gode,  and  encresen  ^  oure  love  to 
God  and  oure  brejjerin.  And  5if  ]?ai  letten  us  fro  better 
doynge,  and  encresynge  of  Gods  worschipe,  and  helpe  of 
Cristen  soulys,  for  ]?at  tyme  suspende  alle  suche  cerymonyes, 
leste  )?ai  take  jjo  grace  of  God  in  vayne,  leefynge  J?o  better  ande 
chesynge  J)0  worse. 

^  corrected ;  encre-^ynge,  BB. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


483 


POINT  XVI. 

Also  bischoppis  and  freris  putten  to  pore  men  ]>at  j^ai  sayne, 
hit  ys  not  leefful  for  to  swere  in  ony  manere. 

Trewiy  here  is  J?o  sothe  sparid,  as  in  mony  wrytyngus  and 
prechyngus  hit  is  openly  knowen.  But  here  Cristen  men  sayne, 
]>at  hit  is  not  leeful  to  swere  by  creaturis,  ne  by  Goddus  bonys, 
sydus,  naylus,  ne  armus,  or  by  ony  ^  membre  of  Cristis  body,  as 
J?o  moste  dele  of  men  usen,  ffor  )?is  is  a^eynus  holy  writte,  holy 
doctouris,  and  comyn  lawe,  and  grete  peyne  sette  jjeruppon. 
Hit  is  nout  leeful  for  to  swere  nedeles  for  a  veyne  thing,  as 
mony  men  usen,  ne  for  yvelle  wille  to  harme  ofer  men,  for  }?is 
is  a^eyne  \o  maundement  of  God  fully,  ne  to  for  swere  hem  for 
hate  ne  love  ne  drede  ne  wynnynge,  ne  for  lyve  ne  deth,  as 
mony  men  chargyn  ful  littel ;  for  ]?is  false  swerynge  schulden 
kyngus  punysch  by  J^er  office,  ande  suffer  not  suche  false  men 
in  Jjer  londis,  as  Seint  Austyne  sais.  5^^?  ^^  man  schulde  swere, 
nou]?er  for  life  ne  dethe,  no  but  wi]?  J^ese  Jjre  condiciones,  pat  is, 
in  treuthe,  in  dome,  and  in  rightwisenes,  as  God  sais  by  \o  pro- 
phet Jeremye.  If  hit  be  nedeful  for  to  swere  for  a  spedful 
treuthe,  men  mowe  wele  swere  as  God  did  in  J?o  olde  lawe, 
Crist  in  his  gospel,  Seint  Poule  in  his  pistile,  \o  aungel  in  \o 
Apochalipse,  wi}>  declarynge  of  Seint  Austen,  Crisostom,  Jerom, 
and  mony  moo. 

POINT  XVII. 

Also  prelatis  ande  frerus  putten  to  pore  men  \2X  |>ai  schulde 
say,  j?at  ))at  ilke  finge  j^at  was  brede  bifore  \o  consecracione  in 
\o  sacrament  of  J)0  auter,  after  j^o  consecracione  or  halowing  is 
not  Cristus  body,  but  a  signe  of  ]>at  ]?inge,  and  not  \o  ilke 
J>inge. 

Certus  here  is  openly  schewed  \o  malice  of  freris,  wrongfully 
accusynge  pore  men.  No]?oles  )?ese  wordis  of  freris  ben  nout 
craftily  sette ;  ande  ^it  )?is  sentence  is  \o  olde  heresie  of  freris 
ande  munkys,  and  men  of  ))0  newe  lawe,  a3eyne  }?o  gospel  ande 
olde  seintis  and  \o  olde  lawe.     For  freris  and  munkis,  and  J^er 

^  corrected ;  he  ony  by,  BB. 
I  i  2 


16.  That  it  is 
unlawful  to 
swear  at  ail. 
Charge  untrue ; 
we  only  blame 
profane  and 
unnecessary 
swearing-. 


Jen  iv,  2. 


17.  That  the 
consecrated 
bread  is  not 
Christ's  body. 
Charge  untrue ; 
we  say  it  is, 
but  that  it  does 
not  cease  to  be 
bread. 


484 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


folowars  of  scole,  seyne  J?at  fat  ilke  j)inge  ])at  was  brede  bifore 
))0  consecracione,  is  turned  into  nou^t,  J?at  J>ai  clepen  adnicliilat^', 
or  brou^t  to  nou^t ;  ande  \o  sacrament  }>at  men  sene  wi|>  bodily 
een,  is  not  Cristis  body,  but  accident  wi]?outen  sogett,  or  nou^t, 
as  }?ai  ban  playnly  said  in  Oxenforde  scole,  and  in  many  placis 
of  \o  londe  bojje  seide  ande  writen.  But  Cristen  men  seyne 
pleynly,  as  Crist  techis,  Seint  Poule,  Seint  Austyne,  Seint  Jerom, 
and  alle  Cristen  pepul  bileven,  ]?at  fo  sacrament  of  Jjo  auter  is 
verrey  Cristis  body  in  forme  of  brede,  ande  ]?ai  wole  no  ferj^er 
f)en  holy  writte  ande  olde  seintus  teche,  for  no  newe  knackynge 
of  sotile  cavellaciones,  or  multitude  of  synneful  wrecchis.  Crist 
toke  brede  in  his  hondus,  blessid,  brake  hit,  and  5ave  hit  to  hys 
disciplis,  seyynge,  pis  is  my  body ;  })us  Cristen  men  bileven  fully. 
Ande  Seynte  Poule  seis  in  holy  writte,  \dX  ))is  sacrament  is  bred 
\dX  we  breken,  ande  efte,  Prove  a  man  hymselfe  ande  so  ete  he 
of  ]?at  brede.  Ffoure  tymes  Seint  Poule  clepis  hit  brede  in  holy 
writte.  And  \o  holy  Trinite,  autorisynge  Seint  Poule  to  write 
Cristen  mennys  bileve,  clepis  \o  sacrament  }>o  same  word,  brede. 
Lorde  !  whefer  Cristen  men  schulden  be  tourmentid,  by  Anti- 
cristis  clerkis,  J)at  J)ai  schullen  not  graunte  [?o  wordis  of  God 
and  Cristen  bileve !  si])en  Seynt  Austyne  seis,  as  J>o  comyne 
lawe  wittenessis  ^,  }>at  })at  j?inge  ))at  is  sene  is  bred,  fat,  sothely, 
fat  f 0  feithe  askis ;  f enne  brede  is  Goddus  body.  Seint  Jerome 
sais  in  his  pistiles,  fat  f o  ilke  brede  fat  Criste  blessid,  brake, 
and  ^afe  to  his  disciplis  for  to  ete,  is  f  0  body  of  oure  Savyoure. 
po  comyne  lawe  of  decrees  wittenessis,  when  prelatis  weren 
sumwhat  gostly,  fat  fo  bred  and  wyne  fat  bene  put  in  fo 
auter,  aftur  f  o  consecracione  [ben]  ^  not  onely  f  0  sacrament,  but 
fo  verrey  body  and  blode  of  oure  Lord  Jesus  Criste.  Ande 
sifen  holy  writte  spekis  not  of  accident  \vifouten  sogett,  ne 
resone   schewis,  ne  philosophurs   tellen  hit,   ne  revelacion  of 

^  supplied  conjecturally. 


^  annihilatum. 

^  Decretum,  Pars  III,  Dist.  2,  cap: 
58.  *  Quod  videtur,  panis  est,  et 
calix,  quod  etiam  oculi  renuntiant. 
Quod  autem  fides  postulat  instm- 
enda,  panis  est  coipus  Christi,  calix 
sanguis.'    Our  author's  translation 


of  these  words  is  not,  it  must  be 
confessed,  very  exact.  Nor  are  they 
taken  from  St.  Augustine,  but  from 
Bede ;  the  first  portion  of  this  chap- 
ter only  being  derived  from  the 
former,  namely,  from  his  second 
sermon,  De  verbis  Apostoli. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


48^ 


God  proves  hit,  ne  olde  seyntis  )>at  beste  couthen  holy  writte 
ande  were  saddest  in  feythe  affermed  hit  not,  but  fully  J)0  con- 
trary ;  ande  si J?en  Seint  Austyne,  namely  ^ysest  of  alle  doctouris 
hoiden  sijjen  \o  apostilis  weren,  J?at^  seis  in  mony  bokis  ])at 
none  accident  may  be  wipouten  sogett  ^,  whejjer  schullen  [men]  ^ 
be  constrayned  by  Anticristis  powere  to  forsake  holy  writte  and 
resone  and  beste  seyntis,  for  an  unknowen  J)inge  f>at  plesus  to  a 
multitude  of  worldly  moldywarpis,  ful  of  pride,  covetise,  sy- 
monye,  heresie,  and  blaspheme  ?  Criste  for  his  precius  blode 
move  worldly  lordis  to  love  his  lawe;  mayntenynge  hit,  |>at 
Cristen  men  may  frely  telle  holy  writte,  and  comyne  lawe  and 
bileve  of  Cristen  peple ;  iFor,  J?orow  Goddis  grace,  nou}>er  for  lyfe 
ne  dethe  Jjai  wille  no  ferj^er,  but  crien  oute  on  \o  open  synnus 
ande  heresies  of  Anticriste  and  his  fautouris. 

POINT   XVIII. 

Also  bischopis  prestis  and  frerus  putten  to  pore  men  J^at  j^ai 
seyn,  ]?at  a  preste  beyng  in  dedely  synne  nouJ?er  makis  ]?o  sacra- 
ment of  ])0  auter,  ne  cristynes,  ne  ^yves  ony  sacrament. 

Sikerly  here  is  feyned  finge  putte  on  pore  men,  wi])Outen 
evydence  of  J^er  seyynge.  But  Cristen  men  sayne,  ]>at  a  preste 
beynge  in  dedely  synne  may  make  and  ^yve  sacramentis  to 
salvation  of  hem  ]>at  worj^ily  receyven  hem,  and  consenten  not 
to  ]?o  prestus  synne ;  as,  if  his  synne  be  privey,  and  als  sone 
as  ]?ai  knowen  hit,  ]?ai  done  }>er  bisynes  for  to  amende  hym  by 
mekenys  and  charite.  And  if  he  wille  not  amende  hym,  hym 
owe  to  be  eschewid  as  a  hethen  man,  as  ]?o  gospel  techis. 
But  \o  preste  in  J)is  case  mynystris  to  his  owne  dampnacion, 
as  Seint  Poule  sais,  ]?at  is,  if  he  amende  hym  not  in  J?is  lyve. 
And  he  displesis  God  ful  muche  and  deceyvus  ])0  pepul  of 
gostly  helpe  and  teris  God  to  vengeaunce  f)en  to  mercy,  as 
holy  writt,  Seint  Gregore,  and  ojjer  doctouris  tellen.  If  ]>o 
preste  unworj^ily  sey  masse,  and  receyve  J?o  sacrament  un- 
worthily, he  receyvus  dampnacion  to  hym,  and  is  gilty  of  J)0 
body  and  ]?o  blode  of  )?o  Lorde,  as  holy  writte  sais ;  ])at  is,  as 


18.  That  a 
priest  in  deadly 
sin  can  make 
no  sacranicnt ; 
how  far  the 
charge  is  true. 


dele  \>at. 


supplied  conjeclurally. 


See  p,  409,  note  a. 


486 


WYCLIF'S  WORKS. 


19.  That  prayer 
in  a  church  is 
no  better  than 


John  iv.  23. 


holy  doctours  sayne,  he  is  gilty  as  he  }?at  betrayed  Crist,  and 
as  he  ]?at  naylud  hym  on  |?o  crosse.  Ande  if  his  synne  be 
open,  \o  pepul  owes  nout  to  receyve  sacramentus  of  hym,  leste 
consent  to  his  synne  make  hem  parteners  in  peyne,  nomely 
of  open  fornicacione,  open  covetyse  and  raveyne  of  pore 
mennus  lyvelode,  ]?at  is  mawmetry,  as  Seint  Poule  tellis,  and 
of  symonye,  ]?at  is  cursid  heresie,  Jjat  maids  \o  doar  and  alle 
\o  maynteners  J?eroff  cursud  of  God  and  of  al  holy  Chirche. 
Ffor  Seint  Jon  Evangelist  sais  in  his  Epistile,  If  ony  man  come 
to  50W  and  bringe  not  ]?is  doctrine  of  \o  gospell,  nyl  ^ee  receyve 
hym  in  to  ^oure  howsis,  ne  say  ^ee  to  hym,  Hayle.  Sothly 
he  })at  schal  say  to  hym,  Hayle,  comyns  wij?  his  yvel  werkis. 
Lorde  !  how  unkynde  is  J)at  childe  J^at  wittyngely  is  present 
where  open  despite  and  deth  of  his  fadur  is  done,  and  con- 
sentus  ])erto !  pus  done  yvel  Cristen  men,  }>at  receyven  sacra- 
mentis  of  prestus  knowen  in  open  grete  synnes  biforesaide; 
for  jjerinne,  als  muche  as  in  hem  is,  ))ai  crucifien  Jesus  Criste 
and  appro ven  his  deth.  perfore  Cristen  men  schulden  bisye 
hem  for  to  here  reverently  and  devoutely  Goddis  worde, 
and  receyve  sacramentis  at  prestis  of  clene  life,  and  amende 
vicious  prestes  by  gode  counselyng  and  ensaumple  of  gode 
lyife,  and  els  eschewe  ]jer  companye  as  cursid  men.  Ffor 
Seint  Poule  sais,  wi]?  leccherous  covetous  men,  or  drunkenlewe 
by  custome,  Cristen  men  schulden  not  take  mete. 

POINT   XIX. 

Also  byschopis  ande  frerus  putten  to  pore  men  J>at  J>ai  sayne, 
}»at  men  owen  not  raj^er  for  to  pray  in  chirche  }>en  in  ofer  placis. 

Here  Cristen  men  sayne,  J?at  in  iche  place  where  a  man  is 
he  owes  for  to  pray  God  in  spirite  and  treuthe,  J?at  is,  wi]?  wille 
and  devocioun  and  clennes  of  lyvynge.  Crist  says;  Tyme 
comys  when  nou]?er  in  J)is  hille  ne  in  Jerusalem  men  schullen 
worschipen,  but  hit  byhoves  for  to  worschipe  God  in  spirite 
and  treuthe ;  }>at  is,  J?at  \o  hert  by  clen  desire,  and  al  \o  man, 
be  kepynge  of  Gods  heste,  worschipe  God  trewly ;  ellis  wil 
Criste  say  to  hem.  What  say  ^ee  to  me,  Lord,  Lord,  and  do  not 
\o  j?inge  \2X  I  say ;  ande  efte,  pis  pepul  honouris  me  wi}?  \^x 
lippis,  sojjcly  |?er  hert  is  fer  fro  me.     Forso)?e  }>ai  worschipe 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 


487 


me  wijjouten  cause,  techynge  \o  doctrynys  ande  \o  maunde- 
mentis  of  men.  Seint  Poule  sais,  I  wole  J?at  men  prayen  in 
iche  place,  liftynge  clene  hondis,  j?at  is,  gode  werkys,  wi}>outen 
wrath  ande  strife.  Also  David  seis,  My  soule,  blesse  J;ou  to 
J)0  lorde  in  iche  place  of  his  lordschip.  Men  of  God  dreden 
to  pray  in  mony  grete  chirchis,  leste  ]?ai  ben  cursid  and  ab- 
hominabul.  po  comyne  lawe  sais,  A  chirche  )?at  is  halowid 
by  covenaunt-making  is  ra{?er  cursid  J?en  halowed.  Crist  sayde 
of  J70  temple  of  Jerusalem,  Myn  hows  schal  be  clepud  a  hows 
of  prayere,  so}?ely  ^e  have  made  it  a  den  of  thefis.  If  als  open 
symony,  extorsioun,  fals  oJ?is,  and  false  causis,  bene  mayntenyd 
in  grete  chirchys  nowe  as  was  J?en  in  Jerusalem,  ))en  as  unclene 
and  unholy  bene  ])ai  as  Jerusalem,  ])at  was  destroyed  by  hej^en 
men.  Moreover  \o  place  halowis  not  a  man,  but  a  man 
halowis  \o  place,  as  \o  storye  of  Machabeis  and  comyne  lawe 
seyne.  Ande  cursid  pepul  defoules  \o  londe  in  whiche  hit 
dwellis,  as  God  wittenessis  ofte  by  his  prophetis,  how  J?o  londe 
of  byheste  was  polutid  for  ydolatrie  and  ojjer  synnes  of  Jewis. 
And  J?o  erthe  was  cursid  in  Adams  werke,  as  God  seis  in  \o 
furste  boke  of  holy  writte.  pen  hit  semys  ]?at  grete  churchis 
where  symonye  is  done,  false  oJ?is,  fals  covetise,  takynge 
wrongly  o]jer  godis  by  extorsioun  of  feyned  correctione,  sell- 
ynge  of  sacramentus,  and  nomely  of  Cristus  body,  when  men 
seyne  more  J?o  masse  for  money  and  worldly  favoure  j)en  for 
devocione, — alle  suche  chirchis  bene  gretely  polutid  and  cursud 
of  God,  nomely  for  sellynge  of  leccherie,  and  fals  swering  upon 
bokus.  Si}?en  \o  churchis  ben  dennus  of  thefis  and  habita- 
tionis  of  fendis,  hit  is  gode  fat  Cristen  men  bere  no  false  witte- 
nessynge,  saying  in  dede  j^at  suche  chirchys  ben  holier  ]>en  oj^er 
placis  where  is  lesse  synne,  ande  J?at  [j?ai]  ^  mowne  in  pes  serve 
God  in  hem  jjerfore,  sithen  Criste  sais  in  J?o  gospel,  po  rewme 
of  God  is  wij^inne  ^owe,  ande  Seint  Poule  seis,  Jjat  Cristen  men 
ben  f)0  temple  of  J?o  Holy  Goste,  consent  ^ee  not  ]?erfore  to  \q 
symony  of  byschopis,  ne  covetise  of  ojjer  prestis,  for  )?o  feyned 
blessynge  of  heretikis  to  whos  blessyng  God  cursus,  as  \o  pro- 
phete  wittenessis ;  as  Seint  Jerome  sais,  wij?  \q  comyn  lawe, 
whatever  }?ai  blessen  God  cursis. 

^  supplied. 


488 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


Few  churches 
are  now  con- 
secrated with- 
out simony. 


Efte  men  mowe  say  ]?er  Pater  noster  medefully  under  ))0 
cope  of  heven,  as  Crist  dide  in  \o  hille  in  ny3ttus,  ande  ))0 
apostilus  in  prisone  and  oj^er  placis,  J?of  ]?ai  do  symonye  for 
halowynge  chirchis  and  J>er  ^erdis  and  auteris.  Ffor  now 
comynly  none  is  halowyd  wi|?outen  symonye  of  fals  suifrygans, 
forsworn  mony  wayes.  Be  ^e  not  made  thrallys  to  heretikis 
and  fendus,  by  ypocrisie  of  Jjes  nedeles  halowyngus,  ])at  comynly 
is  verrey  cursynge,  but  pray  ^e  whereever  ande  when  God  ^yves 
50W  moste  devocioun  ande  fervour  of  charite.  Crist  seis,  When 
J}OU  schalt  pray,  entre  into  l?i  couche,  and  \>i  dore  schytte,  pray 
\i  Fadur  in  hydde  place.  Seint  Austyne  sais,  What  Jjou  to 
bysechynge  God  sechest  an  holy  place  and  convenable? 
dense  ]?ou  ]?ine  inwarde  ]?ingis,  Jjat  is,  J)i  soule  and  conscience,  ^ 
and  alle  yvel  covetise  put  away  fro  };ennes;  mak  redy  to  }?e 
a  privey  place  in  pes  of  jjine  hert,  willynge  to  pray ;  pray  J?ou 
in  J?i  selfe,  and  do  so,  bro|)er,  j^at  ])0u  be  ]?o  temple  of  God. 

So]?ely  here  God  heris  graciusly  where  he  dwellis.  pus 
Cristen  men  willen  devoutely  comyn  to  ]?o  chirche,  where  prestis 
bene  gode  and  clene,  and  Gods  word  wele  tau^t,  ande  sacra- 
mentis  frely  mynistrid,  not  solde  for  money ;  and  where  symony 
regnus  openly,  wi]>  fals  oj)US,  ravayn,  pride,  and  mayntenynge 
of  leccherye  and  o)?er  synnus  for  money,  ]?ai  will  flee  fennus, 
leste  }>ai  consent  to  open  mawmetry  and  oJ?er  cursidnes.  Ffor 
})0  hoore-hows  is  not  so  cursid  as  mony  suche  templis  bene  ; 
ffor  more  cursid  synne  regnus  in  hem,  and  lesse  schameles, 
undur  coloure  of  holynes  ande  ri^twysenes,  J^en  at  J?o  hoore-hows 
]?at  alle  men  knowen  is  nou^t ;  f>ow  popis  and  bischopis  halowen 
horedame  by  receyvyng  of  money,  and  bene  partyners  }?eroif, 
wers  J?en  ]?ai  }>at  done  it  in  dede.  For  }30  suffrynge  of  lecchery 
is  expressely  a^eynus  Goddis  commaundement,  ande  receyvyng 
of  ]>is  money  is  mayntenynge  j^eroif,  for  whiche  J)0  bischope, 
by  Goddis  lawe  and  comyne  lawe  of  Jjo  Chirche,  schulden  be 
degradid,  for  hit  is  open  mayntenynge  of  open  erroure  a5eyne 
Cristen  menus  bileve.  And  so  no  doute  oure  byschopis,  mayn- 
tenynge hit  openly  and  stedfastly,  ben  cursid  heretikis  and 
trervn  ^  God  to  vengeaunce. 


^  This  is  all  that  I  can  make  out  of  'the  strangely  abbreviated  word  in 
the  MS. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS, 


489 


POINT   XX. 

Also  byschopis  prestus  and  freris  putten  to  pore  men  J?at  J^ai 
sayne,  J)at  \o  festys  of  Steven,  Laurence,  Nicholas,  Kateryne, 
Margarete,  and  of  o}?er  seintis,  ben  not  to  be  worschipid  ne 
bene  to  be  halowid,  for  })at  men  wote  not,  as  Jjai  sayne,  whej?er 
J?ai  bene  dampned  or  saved;  ne  men  owen  not  to  byleve  ne 
stonde  to  ]?o  canonysyng  of  foo  seyntus  made  by  \o  courte 
of  Rome  in  l?is  part. 

Here  is  open  malice  and  untreuthe  putte  on  Cristen  men. 
Ffor  of  Seint  Steven  men  bene  certeyne  by  holy  writte  J^at  he 
is  a  gloriouse  martire,  ande  trewly  prechid,  bojje  of  \o  Olde 
Testament  ande  J)0  Newe,  when  he  was  onely  deken,  which  men 
sayne  nowe  is  a^eyne  \o  lawe  and  dewe  obedience,  and  in  l?is 
J>ai  distroyen  his  martirdame,  or  ellys  ]?ai  sayne  nowe  open 
falshede,  \2X  dekenys  owen  not  to  preche.  Of  Seint  Laurence, 
Seint  Nicholas,  Seint  Kateryne,  and  Seynt  Margarete,  virgynes, 
Cristen  men  dowten  no)?inge  ))at  ]?ai  bene  glorious  seyntis,  but 
supposen  hit  sothe,  and  not  as  article  of  \o  bileve  ]?at  iche  man 
mot  bileve  upon  payne  of  dampnacioun.  But  of  oJ>er  J?at 
lyveden  late,  and  bene  clepid  seyntis,  and  seen  grete  heresies 
of  open  tirauntry  of  worldely  prelatis,  ande  tolden  nout  )?o 
treuthe  and  sufiiriden  ]?erfore  persecucion,  as  did  Grosthede 
])at  was  pursued  of  \o  pope,  and  mony  trewe  Menourys,  as  men 
sayne,  but  raj?er  faveriden  hem  [in]  ^  )?ese  open  errouris,  men 
witten  never  whej)er  |)ai  died  fynaly  wijjouten  satisfaccioun  for 
))er  synnus,  ande  endid  in  charite.  Ande  if  ]?ai  haden  bene 
open  trewe  men,  as  Grosthede  was,  in  withstondynge  j?o  pope, 
]5ai  schulden  have  bene  hatid  als  myche  as  he  and  o]?er  trewe 
men  weren.  Certis,  ]?of  lewid  men  ande  symple  resten  in 
\o  crede,  ande  knowen  nou}>er  one  ne  ofer  whej^er  ]?ese  late 
men  ben  seintus,  hit  is  none  heresie,  so  ]?at  ])ai  kepe  Goddis 
hestis. 

Of  ]?es  grete  halidayes  men  wondryn,  ffurst  what  \o  holy 
Trinite   has   trespassid   a3eyne    ))es   worldly   prelatis,    ]?at   his 


20.  That  the 
festivals  of 
saints  ought 
not  to  be  kept 
holy.    We 
make  a  distinc- 
tion, in  favour 
of  the  earlier, 
and  against  the 
later  saints. 


Trinity  Sunday 
and  otherj^rcat 
dnj's  dis- 
pnra^'cd  in 
the  ritual. 


^  supplied  conjectural]  y. 


49° 


WYCLIF'S  WORKS. 


Hallowing  is 
good,  if  it  be  of 
tlie  right  per- 
sons and 
things. 


Sonenday  may  nou^t  be  dowble  feste^,  als  wele  as  \o  festes 
of  mony  ojjer  \2X  littel  profiten  to  holy  Chirche,  and  ban  dowble 
festis  one  or  two ;  ande  wbi  Seint  Poule,  \o  solempne  clerk  and 
apostle  of  alle  \o  apo stills,  J>at  travelid  more  J^en  alle  oj^er,  has 
no  dowble  feste  ne  haliday  by  hymselfe  in  J)0  provynce  of 
Caunterbury,  nou]?er  Conversion  ne  Passione.  And  ^it  he  dide 
more  honom*e  and  profite  of  holy  Chirche  ])an  mony  J?owsandis, 
whos  dayes  men  halowen  more  )?en  })0  Sonenday.  What  have 
alle  ]?o  apostilis  of  Criste  agiltid  in  f»o  sy5te  of  symonyen  clerkis, 
]?at  one  symple  seint,  ]?at  longe  lyved  in  luste  of  ]?e  worlde, 
littul  or  nou^t  tau^te  and  wrote  to  edificacioun  of  Cristen  soulis, 
has  more  worschipe  and  solempnite  J^en  alle  Cristis  apostilis 
and  disciplis^?  What  have  alle  J30  foure  doctouris  of  holy 
Chirche  trespassid,  ])at  J>ei  alle  haven  not  one  haliday  amonge 
lewid  men,  as  wele  as  mony  confessom'us  of  synglere  bis- 
choperiches?  Hit  semys  J>at  syngulere  aifeccione,  and  ac- 
ceptynge  of  persons  a^eynes  Goddus  lawe,  ande  lesse  worschip 
of  great  seyntis,  wyrcchys  myche  ]?at  is  done  in  ])is  halowynge. 
What  has  Seint  Jon  Baptiste  trespast,  J^at  his  day  of  martir- 
dame  is  not  halowid  dowble  feste,  as  wele  as  martirdame  and 
translacioun  of  Seint  Thomas  ?  Whe]?er  Baptiste  hade  werse, 
and  was  lesse  holy  ]?en  Thomas  ? 

Mony  Cristen  men  wonderyn  whi  prelatis  chargen  more 
bodily  werk  done  on  a  ly^t  haliday,  f>en  cursid  pride,  open 
blaspheme  of  God  by  fals  swerynge,  done  on  a  Sonenday,  wij) 
glotony,  leccherie,  drunkennes,  open  marchaundyse,  fals  cove- 
tise,  chydynge  and  fey3ttynge,  ande  wronge  schedynge  of  man- 
nys  blode,  wiJ?  usm-e  and  false  extorsiouns.  Men  proposen  not 
J30  lewed  pepul  schulde  be  chargid  wi]?  moo  halidayes,  ne  wij? 
alle  J?ese,  but  for  to  schewe  ]?at  muche  of  J?is  halowynge  gose 
aftur  luste  and  accepting  of  persones,  and  noujjer  aftur  resoun 
ne  charite.  For  if  \o  pepul,  laboreris,  halo  widen  wele  J?o 
Sonendayes,  and  kepte  hem  upon  J>er  my^t  fro  open  synnes. 


«  According  to  their  dignity,  and 
the  degree  in  which  they  are  per- 
mitted to  displace  variable  feasts, 
the  festivals  of  saints,  in  the  modem 
Roman  ritual,  are  rated  as,  greater- 
double,  double  of  first  class,  double 


of  second  class,  and  semi-double. 

^  The  description  must  be  in- 
tended for  St.  Thomas  of  Canter- 
bury, who  was  for  many  years  the 
king's  chancellor,  and  led  a  worldly 
life  before  he  was  made  archbishop. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS, 

doynge  treuth  and  charlte,  hit  were  ynow^e  ]>of  J)ai  hadden  no 
moo  gnaris. 

POINT  XXL 

Also  bischopis  and  freris  putten  to  pore  men  J)at  j?ai  sayne, 
])at  )?o  holy  Trinite  in  no  manere  schulde  be  worschipid,  fygurid, 
fourmed,  ne  payntid,  in  jjat  fourme  by  whiche  comynly  it  is 
peyntid  by  alle  j)0  Chirche  of  God. 

Here  Cristen  men  supposen  ]?at  J?ese  prelatis  menyn  of  ])is 
J)inge,  where  a  ]?inge  is  payntud  as  if  \o  Fadir  of  heven  were  an 
olde  hore  man,  \o  secunde  persoun  a  man  crucified,  \o  ]?rid 
persone  a  white  culvyr.  Of  ]?is  paynting  men  supposen,  ])at  hit 
bringus  symple  men  of  cunnynge  into  grete  erroure,  fFor  by  ]?is 
\o  Fadir  moote  be  eldur  )?en  \o  Son  if  |)is  payntynge  be  trewe, 
and  ]?ai  paynten  ))0  Trinite,  ]?at  is  spirite  and  no  creature,  pai 
make  \o  godhede  of  \q  Trinite  a  man,  and  ))at  \o  secunde 
persone  by  his  godhede  is  man,  and  whenever  \o  Trinite  was, 
J)0  secunde  persone  was  man.  God  kepe  men  fro  l>is  foule 
heresie !  By  ]?is  payntynge  \o  Holy  Goste  is  not  like  to  God 
\o  Fadur,  ne  to  God  ]?o  Son,  whiche  erroure  be  fer  fro  Cristen 
mennys  soulys.  Ne  men  supposen  J?at  alle  Cristen  chirchis 
have  ]?is  payntynge,  as  l)ese  prelatis  and  freris  seyne.  Ffor  in 
heven,  j?at  is  chefe  Chirche,  is  not  J>is  payntynge ;  and,  in  case, 
mony  Cristen  chirchis  wolen  nout  receyve  hit;  ]?erfore  hit  is 
none  heresie,  J)OW  }>is  ymages  be  lefte,  sijjen  God  expressely 
commaundis  in  holy  writte,  pou  schalt  nout  make  to  fe  a  graven 
ymage,  j?at  is  of  \o  godhede,  ne  eche  lickenes  in  heven  aboven 
and  }>at  is  in  erthe  bynethe,  ne  of  )?oo  )?ingis  J?at  bene  in  watur 
under  erthe,  ne  ]30u  schalt  worschip  hem  in  erthe.  pis  com- 
maundement  is  ever  in  stryngthe,  ande  if  prestis  sufFeryn  and 
counforten  \o  peple  for  to  worschip  fals  ymagis  for  wynnynge 
of  offerynge,  fai  bene  cursud  heretikis.  And  if  J?ai  enfourmen 
not  j?o  peple,  J)at  J)ai  offer  not  to  J^er  pore  neygheburis  made  to 
j)0  ymage  and  liknes  of  \o  holy  Trinite,  but  by  blynde  devocion 
drawen  Jjer  l}^elode  away  for  }jer  wynnynge,  J^ai  ben  cursud 
monquellers,  and  worschipen  false  goddis.  If  j^ai  techen  in 
worde  or  dede,  jjat  hit  is  better  and  more  plesus  to  God  for  to 
offer  to  dede  stockys  or  stonys  J?en  to  pore  men,  })at  God  com- 


491 


21.  That  it  Is 
wrong  to  paint 
or  carve  repre- 
sentations of 
the  Trinity. 


493 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


22.  That  a 
priest  may  not 
set  his  office  to 
hire. 


maundis  up  payne  of  dampnacione,  J)ai  techen  open  heresie. 
If  ])ai  sayne  in  worde,  }?at  hit  is  beste  a  man  to  do  after  his  owne 
devocioun,  Jjai  sayne  a^eyne  Crist  and  faylen  foule  in  charite ; 
for  ]?ai  schulden  preche  openly  ])at  it  is  beste  J>at  iche  man  con- 
fourme  his  wille  to  Gods  heste  and  counsaile,  raj^er  ])en  after 
blynde  devocioun,  }>at  God  never  bad  ne  counseylid  Jjerto. 
perfore  Cristen  men  schulden  honoure  ]?o  Trinite  in  verrey 
bileve  wi[?outen  erroure,  ande  holy  lyvynge  wi})Outen  ypocrisie, 
and  brennyng  charite  to  frende  ande  enmye  wi})Outen  cessyng, 
ever  encresynge  ]?erinne,  ande  worschippynge  ande  helpynge  pore 
men  made  to  Goddis  ymage  ande  lickenys,  wiJ?outen  meynten- 
ynge  of  nedeles  beggars,  J^at  stelen  }>o  lyvelode  of  verrey  nedy 
men  and  bedraden.  And  J)is  is  ynow^e  to  come  to  heven, 
wi})0uten  novelrie  of  covetous  prestis  and  crafty  payntouris,  ]?at 
crien  more  on  grete  Dyan  Jjen  on  Gods  hestis. 

POINT  XXII. 

Also  prelatis  and  freris  putten  to  pore  men  ]?at  })ai  sayne,  j?at 
hit  is  not  leefful  to  a  preste  for  to  sette  to  hire  his  bysynes  of 
werkis. 

Here  is  \o  sothe  sparid,  for  sojjely  a  preste  may  lawefully 
hire  his  wrytynge,  his  travaile,  of  techynge,  byndynge  of  bokis, 
and  mony  o]?er  honeste  traveylis,  as  Seint  Poule,  wor]?i  many 
Jjowsandus  prestis,  gat  his  lyvelode  wi]?  a  ful  symple  crafte,  as 
holy  writte  wittenessis.  But  to  \o  poynt.  Men  seyne  playnly, 
J?at  a  preste  may  leeifully  take  a  resonable  lyvelode  of  gode  man, 
or  mony  wij?  one  wille,  so  ]?at  he  do  trewly  his  office  ordeyned 
of  God.  And  if  worldly  covenant-makyng  make  J^at  he  wille  not 
do  his  office  wi];outen  worldely  sikernes  and  worldly  plee,  cha- 
rite and  resoun  of  almes  acorden  not  )?erto.  Ffor  ])is  is  fulle 
symonye,  more  chargyng  muk  J)en  spirituale  office  of  presthod. 
Lete  prestis  lif  wele,  jjat  j?ai  be  ly^t  of  worldly  men  by  holy  en- 
saumple,  and  sithen  j^ai  bene  Goddus  aungelis,  do  J^ei  ])eire 
message,  techynge  ])0  gospel,  and  be  ])ai  devoute  in  prayeris, 
desirynge  and  sekynge  grace  Jjat  J>ei  mowne  be  }>o  folowers  of 
Crist,  and  God  will  not  faile  hem  in  nede.  If  ))ai  done  not 
wele  her  offices  )?at  God  ordeyned,  but  lyven  viciousely,  }?ai  ben 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS, 


493 


Jeuis  and  manquellers,  and  not  prestus  of  God,  ]?ow  \2X  bene 
demed  of  \o  worlde  boJ?e  wise  and  holy ;  as  Seint  Jon  Crisos- 
tome  wittenessys  by  techynge  taken  of  Cristis  apostilis. 

POINT  XXIII. 

Also  bischopis  cnratis  and  freris  putten  on  pore  men  J^at  ])ai 
sayne,  J^at  no  persone  ne  vicare  ne  prelate  is  excusud  fro  per- 
sonele  residense  to  be  made  in  ]?er  beneficys,  in  dwellynge  in 
servycis  of  byschopis,  or  of  archebyschopis,  or  of  ]?o  pope. 

Here  Cristen  men  sayne,  \2X  none  suche  curate  schulde  be 
absent  fro  his  gostly  childryn  for  worldly  pompe,  wombe  joy, 
and  worldely  bysynes  in  J?o  bischopis  courtis.  Ffor  hit  is  more 
synne  to  a  byschope  to  robbe  pore  paryschens  of  J)er  gostly 
leche,  and  oj^er  spirituale  helpe  }>at  J?o  curate  is  bounden  to,  J)an 
to  a  worldly  lord.  And  Jjere  comynly  is  more  ravayne  ande 
glotonye  hauntid  Jjen  in  lordis  courtis ;  more  symonye  on  one 
day  l^en  in  some  lordis  courte  al  his  lyve.  Ande  cursidnes  wi)?- 
outen  noumber  in  oure  knowynge  is  done  ]?ere  under  colour  of 
holynes,  jjat  is  nout  so  colourid  in  many  lordys  courtis.  Hit 
were  lesse  harme  ])at  mony  of  suche  curatis  weren  heerdis  or 
laboreris,  for  J?er  symonye  and  o})er  cursudnessis,  ]?en  J?at  Jjai 
barkyden  in  bischopus  howsis  for  to  encres  more  synne,  so  J)at 
gode  prestis  diden  wele  curatis  offices  to  J^er  paryschys. 

Certis  in  \o  popis  courte  regnys  ))0  same  cause  and  more, 
ledynge  of  gold  out  of  oure  rewme,  wi|)  mayntenynge  of  false 
plees  and  debatis  among  Cristen  men.  Ande  if  ony  of  ]?ese 
curatus  were  trewe  aungelis  of  God,  techynge  and  witteness- 
ynge  openly  to  povert  of  Crist,  a3eyne  worldlynes  and  extor- 
siones  ande  werrys  of  proude  prestis,  J?ai  my^tten  sone  be 
tongide  out  of  court.  But  fro  \o  moste  to  \o  leste  alle  studyen 
aboute  covetyse,  ande  iche  preste  mayntenys  o}?er  J^erinne,  til 
scharpe  vengeaunce  come  upon  hem  alle.  What  pope  or  bischop 
prayes  ony  trewe  preste  for  to  dwell  in  his  court,  for  prechyng 
of  {?o  gospelle  and  werkis  of  penaunce  or  gostly  occupacioun, 
but  ra]?er  for  hunndaunce  ^  and  prosperite  of  worldly  wynnyng. 

^  So  I  read  the  word  in  the  MS. ;  there  seems  to  be  an  error  of  the  scribe, 
for  which  I  cannot  suggest  a  correction. 


23.  That  the 
non-residence 
of  bishops  and 
priests  is 
inexcusable. 


Yet  the  Court 
of  Rome  sanc- 
tions and  per- 
petuates the 
practice. 


494 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


24.  That  parish 
priests  who  do 
not  perform 
their  duty 
ought  to  be 
removed. 


2<.  That 
churchmen 
should  re- 
nounce wealth 
and  luxury,  and 
preach  Christ 
in  poverty. 


And  ever  more  Jjo  pepul  is  robbid  of  gostly  fode,  and  helpe  of 
almes,  and  ensaumple  of  holy  lyife,  ande  gostly  counfort  of  per 
curate,  perfore  it  is  fer  gretter  synne  for  ])0  pope  to  mayn- 
tene  J?is  robrye  Jjen  in  a  lowere  man,  al  be  hit  j^at  it  is  dedely 
synne  who  ever  do  hit. 

POINT  XXIV. 

Also  prelatis  and  proude  ciiratis  and  freris  putten  to  pore 
men  ])at  J?ai  seyne,  jjat  parsouns  ande  vicaris,  not  seying  masse, 
ne  mynystrynge  sacramentus  of  holy  Chirche,  bene  wor]?i  for  to 
be  removed,  and  oj^er  for  to  be  ordeynde  in  her  stede,  ffor 
Jjai  bene  unwor]?i  and  wasters  of  \o  Chirche  godis. 

Here  Cristen  men  sayne,  when  ])0  curatis  bene  not  excusud 
by  sekenys,  but  lyven  in  jolite  of  Jjo  worlde,  ande  nouj^er  prechen 
]?o  gospel,  ne  devoutely  prayen  wij?  clere  conscience,  ne  bisyen 
hem  not  to  lerne  \o  gospel  to  Hf  }»eraftur,  worldely  occupacione 
schal  not  excuse  hem  fro  thefte  ande  raveyne  ande  sleynge  of 
mennys  soulis  bifore  Criste,  juste  domes  man,  if  ]?ai  amenden 
hem  not  by  tyme,  si}»en  holy  writte  [seys]  ^  ])at  he  J)at  travailys 
not  schal  nout  ete.  pes  ]>at  done  not  curatis  office  schulde  not 
have  frutis  Jjat  longen  to  ])0  office,  nomely  when  }>ai  bene 
stronge  of  body,  and  lyvyn  in  ydulnes  of  worldely  vanite.  Ande 
])Owe  suche  unable  curatis,  contynuyng  in  fer  defautis  openly, 
were  putte  oute,  and  holy  prestis  ordeynde  in  J^er  stede,  ^yvynge 
ensaumple  of  holy  lyfe,  trewly  prechynge  J)0  gospel,  and  mekely 
visitynge  ])0  pore  paryschens,  and  helpynge  j^am  at  J)er  my^t, 
hit  were  no  grete  heresie  a^eyne  holy  writte;  but  it  is  cursid 
heresie  for  to  mayntene  hem  in  cursid  lyfe,  for  to  robbe  ]?o 
peple  of  gostly  fode  and  office  of  cm-ate,  and  ^it  to  waste  J^er 
godis  in  lecherye,  glotonye,  and  fals  pride,  ande  vanite  of  fo 
worlde. 

POINT  XXV. 

Also  bischopis  and  freris  putten  to  pore  men  ])at  Jjai  sayne, 
l;at  men  of  Jjo  Chirche  schulden  not  ride  on  so  stronge  horsys, 
ne  use  so  mony  jewelis,  ne  precius  clof»is,  or  delicate  metys, 


^  supplied  conjecturally. 


CONTROVERSIAL  TRACTS. 

but  renounce  alle  ])ingus  and  ^yve  hem  to  pore  men,  goynge  on  i 
fete,  and  takjnge  stavys  in  hondis,  receyvyng  Jjo  state  of  pore 
men,  in  5yv^'ng  ensaumple  of  holynes  by  Jjer  conversacion. 

Here  Cristen  men  thynken  no  grete  heresie,  J?owe  worldly 
prelatis,  in  amendement  of  symonye,  ydolatrie,  and  sleynge  of 
mennys  bodies  and  soulis,  renounce  alle  vanitees  and  waste 
godis,  and  selle  ]?er  fatte  horsis  and  alle  )?er  waste  jewelis  and 
waste  clothis,  delynge  hem  to  pore  men,  and  stoppe  a  taxe  of 
sex  or  seven  fro  Jjo  pore  comyns,  and  go  mekely  on  )?er  fete, 
and  preche  trewly  ^o  gospel,  as  Criste  ande  his  apostilis  diden. 
Ande  l?is  my^t  weie  be  done,  })of  ]>ai  laften  grete  pikid  stavys, 
wij?  daggers  in  J)0  ende,  for  we  redyn  not  })at  Criste  and  his 
apostilis  usiden  suche  stavys,  ne  weppyns  of  debate.  Ande 
J^ow  J)ey  crieden  oute  on  pride  and  glotony,  ydelnes  and  lech- 
erye,  and  extorsions  fat  )>ai  have  done  and  mayntenyd  in  ofer 
men,  and  do  grete  penaunce  and  travaile  al  J?er  lyfe,  and  ^yven 
ensaumple  of  grete  mekenys,  paciens,  povert,  and  charite,  as 
Jesus  Crist  did  and  hys  apostilis,  hit  were  no  grete  heresie. 
Ande  if  one  trewe  byschope  or  moo,  if  God  wole,  writen  fer 
open  heresies,  of  symonye,  of  hyndryng  of  ]?o  kyngus  regal  ande 
seculere  lordschip,  ande  all  grete  synnus  by  whiche  >ai  blyndiden 
\o  pepul,  as  holy  writte  dos  of  errour  of  Seint  Petur  and  of  alle 
\o  apostylys,  and  of  J?o  open  heresie  of  Seint  Poule,  wi]?  David, 
Maudeleyne,  and  mony  moo,  hit  were  no  grete  heresie,  for  to 
brenne  pore  prestis  ]?erfore.  If  pore  men  erriden  in  ony  of 
|>es  sentences,  or  ony  o]?er,  ]>ai  wolden  ful  fayne  be  amendid  of 
trew  clerkis,  wele  lyvyng  and  wele  lemyng  in  holy  writte.  For 
ofer  worldely  clerkus,  blyndid  wi>  covetise  pride  and  envie,  and 
wlappid  in  seculere  office,  as  fai  leden  hem  selfe  to  helle,  so  fai 
wolen  make  lesyngus  to  o]?er  men,  fiaterynge  hem  to  regne  in 
J)er  lustus,  and  seyne  J)at  gode  is  yvel  and  yvel  is  god.  Ffor  J>o 
wyse  man  sais,  Into  an  yvel-willed  soule  wysedame  schale  not 
enter,  ne  dwelle  in  a  body  soget  to  synne. 

perfore  Cristen  men  willen  knowlache  holy  writte  and  \o 
lyvynge  of  Criste  for  J^er  rewle,  and  wolen  do  aftur  ony  man  in 
als  myche  as  j?ai  knowen  sickerly  |>at  he  acordus  })erwithe,  and 
no  ferfer,  for  lyfe  ne  dethe,  wi|)  grace  and  helpe  of  J?o  holy 
Trinite. 


495 


Wisd.  i.  4. 


Christian  men 
will  take 
Scripture  for 
their  sole  rule. 


496  WYCLIF'S  WORKS, 

God  for  his  grate  mercy  distroye  errouris  and  heresies  of 
Anticristis  chyrche,  and  make  knowen  \o  treu])is  of  holy  Chirche, 
and  encrese  ri5twysenys,  pes,  and  charite,  and  ly^te  \o  hertes  of 
lordus,  to  know  and  distroye  \o  heresies  of  \o  Chirche,  f>at 
pride  of  prestis  lese  not  )?is  worlde. 

Amen.     Explicit. 


--O^-0^<^— 


WYCLIF. 


PART    III. 


LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS. 


WOKKS.       VOL.  III.  K  k 


LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS. 


499 


XXX. 

[CONCERNING  THE  EUCHARIST.] 


No.  L 

[The  following  short  piece  exists  nowhere  but  in  Knyghton's  *  Chronicle^ 
bk-  v.,  col.  2650.  His  account  of  it  is,  that  after  having  been  cited  by  the 
Pope — Gregory  XI — to  appear  before  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury  and 
sundry  learned  doctors  in  the  church  of  the  Black  Friars,  London,  Wyclif 
appeared  there  on  the  day  appointed,  renounced  all  his  errors  in  order  to 
escape  death,  and  made  the  confession  '  I  knowleche,'  &c.  Now,  Ejiyghton's 
narrative  of  these  transactions,  as  will  more  clearly  appear  when  we  come 
to  consider  the  longer  declaration  concerning  the  Eucharist  (No.  2), 
is  confused  and  inaccurate ;  and  as  Walden,  who  is  in  every  way  a  more 
trustworthy  guide,  in  his  detailed  narrative  of  these  very  transactions,  says 
nothing  about  this  confession,  but  does  give  a  much  longer  confession  in 
Latin,  beginning  '  Saepe  confessus  sum  et  adliuc  confiteor '  {Fasciculi,  p.  115), 
the  first  part  of  which  agrees  in  its  general  drift  with  the  short  piece  we 
have  before  us,  I  am  forced  to  adopt  the  conclusion  that  the  short  piece 
before  us  is  merely  an  abstract  in  English  of  the  longer  Latin  Confessio. 
It  is  difficult  to  imagine  for  what  purpose  such  an  abstract  would  have 
been  made.  It  would  not  have  proceeded  from  the  Lollards,  for  their 
practice  was  to  give  to  any  documents  or  manifestos  which  they  might  be 
handling,  not  a  more,  but  a  less,  *  uncertain  sound ;  *  instead  of  circulating 
as  Wyclif  s  an  English  abstract  of  his  Confessio,  which  was  absolutely 
inoffensive  to  the  hierarchy,  they  would  have  been  more  likely,  in  trans- 
lating it,  to  exaggerate  the  divergence  from  received  tenets  which  that 
paper  presents.  I  can  only  conceive  that  some  zealous  and  orthodox  priest 
or  friar,  perhaps,  like  Knyghton  himself,  an  inhabitant  of  Leicester,  might 
have  made  this  abstract  of  the  contents  of  the  celebrated  Co?ifessio,  (for  that 
it  was  celebrated,  the  number  of  answers  which  it  called  forth,  and  which 
are  found  in  the  Fasciculi,  demonstrates,)  in  order  that,  being  shown  about 
to  the  illiterate  laity,  it  might  convince  them  that  Wyclif  had  been  obliged 
or  induced  to  abandon  his  novel  views  on  the  Eucharist.  It  would  take 
too  much  space  to  quote  passages  from  the  Confessio  confirmatory  of 
the  opinon  given  above;  nor  is  it  necessary,  as  the  Fasciculi  is  a  book 

^  On  the  question  of  the  genuineness  of  Knyghton's  Fifth  Book,  see 
Appendix. 

K  k  2 


500 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


generally  accessible;  but  I  think  that  a  careful  consideration  of  the  two 
documents  in  connection  with  each  other  would  induce  niost  critics  to  take 
the  same  view. 

The  Confessio  was  written  in  the  early  summer  of  1381  {Fasciculi,  p.  115, 
note  i),  William  Barton  being  then  Chancellor  (Wood's  History  and  Anti- 
quities of  Oxford  University). 

The  text  given  here  is  not  taken  from  the  printed  edition  of  Knyghton 
in  the  Decern  Scriptores,  but  from  the  MSS.  in  the  British  Museum  (Tiberius 
C.  VII.  and  Claudius  E.  III.)  from  which  Twysden  originally  printed  the 
Chro?iicle.'] 

I  KNOWLECHE  \2X  jjc  sacrainent  of  ))e  atiter  is  verrey  Goddus 
body  in  fourme  of  brede ;  but  it  is  in  anofer  maner  Godus  body 
)?an  it  is  in  hevene.  For  in  hevene  it  is  sene  fote  ^  in  fourme 
and  figure  of  fiesshe  and  blode.  But  in  )?e  sacrament  Goddus 
body  is  be  myracle  of  God  in  fourme  of  brede,  and  is  he 
nouj^er  of  seven  fote,  ne  in  mannes  figure.  But  as  a  man 
ieeves  for  to  ]?enk  J?e  kynde  of  an  ymage,  whej>er  it  be  of  oke 
or  of  asshe,  and  settys  his  J^ou^t  in  him  of  whom  is  J?e  ymage, 
so  myche  more  schuld  a  man  leve  to  Jjenk  on  ]?e  kynde  of 
brede,  but  j^enk  upon  Crist ;  for  his  body  is  ]?e  same  brede  })at 
is  \e  Sacrament  of  ]?e  Autere ;  and  wi}>  alle  clennes,  alle  devo- 
cion,  and  alle  charite  ])at  God  wolde  gif  him,  worschippe  he 
Crist,  and  J^an  he  receyves  God  gostly  more  medefully  J?an  ]?e 
prist  })at  syngus  the  masse  in  lesse  charite-  Ffor  j^e  bodely 
etyng  ne  profites  nouth  to  soule,  but  in  als  mykul  as  ])e  soule 
is  fedde  with  charite.  pis  sentence  is  provyde  be  Crist  J?at 
may  nou^t  lye.  For,  as  Jje  gospel  says,  Crist,  J?at  nyght  J^at  he 
was  betrayede  of  Judas  Scarioth,  he  tok  brede  in  hise  hondes, 
and  blesside  it,  brak  it,  and  gaf  it  to  hise  disciplis  to  ete.  Ffor 
he  says  and  may  not  lye,  pis  is  my  body. 


»  The  use  of  this  singular  phrase, 
which,  so  far  as  I  know,  occurs 
nowhere  else,  appears  to  me  to 
show  clearly  the  connection  be- 
tween this  piece  and  the  Latin  Con- 
fessio, which  I  liave  tried  to  establish 
in  the  prefatoiy  notice.  In  the 
latter,  the  terms  '  septipedalis  '  and 
'  septipedalitas '  occur  several  times, 
apparently  in  the  same  sense  as  that 
which  we  now  give  to  the  words 


'  extended '  and  *  extension,*  used  as 
philosophical  terms.  This  usage 
appears  to  have  grown  out  of  the 
belief  mentioned  by  Dr.  Shirley 
{Fasciculi,  p.  558)  that  the  place  in 
the  Holy  Sepulchre  where  Chnst's 
body  was  laid  w'as  seven  feet  long. 
The  substitution  of  '  extended '  for 
'  sene  foot '  or  '  seven  foot '  would, 
I  think,  convey  the  precise  meaning 
of  the  writer. 


LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS, 


501 


XXXL 


[CONCERNING  THE  EUCHARIST.] 


No.  II. 


[Besides  being  given  by  Knyghton,  the  profession  of  faith  which  follows 
is  found  in  one  independent  MS.,  Bodl.  647,  with  *  Johannes  Wycliff'  as 
a  heading  to  it.     It  is  also  included  in  Bale's  Catalogue. 

The  account  which  Klnyghton  gives  of  the  circumstances  under  which 
this  profession  was  made,  seems  at  first  sight  to  be  straightforward  enough, 
but  when  pressed,  turns  out  to  be  a  mass  of  inconsistencies.  After  entering 
in  his  Chronicle  the  short  confession  '  I  knowleche,*  &c.  (see  prefatory  notice 
to  No.  i),  Knyghton  gives,  without  a  break,  a  copy  of  the  tw-enty-four 
conclusions  condemned  as  heretical  or  erroneous  in  the  Council  of  May 
1382.  Archbishop  Courtney,  he  proceeds  to  say,  after  examining  these 
conclusions,  appointed  a  day  on  which  Wyclif  was  to  appear  before  himself 
and  six  other  bishops  at  Oxford,  so  that  the  business  might  be  settled. 
He  adds  that  on  the  day  named  Wyclif  appeared,  and  gave  in  the  state- 
ment *  We  beleve  as  Crist,'  &c.,  namely,  this  tract  which  follows;  after 
which  the  archbishop  considered  the  conclusions  in  Council,  and  con- 
demned them.  Now  this  last  statement  plainly  refers  to  the  proceedings 
of  the  Council  of  London,  which  took  place  therefore,  according  to 
Elnyghton,  after  Wyclif  had  given  in  the  statement  in  question.  And  yet 
the  statement  itself,  speaking  of  '  ])is  counseil  of  freres  at  Londoun  wi]j 
erl>e-dyn,'  affords  decisive  evidence  that  it  was  written  after  the  Council 
had  sat. 

Kjiyghton's  narrative,  therefore,  cannot  be  relied  upon  to  establish  the 
sequence  of  events ;  and  all  that  we  can  say  as  to  the  date  of  the  piece  is, 
that  it  must  have  been  written  between  June  1382  and  Wyclif's  death  in 
1384.  The  difference  in  tone  between  it  and  the  short  confession  'I  know- 
lech  e,'  is  very  marked ;  in  that  scarcely  a  trace  of  heterodoxy  can  be 
detected ;  in  this,  consubstantiation  is  broadly  asserted. 

The  text  is  based  on  Bodl.  647,  collated  with  the  MSS.  of  Knyghton's 
Chronicle  before  referred  to,  namely,  Tiberius  C.  VII.  and  Claudius  E.  III.] 


5oa 


Wr CLIP'S  WORKS. 


The  Eucha- 
ristic  bread  is 
at  the  same 
time  the  true 
body  of  Christ 
and  true  bread. 


It  is  tBie  worst 
heresy  to  be- 
lieve that  the 
sacrament  is 
accident  with- 
out subject. 


JOHANNES   WYCLIFR 

I  BiLEVE^  as  Crist  and  his  apostels  have  tau^t  us,  J)at  \o 
sacrament  of  \o  auter,  whyte  and  rounde,  and  like  io  oj?er  bred, 
or  oost  sacred  ^,  is  verrey  Gods  body  in  fourme  of  bred ;  and 
J?of  hit  be  broken  in  thre  party es,  as  \o  Kirke  uses,  or  elles  in 
a  thousande,  evere  ilk  one  of  j?ese  parties  is  \o  same  Gods 
body.  And  right  as  \o  persoun  of  Crist  is  verrey  God  and 
mon  —  verrey  godhed  and  verrey  monhed  —  right  so  holy 
Kirke,  mony  hundred  vi^inters,  haves  trowed  \o  same  sacrament 
is  verrey  Gods  body  and  verrey  bred,  as  hit  is  fourme  of  Gods 
body  and  fourme  of  bred,  as  teches  Crist,  and  his  apostels. 
And  ]?erfore  Seint  Poul  nemmes  hit  nevere,  bot  when  he  calles 
hit  bred ;  and  he  by  oure  bileve  toke  in  ]?is  his  witte  of  God. 
And  \o  argumentis  ^  of  heretikes  ageyns  ]?is  sentense  are  light 
for  to  assoyle  to  a  Cristen  mon  *.  And  right  as  hit  is  heresye 
*  to  trowe  \2X  Crist  is  a  spiryt  and  no  body,  so  hit  is  heresye  "^  ^ 
to  trowe  \2X  ])is  sacrament  is  Gods  body  and  no  bred;  for  hit 
is  bothe  togedir. 

Bot  ]?o  moste  heresye  ])at  God  suifred  cum  ^  to  his  Chirche, 
is  to  trowe  J)at  |?is  sacrament  is  accydent  wi]?outen  subgett  ^ ; 
and  may  on  no  wyse  be  Gods  body  ^.  And  if  J?ou  sey,  by  his  ^ 
skil  holy  Kirke  hafs  ben  in  erronre  mony  hundred  wynters,  for 
Crist  seis,  by  wittenesse  of  Jerome,  J)at  ]?is  bred  is  my  body, 
soth  hit  is,  specialy  sithen  ]>o  fende  was  loused,  )?at  was,  by 
wittenesse  of  ])0  aungel  to  Jon  ]>o  Evangeliste,  aftir  a  Jjousande 
wynters  ]?at  Crist  was  styed  ^*^  to  heven.  Bot  hit  is  to  suppose 
J)at  mony  seyntis,  ]?at  dyed  in  Jjo  meene  tyme,  bifore  hor  deth 
were  purged  of  J)is  errour.  Ow  !  how  gret  diversyte  is  bytwene 
us  J?at  trowen  J)at  ]?is  sacrament  is  verrey  bred  in  his  kynde, 
and  bytwene  heretikes  })at  tellen  |)at  hit  is  an  accydent  wiJ?outen 


1  We  heleve,  HH.  ^  q„^  lypg  ^yi  ^^^^  ^^^^^  ^^  ^^^  iinsaerede,  HH. 

3  argument.,  HH.  *  lyth  to  a  Cristene  man  for  to  assolve,  HH.  ^  HH 

and  II  omit  the  words  between  asterisks.  ^  come,  HH.  "^  accident 

wi\  a  substans,  HH.  ^  Here  HH  and  II  insert  the  following  sentence  ; 

For  Crist  sayde,  be  ivztnesse  of  Johan,  ])at  \>is  brede  is  my  body.     The  words 
For  Crist  occur  also  in  W,  but  are  scored  through.  ^  j?/s,  HH ;  this,  II. 

^^  stevenyde,  HH. 


LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS. 


503 


sugett  I  For  bifore  }?at  {>o  fende,  fadir  of  leesynges,  was  loused, 
was  nevere  ]?is  gabbynge  contreved  \  And  how  gret  diversite 
is  bitwene  us  fat  trowen  J>at  })is  sacrament  in  his  kynde  is 
verrey  bred,  and  sacramentaly  Gods  body,  and  bytwene  here- 
tikes  ]?at  trowen  and  tellen  ]?at  J)is  sacrament  may  on  no  wyse 
be  Gods  body !  For  I  dar  surely  sey,  )>at  \S.  j?is  were  sothe, 
Crist  and  his  seyntis  dyed  heretikes,  and  Jjo  more  partye  of 
holy  Kirke  byleved  ^  nowe  heresye.  And  herfore  devoute  men 
supposen  )?at  |)is  counseil  of  freris  at  ^  Londoun  was  wi]>  erthe 
dyn*  For  \€\  putt  an  heresye  upon  Crist  and  seyntis  in 
heven;  wherfore  J)0  erthe  trembled,  faylande  monnis  voice 
answerande  ^  for  God,  as  hit  did  in  tyme  of  his  passioun,  when 
he  was  dampned  to  bodily  deth  ^. 

Crist  and  his  modir,  J?at  in  grounde  have  destryed  alle 
heresies,  kepe  his  Kirke  in  right  byleve  of  })is  sacrament.  And 
move  w'e^  kyng  and  his  reume  to  aske  scharpjy  of  clerkes^ 
J?is  office ;  Jjat  alle  possessioners,  on  peyne  of  leesynge  of  alle 
hor  temporaltees,  telle  \o  kyng  and  his  rewme,  wij?  sufficiaunt 
groundynge,  what  is  |?is  sacrament ;  and  alle  \o  ordiris  of  freris, 
in  peyne  of  lesynge  of  alle  hor  legeaunce,  telle  ]?o  kynge  and 
his  reume  wi))  gode  groundynge  what  is  J)is  ^  sacrament.  Ffor 
I  am  certen,  for^  \o  thridde  part  of  clergye  \2X  defFendes  ]?is 
sentence  ^°  ]>at  is  here  seyde,  J)at  ])ai  wil  defFende  hit  on  peyne 
of  losyng  of  hor  lyve  ".     Amen  ^l 

^  contryvede,  HH.  ^  hdevyih,  HH.  ^  and,  HH.  ^  hery 

dene,  HH.  ^  ansueride,  HH.  «  Ipe,  HH.  ^  bis  clerkus,  HH. 

8  ])e,  HH.  «  of,  HH.  ^°  \>ise  doutes,  HH  ;  thyse  dowtes,  11. 

^  onpayne  of  her  lyf  HH.  ^  om.  HH,  H. 


a  As  printed  by  Lewis  and  Dr. 
Vaughan,  this  passage  makes  mere 
nonsense  ;  but  if  they  had  consulted 
the  MSS.  all  difficulty  would  have 
vanished.  Men  think,  says  Wyclif, 
that  it  was  for  this  reason  that  the 
late  council  in  London  was  sig- 
nalized by  an  earthquake,  namely, 
because  its  members  put  a  heresy 


upon  Crist ;  the  earth  itself,  in  the 
absence  of  a  protesting  human  voice, 
answering  for  God.  Dr.  Vaughan, 
in  the  attempt  to  amend  Lewis* 
version,  makes  matters  worse;  he 
boldly  writes,  '  In  truth,  landman's 
voice  answered  for  God.'  {Tracts 
and  Treatises  of  Wyclyffe,  p.  302.) 


Matt,  xxvii.  51. 


Let  the  king 
demand  of  all 
the  clergy 
what  is  their 
belief  herein. 


5°4 


WrCLIF'S  WORKS. 


XXXII. 
[LETTER  TO  POPE   URBAN.] 


[There  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  origmal  of  this  letter  was  written  in 
Latin,  in  the  form  preserved  by  Walden  in  the  Fasciculi  Zizaniorum,  p.  341, 
and  to  be  seen  in  a  number  of  MSS.  now  at  Vienna.  The  English  version, 
as  preserved  in  two  MSS.  (one  at  the  Bodleian,  the  other  at  New  College), 
is  a  heightened  and  amplified  composition;  probably  it  was  prepared 
by  "WycHf's  followers  chiefly  with  a  view  to  home  consumption.  The 
differences  between  the  two  versions  are  indicated  in  the  notes. 

Of  the  authenticity  of  the  letter  there  can  be  no  doubt.  Walden,  in  the 
Fasciculi,  introduces  it  with  the  heading,  •  Copia  cujusdam  literae  magistri 
Johannis  Wyclyif  missae  Papae  Urbano  VI.  ad  excusationem  de  non 
veniendo  sibi  ad  citationem  suam,  a.d.  mccclxxxiv.*  It  was  written  there- 
fore in  1384,  the  last  year  of  Wychfs  life,  when  he  was  affected  by 
paralysis,  and  incapable  of  making  the  long  journey  to  which  the  JPope 
invited  him. 

The  text  is  founded  on  the  Bodleian  (647),  collated  with  the  New  College 
MS.  (W  and  Q  in  this  edition).  The  latter  I  believe  to  be  a  copy  of  the 
former,  so  far  at  least  as  this  letter  is  concerned.] 


1  HAVE  joy  fully  to  telle  to  alle  treue  men  ]>o  bileve  J)at  I 
holde,  and  algatis  to  ]>o  pope ;  for  I  suppose  J)at  if  my  fayth 
be  ri^tful  and  gyven  of  God,  ]>o  pope  wil  gladly  ^  conferme  hit ; 
and  if  my  fayth  be  erroin,  J>o  pope  wil  wisely  amende  hit. 

I  suppose  over  f>is,  |?at  J?o  gospel  of  Crist  be  hert  of  J?o 
corps  of  Gods  lawe  ^ ;  ffor  I  byleve  ])at  Jesus  Crist,  J?at  gaf 
in  his  owne  persoun  )?is  gospel,  is  verrey  God  and  verrey  mon, 
and  be  ])is  hert  ^  passes  alle  of  er  lawes. 

I  suppose  over  j>is  ]?at  }>o  pope  be  moste  oblischid  to  ]>o 
keping  of  )?o  gospel  among  alle  men  ]?at  lyven  here;   for  ]>o 


^  om 


Q.  ^  be  herie  of  Gpddis  lawe,  Q.  ^  om.  Q. 


LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS. 


S^S 


pope  is  hyeste  vicar  ]?at  Crist  has  here  in  erthe.  Ffor  more- 
nesse  of  Cristis  vicar  is  not  mesurid  by  worldly  morenesse,  hot 
bi  J)is,  )?at  ])is  vicar  sues  more  Crist  by  virtuous  iyvyng^;  for 
])us  techis  \o  gospel,  )>at  )?is  is  \o  sentence  of  Crist. 

And  of  })is  gospel  I  take  as  byleve,  fat  Crist,  for  tyme  J?at  he 
walkid  here,  was  moste  pore  mon  of  alle,  bope  in  spirit  and  in 
havyng ;  for  Crist  seis  fat  he  had  no^t  for  to  reste  his  hed  on. 
And  Poule  seis  fat  he  was  made  nedy  for  our  love  a.  And 
more  pore  my^t  no  mon  be,  noufer  bodily  ne  in  spirit.  And 
pus  Crist  putte  fro  hym  al  maner  of  worldly  lordschip.  Ffor  fo 
gospel  of  Jon  tellif  fat  when  f ei  wold  have  made  Crist  kyftg, 
he  fled  and  hid  hym  fro  hem,  for  he  wold  non  such  worldly 
hynesse. 

And  over  fis  I  take  as  byleve,  fat  no  mon  schuld  sue  fo 
pope,  ne  no  ^  seynt  fat  now  is  in  heven,  bot  in  als  myche  as  he 
sues  Crist.  For  Jon  and  James  errid  when  f  ei  coveytid  worldly 
hynesse;  and  Petir  and  Poule  synned  also  when  fei  denyed 
and  blasphemed  in  Crist ;  bot  men  schuld  not  sue  hom  in  fis, 
for  fen  fei  wente  fro  Jesus  Crist  ^.  OfF^  fis  I  take  as  hool- 
some  counseil,  fat  f o  pope  leeve  his  worldly  lordschip  to  worldly 
lordis,  as  Crist  gaf  hom, —  and  move  spedely  alle  his  clerkis 
to  do  so.  For  fus  did  Crist,  and  tau^t  f us  his  disciplis,  til  f o 
fende  had  blyndid  fis  world.  And  hit  semes  to  sum  men,  fat 
clerkis  fat  dwellen  lastandly  in  fis  error  ageyns  Gods  lawe,  and 
flees  to  sue  Crist  in  fis,  ben  open  heretikes,  and  hor  fautours 
ben  partyneris  c. 

And  if  I  erre  in  fis  sentense,  I  ^vil  mekely  be  amendid,  ^he, 
by  f o  deth,  if  hit  be  skilful,  for  fat  I  hope  were  gude  to  me. 
And  if  I  my^t  travel  in  myn  owne  persoun,  I  wold  wif  gode 


Matt.  viii.  20. 
2  Cor.  viii,  9. 


^  in  vertuous  lif,  Q. 


any,  Q. 


3  A7ld,  Q. 


a  In  Walden's  Latin  version  only 
the  references  to  these  texts  are  given. 
The  two  sentences  which  follow  are 
not  in  Walden ;  probably  they  were 
inserted  by  the  disciple  who  trans- 
lated the  letter.  They  are  also 
omitted  both  by  Lewis  and  Dr. 
Vaughan,  although  they  are  found 
in   both   the   extant   copies   of  the 


English  version. 

^  Lewis,  who  is  followed  by  Dr. 
Vaughan,  cuts  down  this  long  sen- 
tence to  — '  for  James  and  John  errid, 
and  Peter  and  Powl  sinned.' 

^  This  sentence  is  not  in  the 
Latin ;  it  is  also  omitted  by  Lev/is 
and  Dr.  Vaughan. 


t 


5o6 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


wille  go  to  ])0  pope.  Bot  God  ^  has  nedid  me  to  J)0  contrarye, 
and  tau3t  me  more  obeche  to  God  Jjen  to  mon  a.  And  I  sup- 
pose of  oure  pope  j?at  he  wil  not  be  Anticrist,  and  reversen 
Crist  in  )?is  wirkynge,  to  \o  contrarie  of  Cristis  wille;  for  if 
he  summone  ageyns  resoun,  by  him  or  by  any  of  his,  and 
pursue  ]?is  unskilful  summonyng,  he  is  an  open  Anticrist.  And 
merciful  entent  excusid  not  Peter,  ]?at  ne  Crist  cleped  hym 
Sathanas;  so  blynde  entent  and  wicked  counseil  excuses  not 
))0  pope  here ;  bot  if  he  aske  of  trew  prestis  J?at  ]?ei  travel  more 
])an  ]?ei  may,  he  is  not  excusid  by  resoun  of  God  ]?at  ne  he  is 
Anticrist.  For  oure  byleve  techis  us,  }>at  oure  blessid  God 
sufFris  us  not  to  be  temptid  more  })an  we  may;  how  schulde 
a  mon  aske  such  servyce .?  And  Jjerfore  preye  we  to  God  for 
oure  pope  Urban  \o  sex^,  J^at  his  olde  holy  entent  be  not 
quenchid  by  his  enemyes.  And  Crist  Jjat  may  not  lye  seis,  J?at 
\q  enemyes  of  a  mon  ben  specialy  his  homely  meyne^ ;  and  ]?is 
is  soth  of  men  and  fendis. 


supplied  from  Q  ;  om.  W. 


^  sixte^  Q. 


°'  From  this  point  to  the  end  the  English  version  bears  only  a  distant 
resemblance  to  the  Latin, 


LETTERS  AND   DOCUMENTS. 


507 


XXXIIL 

[A  PETITION  TO  THE  KING  AND 
PARLIAMENT.] 


[Although  Lewis  m  his  Life  of  Wyclif  and  Dr.  Milman,  following  Lewis, 
have  unhesitatingly  assigned  the  following  petition  to  Wyclif,  and  assumed 
as  a  fact  that  it  was  addressed  to  the  Parliament  which  met  at  Westminster 
on  the  6th  of  May,  1382,  and  although  I  am  far  from  disputing  either  con- 
clusion, yet  it  is  necessaiy  to  show  that  the  evidence  on  which  they  relied 
is  extremely  slight.  For  the  authorship  we  have  no  other  authority  than 
that  of  Bale,  who  includes  the  piece  in  his  Catalogue.  Dr.  Milman  writes 
as  if  the  articles  of  this  petition  were  mentioned  by  Walsingham  among  the 
opinions  which  he  states  Wyclif  to  have  laid  before  this  Parliament,  in 
which  case  we  should  have  had  the  authority  of  Walsingham  for  ascribing 
them  to  Wyclif;  but  this  is  not  the  case, — although,  by  mixing  up  these 
articles  with  ihe  opinions  which  Walsingham  does  ascribe  to  Wyclif,  Dr. 
Milman  {Latin  Christ,  viii.  192)  makes  it  appear  so.  Only  one  of  the 
opinions,  the  sixth,  named  in  Walsingham's  schedule  (Rolls  edition,  II.  51) 
bears  any  resemblance  to  any  of  the  four  articles  of  the  petition.  However, 
among  the  '  Conclusiones  Johannis  Wycliffe,'  which  William  Swinderby, 
one  of  Wyclif  *s  followers;  preached,  according  to  Walsingham,  at  Leicester 
on  the  Palm  Simday  and  Good  Friday  of  1382,  all  the  four  articles,  ex- 
pressed in  somewhat  different  language,  may  be  found.  It  seems  highly 
probable  therefore  that  Wyclif  did  address  such  a  petition  to  this  Parlia- 
ment; for,  (i)  he  did  not  broach  his  sacramental  doctrine,  which  is  the 
subject  of  the  fourth  article,  before  1381 ;  (2)  it  is  not  likely  that  he  would 
have  presented  his  petition  at  the  short  session  of  the  Parliament  which  met 
in  November,  1381,  and  which  was  completely  engrossed  with  the  recently 
quelled  rebellion;  (3)  after  the  Council  of  London  (begun  May  19,  1382) 
had  sat,  he  would  hardly  have  thought  it  worth  while  or  prudent  to  urge 
upon  Parliament  the  adoption  of  tenets  which  that  Council  had  formally 
condemned. 

Owing  to  an  extraordinary  blunder  of  the  scribe  who  wrote  the  Corpus 
MS.  (X),  this  petition,  though  tw^ce  before  printed,  has  never  yet  appeared 


5o8 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


A  petition  to 
the  King  and 
Parliament  to 
accept  and 
maintain  cer- 
tain articles : 


in  its  genuine  shape.  How  it  occurred,  it  is  now  impossible  to  say ;  but 
the  fact  is  certain,  and  may  be  verified  by  any  one  who  carefully  examines 
the  MS.,  that  the  scribe  has  tacked  on  the  conclusion  of  the  tract  Offeyjied 
contemplatif  lyf,  &c.  (Shirley,  No.  26)  to  this  petition,  and  transferred  the 
genuine  ending  of  the  petition  to  the  end  of  the  tract.  The  MS.  itself 
affords  not  the  faintest  trace  of  any  consciousness  on  the  part  of  the  scribe 
that  by  this  odd  transposition  he  was  making  utter  nonsense.  The  two 
passages  where  the  breaks  occur  run  as  follows ;  I  have  indicated  the  place 
of  each  error  by  an  obelus  : — 

*  Lord  I  where  hes  worldly  prestis  wisere  ];an  'i*  distried.  J?e  false  id]>  tau^te 
of  Anticrist  and  of  his  false  cursede  disciplis  is  ])is,  })at  j}e  sacrament  }>at  men 
seen  wi]?  bodely  ei3e,'  &c.      Offeyned  contemplatif  Uf,  p.  1 70  of  MS. 

*  fe  four]?e  article  is  ]}is;    ])at  Cristis  techinge  and  bileve  of  j^e  sacrament  of 

his  owne  body may  be  tau3t  openly  in  chirchis  to  Cristen  puple,  and 

))e  contrarie  techinge  and  fals  bileve,  brou3t  up  by  cursed  ypocritis  and  heretikis 
and  worldly  prestis,  unkimnynge  in  Goddis  lawe  +  ben  alle  }>e  apostlis  of  Crist : 
it  seme]?  ]>at  ]?ei  ben,  or  ellis  fooles.  Also  Crist  wolde  not  take  J)e  kyngdom,'  &c. 
Coniplainte  to  King  a?id  Parlimnent,  p.  297  of  MS. 

Dr.  James,  however,  in  his  edition  of  the  Complainte  published  in  i6o8, 
'skimmed  o'er  the  ulcerous  place'  by  taking  liberties  with  the  text;  he 
makes  it  ran  thus :  *  the  contrarie  teaching  and  false  beleve  is  brought  up  by 

cursed  hypocrits unkunning  in  Gods  law,  which  see7ne  that  they  are 

apostles  of  Crist,  hut  are  fools.'  In  Dr.  James,  writing  in  1608,  this  might  be 
pardonable ;  but  it  is  difficult  to  understand  how  Dr.  Vaughan,  though  he 
must  have  felt  the  utter  incongruity  of  the  last  part  of  the  fourth  article  with 
the  commencement,  couldreprint  Dr.  James'  text  without  thinking  itnecessaiy 
to  consult  the  original  MS.  The  error  is  so  plain,  that  I  have  here  restored 
the  text  to  what  there  can  be  no  doubt  was  its  original  state,  by  transferring 
the  concluding  portion  of  the  tract  Of  Feyned  contemplatif  lyf  to  its  pro- 
per place  in  the  fourth  article  of  the  petition. 

The  text  is  founded  on  the  copy  contained  in  the  Corpus  volume  so  often 
referred  to.  There  is  another  MS.  at  Dublin  (C.  III.  1 2),  but  it  breaks  off 
imperfect  just  at  the  place  where  the  erroneous  transposition  occurs.] 


Plese  it  to  oure  most  noble  and  most  worjji  King  Richard, 
kyng  boj^e  of  Englond  and  of  Fraunce,  and  to  J^e  noble  Duk 
of  Lancastre,  and  to  ojjere  grete  men  of  }je  rewme,  bo)?e  to 
seculers  and  men  of  holi  Chirche,  ]?at  ben  gaderid  in  ]?e  Parle- 
ment,  to  here,  assent,  and  meyntene  l>e  fewe  articlis  or  poyntis 
J)at  ben  seet  wi]?inne  };is  writing,  and  proved  bof>e  by  auctorite 
and  resoun;  j?at  Cristen  feij?  and  Cristene  religioun  ben  en- 
creessed,   meyntened,  and  made  stable,   si]?  oure  Lord  Jesus 


LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS, 


509 


Crist,  verrey  God  and  verray  man,  is  heed  and  prelat  of  J)is 
religioim,  and  shedde  his  precious  herte  blood  and  water  out  of 
his  side  on  Jje  cros,  to  make  J?is  religioun  perfit  and  stable  and 
dene,  wi|)Oute  errour. 

pe  ffirste  article  is  }>is ;  J^at  alle  persones  of  what  kynne  privat 
sectis,  or  singuler  religioun,  maad  of  sinful  men,  may  freely, 
wijiouten  eny  lettinge  or  bodili  peyne,  leve  }>at  privat  reule  or 
neue  religioun  founden  of  sinful  men,  and  stably  holde  J^e  reule 
of  Jesus  Crist,  taken  and  ^oven  by  Crist  to  his  apostelis,  as  far 
more  perfit  J>an  any  sich  newe  religioun  founden  of  sinful  men. 

pe  resoun  of  }?is  axinge  is  shewyd  })us  \  pe  reule  of  Jesus 
Crist  30ven  to  apostlis,  and  kept  of  hem  aftir  Cristis  ascencioun, 
is  most  perfit  to  be  kept  for  staat  of  lyvinge  in  ]?is  world ;  and 
eche  reule  of  what  kynne  privat  secte,  or  singuler  religioun 
maad  of  sinneful  men,  is  lesse  perfit  j^an  J>e  reule  50ven  of  Crist 
of  his  endeles  wisdom,  and  his  endeles  charitee  to  mankinde. 
perfore  it  is  leveful  to  eche  man  or  persone  of  Jjis  singuler 
religioun  and  professioun  to  leve  it,  cleve  faste  to  })e  reule  of 
Jesus  Crist  as  more  perfit.  pis  resoun  is  pleyn  to  eche  man  of 
wit  and  discrecioun,  and  nameli  to  clerkes ;  si))  men  of  ]?e  popes 
lawe  witnesse)>  pleynly,  j)at  a  man  may  lawfully,  ^ee,  a^enst  his 
soverains  wille,  go  fro  J?e  lasse  perfit  religioun  to  ])e  more  perfit. 
Whi  ]?anne  may  not  a  man  of  privat  rehgioun  forsake  })at,  and 
take  Cristis  clene  religioun,  wijjouten  error  of  any  sinful  fool,  as 
most  perfit  ?  And  ))at  Cristis  reule,  in  his  owne  clennesse  and 
fredom,  is  most  perfit,  is  shewid  by  Jjis  skile.  Ffor  in  as  muche 
as  a  patron  or  a  foundour  is  more  perfit,  more  my^ty,  and  more 
witty,  and  more  holy,  and  in  more  charite,  ]?an  is  annojjer 
patroun  or  foundour,  in  so  muche  is  }?e  firste  patrouns  reule 
betere  and  more  perfit,  ]?an  is  |)e  secounde  patrones  reule.  But 
Jesus  Crist,  patroun  of  Cristene  religioun  ^oven  to  apostelis, 
passej)  wi}?outen  mesure,  in  my^tt,  witt,  and  good  wille,  or 
charitee,  ])e  perfeccioun  of  everi  patroun  of  eny  privat  secte  or 
singuler ;  {jerfore  his  reule  is  most  perfit. 

Also,  ]?at  Cristis  clene  religioun,  m])Oute  cloutynge  of  sinfulle 
mennis  errours,  is  mot  perfit  of  alle,  is  schewyd  by  ))is  skille. 

^    \is  J3MS,  X. 


I.  That  all 
members  of 
religious  orders 
may  be  allowed 
freely  to  leave 
them 


and  adhere  to 
the  rule  and 
order  of 
Christ, 


which  are 
perfect,  and 
exclude  all 
others; 


5IO 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


and  having 
been  followed 
by  the  apostles 
ought  to  have 
been  followed 
in  the  Church 
ever  since ; 


Ffor  o]?ere  Crist  my^te  ^eve  sich  a  reule  most  perfit  for  J)is  lif  to 
be  kept,  and  wolde  not,  and  J?anne  he  was  envyous  (as  St.  Aus- 
tyn  prove])  in  o})ere  materes);  or  ellis  Crist  wolde  ordeyne  sich 
a  reule  and  mi5te  not,  and  ))anne  Crist  was  unmy^ty,— but  it  is 
heresie  to  afFerme  ]?at  on  Crist; — or  ellis  Crist  mi^te  and  couJ>e, 
and  wolde  not  a,  and  Jjanne  he  was  unwitty, — but  ])at  is  heresie 
no  man  shulde  sufFre  to  here,  perfore  ^  Crist  boj^e  mi3te,  and 
coude,  and  wolde  ordeyne  sich  a  reule  most  perfit,  ]?at  owt  to  be 
kept  for  staat  of  )?is  lif.  And  so  Crist  of  his  endeles  wysdome 
and  charite  ordeynede  siche  a  reule.  And  so  on  eche  side  men 
ben  needid,  up  peyne  of  heresie  and  blasphemyj,  and  of  dampn- 
ynge  in  helle,  to  beleve  and  knowlech,  ])at  li'efe  religioun  b% 
Jesus  Crist  [^oven]  ^  to  apostilis,  and  kept  of  hem,  in  his  owne 
fredom,  wi}>oute  cloutinge  of  sinneful  mennis  errour,  is  most  per- 
fit of  alle ;  and  so  to  lette  no  man  to  forsake  privat  religioun, 
and  kepe  Cristis  clene  religioun,  wij^oute  newe  wronge  tradi- 
ciouns  of  synneful  men,  }>at  ofte  erredtn  in  her  owne  lif  and 
tech      e. 

Also  Crist,  in  makynge  J)e  leule  and  ordre  of  apostils,  was  in 
})is  tyme,  and  hevere  bifore  and  evere  aftir,  al  my^ty,  al  witty, 
and  al  ful  of  good  wille  and  charite,  to  make  perfit  reule ;  J)er- 
fore  he  made  not  oonly  a  perfyt  reule,  but  most  perfit  of  alle. 
But  eche  patroun  of  privat  reule  was  unmy^tie  and  lettid,  boj^e 
in  ^iftis  of  kynde  and  grace,  and  not  al  wytty,  but  in  comparisoun 
of  Crist  an  ^  ydiot  or  fool,  and  not  so  well  willinge  to  make  so 
good  and  perfit  as  Crist,  perfore  he  made  a  reule  lesse  good 
and  lesse  perfit ;  and  herof  it  sue]?  pleynly  ])at  Cristis  clene 
religioun  is  most  perfit  o'  alle. 

Also  apo stiles  and  here  folewers,  kepinge  fie  reule  ^oven  to 
hem  of  Crist,  wonne  most  merit  and  }>ank  of  God  in  ])is  kepinge 
bifore  alle  ojjere  tymes.  perfore  ^if  alle  Cristene  men,  boj^e  in 
old  tyme  and  newe,  hadden  kept  J?e  same  reule  of  Crist  in  his 
owne  clennesse  and  fredom,  [j^ei]  ^  shulde  have  discerved  most 
jpank  of  God  in  degre  possible  to  hem.     perfore  no  newe  secte 

^  ])at  perfore,  ^.  ^  supplied  conjectnrally.  '  corrected;  and 

in  MS.  ■*  supplied  conjecturally. 

^  evidently  it  should  be.  '  mi3te  and  wolde^  and  cou]>e  not.' 


LETTERS  AND   DOCUMENTS. 


511 


of  religioun,  straunge  fro  Cristis  secte,  shulde  have  begunne, 
but  )>at  ]?at  was  first  shulde  have  be  kept  in  his  clennesse,  of 
siche  newe  finders  up  of  novekies  and  patrouns.  Also  hit  were 
now  as  good,  and  of  as  muche  merit,  to  kepe  )?e  reule  of  Jesus 
Crist,  as  it  was  at  }?e  beg>Ttnynge;  si)?  Cristis  reule  is  ynow^,  and 
able  for  alle  men  on  lyve,  of  whatevere  complexion  1  or  a.^  \€\ 
ben  f.  But  })is  reule  was  kept  of  Jesus  Crist  and  his  apostilis, 
and  here  beste  seweres,  by  fyve  hundred  ^eer  aftir  his  ascen- 
cioun,  wijjouten  eny  finding  of  any  siche  newe  plauntynge  or 
religioun ;  in  whiche  time  holi  Chirch  encressede  and  profitede 
most,  fFor  Jeanne  almost  alle  men  disposeden  hem  to  martirdom 
at  ensaumple  of  Crist,  perfore  it  were  now  nott  oonli  meritorie 
or  medful,  butt  moost  medeful  to  Jje  Chirche,  to  lyve  so,  in  alle 
Jjinggis  and  by  alle  ])inggis. 

Also,  boJ?e  monks  and  chanouns  forsaken  Jje  reules  of  Benet 
and  Austyn,  and  taken  wijjouten  eny  dispensacioun  |?e  reule  of 
freres,  as  most  perfit.  But  )?e  reule  of  apostelis  is  utterly  and 
algatis  most  perfit.  perfore  men  may  forsake  privat  reules  in 
religioun,  maad  of  sinful  men,  and  take  })e  clene  religioun  of 
apostelis,  )?at  ys  preched  wi))  fredom  of  ]?e  gospel,  wifoute  dis- 
pensacioun of  worldly  clerkes,  ]?at  in  caas  [are]  ^  queke  develes, 
as  Crist  Judas  Scariot  2.  Also,  j^e  pope  may  dispence  wi|)  j)e 
reule  of  ech  privat  secte  or  religioun,  and  ha}?  dispensed  and  ^itt 
do]?,  but  he  may  not  dispense  wij>  Cristis  reule  ^oven  to  apostlis; 
J?erfore  ]?e  reule  of  Crist  ordeyned  to  apostlis  is  more  perfit 
fan  any  reule  of  privat  religioun,  and  most  perfit  of  alle.  And 
herof  it  sue]?  openly  \2X  men  may  lawefully  forsake  privat 
religioun,  and  kepe  Cristis  religioun  in  his  clennesse,  sij?  it  is 
most  perfit,  moost  esy,  and  li3t  for  to  kepe,  and  most  siker  to 
bringe  men  to  hevene,  and  to  heiest  degre  of  blisse. 

And  ^if  oure  adversaries  of  fis  privat  religioun  stryve  algatis, 
jjat  here  reules  ben  more  perfit  ]?an  }?e  reule  of  aposteles,  whi 
Jeanne  so  manie  persones,  as  who  so  sai]?,  wiJ?oute  noumbre.? 
Of  ech  sich  privat  secte,  by  licence  of  j?e  pope,  ben  maad,  some 
chapeleyns  of  houshold,  summe  chapeleyns  of  honour,  summe 
bisshopis  dowid  wij?  seculer  lordshipes,  summe  bisshopis  among 


nor  is  the  Pope 
at  liberty  to 
dispense  with 
them. 


^  supplied  conjectiirally. 


If  the  friars' 
life  be  more 
perfect,  why- 
do  they  take 
offices  which 
oblige  them  to 
mix  with  the 
world? 


text  conivpt ;  omit  Crht. 


5ia 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


1  Cor.  iii.  3. 


he]?ene  men,  and  dore  not  come  to  her  children.  But  [what]  ^ 
professioun  a  frere  be  of,  anon,  ^if  he  be  chosen  Jjerto,  he 
accept!})  Jje  office  of  \e  pope  or  cardinal,  of  patriark,  of  erche- 
bisshop,  of  bisshop,  and  forsakij?  his  owne  staat.  Si)>  Crist  saij? 
in  })e  gospel,  ]?at  no  man  puttinge  his  bond  to  Jje  plou5,  and 
lokynge  bacward,  is  wor]?y  to  have  Jje  kyngdom  of  God, — ]>at  is, 
no  man  takjnig  perfit  staat  of  poverte  and  mekenesse  and  pen- 
aunce,  is  able  to  be  saved  ^if  he  turne  a^en  to  wordly  lif,  pompe 
and  pride  and  covetise,  and  ese  of  body,  and  slouj^e,  and  riot, 
and  gay  clo))inge  and  costy, — Jjerfore  }>ei  chaungen  not  J)e  more 
perfit  for  J?e  lesse  perfit,  for  J^an  J)ei  were  apostatas,  but  ]?ei  pur- 
chasen  ]?e  more  perfit  for  J^e  lasse  perfit.  perfore  ^e  clene  re- 
ligioun  and  reule  of  presthod,  by  forme  of  Jje  gospel,  is  more 
perfyt  ]?an  any  reule  or  religioun  maad  of  sinful  men.  Also, 
no)ung  ]>at  is  abhominable  and  reproved  of  seyntis  shulde  not  ^ 
be  brou^t  in  of  ojjere,  by  ony  colour  or  cauteel.  But  ]?es  newe 
sectes  ben  siche,  ])at  ben  of  flessh,  as  Saint  Poul  sai})  in  his 
pistel.  perfore  siche  sectis  shulde  not  be  brou^t  in,  to  charginge 
of  Jje  Chirche,  but  alle  Cristen  men  shulde  caste  awey,  and  holde 
faste  ]?e  unite,  fredom,  and  clennesse  of  ])e  reule  .of  Jesus  Crist, 
Paraventure  J?es  ypocrites  sayen,  to  exclude  alle  Jjes  resouns 
and  manie  mo,  \zt  j?e  reule  to  which  ]?ei  make  professioun  is 
not  straunge,  ne  diverse  fro  }>e  reule  of  apostilis  ]?at  Crist  or- 
deynede,  but  it  is  utterly  ]>e  same,  and  non  o))er.  But  Jje  con- 
trarie  of  ]?is  excusing  is  opinly  shewyd  bi  foure  ]?e  laste  resouns 
bifore  said.  Ffor  ^if  J^es  newe  reules  weren  alle  on  wi]?  Cristis 
reule  ^oven  to  apostilis,  [he]  ^  shulde  have  taught  hem  [bo]?e]  * 
and  ensaumpled,  bo]?e  in  his  lif  and  spekinge  and  writing,  wij> 
sermons  and  ritis  and  customes  J?erof ;  but  dide  not  ))is,  neij?er 
in  his  lif,  in  his  dej),  ne  aftir  his  resurreccioun,  ne  to  his  ascen- 
cioun.  And  ^if  fis  excusinge  were  soJ>,  ]?e  sectis  of  ffreres 
shulde  not  have  begonnen  aboute  a  J?ousand  and  tweyn  hundrid 
5eer  of  Crist,  sij?  fei  were  bifore  ]?e  tyme,  ^e,  as  sone  as  ]?e  reule 
of  apostles.  But  )?e  contrarie  is  opin  in  croniclis.  Hit  sue]) 
also  of  ]?e  same  J>at  Cristis  apostlis  hadden  boJ?e  monkes, 
chanouns,  and  freris,  ^if  men  taken  monkes  chanouns  and  freris 


1  supplied  to  complete  the  sense.  ^  dele  not. 

conjecturally.  *  dele  ho])e. 


supplied 


WYCLIF. 


LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS. 


5^i 


If  the  rules  of 
Orders  are  con- 
sistent with 
Christ's  rule, 
they  are  super- 
fluous ;  if  in- 


fer men  bat  professen  sich  privat  sectes ;  but  ]5is  is  opinli  fals. 
Also,  Cristis  reule  30ven  to  apostilis  is  lich  and  of  o  forme,  to 
alle  men  J?at  maken  professioun  j^erto,  to  speke  of  substaunce  of 
))e  reule.  But  reules  of  J^es  privat  sectes  be]?  ful  dyverse  and 
contrarie,  as  to  substaunce  of  })es  reules;  sij?  summe  of  hem 
receyven  dymes  and  dotaciouns,  as  don  J^es  possessioners,  but 
some  forsaken  alle  siche  types  and  possessiouns,  as  freres 
mendinauntis. 

But,  to  discende  doun  in  specialte,  fful  mane  articlis  of  reulis 
of  siche  sectes  ben  openly  contrarie  to  j?e  apostlis  reule ;  si]>  it 
is  leveful  to  eche  trewe  man  of  Cristene  religioun  to  converte  a 

i  consistent, 

man  of  wrong  feij?  to  Cristene,  but  jjis  is  forboden  in  ]?e  reule  of  j  pernicious. 
frere  menours ;  sij>  oonly  fei]?  ^  to  ministres,  and  non  o]?ere,  is  | 
licence  grauntid  to  resceyve  freris  to  here  privat  sectis,  notwi}>-  | 
stondinge  J?at  everemore  freris  don  J?e  contrarie.  And  Crist 
receyvede  penyes,  but  \€\  shulden  not  by  here  owene  reule 
resceyve  penyes,  nei}»er  by  hemself  ne  by  mene  persone.  Also 
Crist,  prechinge  j^e  gospel,  entrid  into  places  bojje  of  wommen 
and  men,  as  )?e  gospel  of  Luk  telle}).  But  [it]  ^  is  forboden  to 
freris  to  entren  into  abbeyes  of  wommen ;  but  freris  glosen  })es 
reules  to  ]?e  contrarie ;  but  Fraunceis  here  foundour  comaundid 
hem  in  article  of  his  de]?  )?at  J?ei  shulde  not  resceyve  gloses  upon 
his  reule.  Also,  5if  Cristis  reule,  ^oven  to  apostelis,  and  J?e  reule 
of  privat  sectis  weren  al  on,  wi]?outen  resoun  men  leven  jje 
ffirste  and  professeden  ]>e  to}>er,  but  ^if  it  were  to  shewe  here 
ypocrisie.  Also,  ^if  ])is  feynynge  be  so]?,  it  seme)?  Jjat  it  is  as 
perfit  and  medeful  to  kepen  Cristis  reule  [as  fe  reule]  ^  of 
Ffraunceis  or  Dominik,  or  eny  sich  o]?ere  man.  Also,  ^if  Jjes 
reules  ben  alle  on,  and  in  noJ?ing  diverse,  J?anne  siche  a  reule 
shulde  not  be  clepid  reule  of  Fraunceis  ne  Dominik,  ne  ony  sich 
o}?ere,  but  reule  of  Crist ;  for  so  it  shulde  be  of  more  auctorite 
and  more  comendid  a.     And  so  jje  gospel  owe}?  to  be  kept, 

^  dele /«']).  2  supplied.  ^  The  scribe  must  have  omitted  these 

words,  which  are  necessary  to  complete  the  sense. 


*  The  reasoning  here  reminds  one 
of  the  famous  dilemma  of  the  Caliph 
Omar,  when  consulted  as  to  the  pre- 
servation of  the  Alexandrian  library. 
'  If   these  writings   of  the   Greeks 


agree  with  the  book  of  God,  they 
are  useless  and  need  not  be  pre- 
served; if  they  disagree,  they  are 
pernicious  and  ought  to  be  des- 
troyed.'—Gibbon,  ch.  li. 


WORKS.      VOL.  III. 


Li 


5 '4 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


2.  That  those 
are  in  error 
who  dispute 
the  kin^s  right 
to  deal  with' 
Church  tem- 
poralities. 


wijjouten  ony  foulinge,  of  alle  Cristene  men,  wi])OUten  sich 
novelries,  and  putte  no  })ing  j^erto  and  drawe  no  ]>mg  ferfro  ; 
and  if  ]?is  ]?ing  were  don,  sich  privat  sectes  shulde  be  superfine 
and  waste,  as  flies  lyvinge  in  ]?e  eyr.  And  it  was  non  nede  ]>at 
Ffraunceis,  Dominik,  or  eny  sich  o]?er  newe  man  bysiede  him 
aboute  makyng  of  }>is  reule  of  apostelis,  ]?at  freris  feynen  to  be 
hern ;  fFor  j>at  reule  was  maad  of  Crist,  God  and  man,  and  kept 
of  apostlis,  and  confermed  by  J^e  Holy  Gost,  and  atte  \q  fulle 
declared  by  a  |)OUsand  ^eer  and  two  hundrid  bifore  Ffraunceis, 
Dominik,  or  anye  frere  of  Such  privat  sect,  were  in  to  ])is  world. 

pe  secounde  poynt  or  article  ys  J>is;  ]?at  \o  men  }>at  un- 
resonably  and  wrongfully  han  dampned  []?e  kyng]  ^  and  al  his 
counsail,  be  amendid  of  so  gret  errour,  and  ]?at  here  errour  may 
be  publisshid  to  men  dwellinge  in  Jie  reume. 

pe  resoun  of  ]?is  axinge  ys  shewyd  J?us.  Nojjing  owej)  to  be 
dampned  as  errour  and  fals,  but  ^if  it  savour  errour  or  unri3t- 
wisnesse  a^ens  Goddis  lawe.  But  nei]?er  ])e  kyng  ne  his  counsayl 
deede  unri^tfully,  for  as  muche  as  he  took  awey  ]>e  posses- 
siouns  of  summe  prelatis  J?at  trespaceden,  whoos  contrarie  freres 
han  determined  opinly.  perfore  resonably  men  shulden  assente 
to  J?is  axing.  Ffor  summe  freris  writen  ]?us  in  Coventre  ^ 
among  articlis  ))at  ]?ei  dampneden  as  heresye  and  error,  Jjat  it  is 
errour  to  saye  ]?at  seculer  lordis  may  levefully  and  medefully 
taken  awey  temporal  goodis,  ^oven  to  men  of  J^e  Chirche  ^. 
But  si])  oure  kyng  ha]?  don  so,  and  o])ere  kynges  his  prede- 
cessoures  han  don  so  manie  tymes,  by  laweful  cause,  as  per- 
teynynge  to  here  regalie,  and  of  comun  lawe,  by  counsail  of 
pieres  of  ])e  rewme,  it  sue]?  ]>at  not  oonly  oure  kyng  now  pre- 
sent ha]?  errid,  but  also  his  predecessours,  and  generally  al  his 
counseillores,  as  lords  and  prelatis,  and  alle  men  of  ])e  Parle- 
ment  counceilinge  J^erto. 

^  supplied  conjecturally. 


a  As  Coventry  was  the  native 
place  of  John  Ball,  one  of  the  ring- 
leaders in  the  insurrection  of  1381, 
the  friars  there  would  be  hlcely  to 
take  the  lead  in  repudiating  his 
tenets,   and    those    of   his   friends, 


particularly   after    the    insurrection 
was  quelled. 

b  This  is  the  seventeenth  of  the 
twenty-four  conclusions  condemned 
by  the  Council  of  London.  See 
Fasciculi  Ziz.,  p.  280. 


LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS, 


i^S 


Also,  5if  J)is  be  errour  touching  \q  hel}>e  of  mannis  soule, 
)>anne  it  is  a^ens  holy  writ ;  and  }?anne,  ^if  a  man  suste}Tie  or 
meynteyne  }?is  error,  he  is  an  heretik.  But  ful  manie  kingis, 
lordis,  prelatis,  and  o]?ere  vWse  men  han  susteyned  }jis  and 
meynteyned,  and  ^ut  don,  as  perteynynge  to  J^e  kynggis  regalie, 
and  of  comune  lawe ;  ]>anne  ben  \t%  freris,  alle  kyngis,  lordis, 
and  prelatis,  and  alle  wise  men  of  oure  reaume,  ben  ^  heretikes. 
Also,  si]?  ]>is  is  an  old  custome,  J?e  whiche  oure  kyng,  lordis,  and 
prelatis  ben  sworen  to  susteyne  and  meynteyne,  ^if  ]?is  be  error, 
as  freris  seyen  opinly,  it  sue]?  by  freris  \2X  alle  ])es  ben  forsworen 
and  heretikes.  Also,  3if  ))is  be  errom*  as  freris  feynen,  })at  \o'\^ 
an  abbot  and  al  his  covent  ben  open  traitours,  conspiringe  into 
de]>  of  ])e  king  and  quene  and  of  o]?ere  lordis,  and  enforce 
hem  to  distroie  al  })e  reaume,  ])e  kyng  may  not  take  fro  hem 
an  halfpeny  ne  ferj)ing  worj?,  si}?  alle  ]?es  ben  temporal  goodis. 
Also,  J)0U5  o]?ere  clerkes  senden  unto  oure  enemys  alle  ]?e  rentis 
J)at  J>ei  han  in  oure  lond,  and  what  evere  ]?ei  may  robbe  or  stele 
of  ]?e  kinggis  legemen,  ^it  may  not  oure  kyng  ponishe  by  oo 
fer]?ing  ne  fer]?ing  wor}?. 

Also  by  j?is  ground  of  freris,  ]?ou3  monkes  or  freris  or  o])ere 
clerkis,  whatevere  ]?ei  ben,  slen  lordis  tenauntis,  ]?e  kynggis 
liegemen,  and  defoulen  lordis  wyves,  ^e,  J?e  quene,  ]?at  God  for- 
bid, or  ]?e  empiresse,  ^it  }?e  kyng  may  not  ponische  hem  by  oo 
ferj?inga.  Also  hit  sue]?  pleynly  ]?at  men  clepid  men  of  holi 
Chirche  may  dwelle  in  t>is  lond  at  here  likynge,  and  do  what 
kynne  sinne,  what  kynne  tresoun,  like]?  hem;  and  naj?eles  ])e 
kyng  may  not  ponische,  nei}?er  in  temporal  goodis  ne  in  here 
body ;  si]?,  5if  he  may  not  ponisshe  hem  in  ]?is  lesse,  he  may  not 
in  J?e  more ;  and  also,  \om,  \€\  maken  on  of  hemself  kyng.  And 
so  no  seculer  lord  may  lette  hem  to  conquere  alle  seculer  lord- 
ship in  ]?is  eor]?e ;  and  so  ]?ei  may  sle  alle  lordis  and  ladies,  and 
here  blod  and  afiinite,  wi]?oute  ^  any  peyne  in  ]?is  lif,  or  in  body, 
or  in  catel.  5^e,  lordis,  see]?  and  undirstondi]?,  wi]?  what  ponissh- 
inge  }?ei  deserve  to  be  chastised,  ]?at  J?us  unwarly  and  wrongfully 
han  dampnyd  30U  for  heretikes,  ffor  as  muche  as  ^e  don  exe- 


^  dele  heti,  or  else  the  preceding  words  hen  ])es  freris. 
wi]>  X. 

^  See  ante,  p.  314. 
Ll2 


corrected  : 


Monstrous  and 
absurd  con- 
sequences 
which  flow 
from  this 
doctrine. 


5i6 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


The  kingf  is 
the  cliief  lord 
over  all  tem- 
poralities, 
%vhether  they 
belong  to  the 
laity  or  to  the 
clergy. 


cucioun  of  ri3twisnesses,  by  Goddis  lawe  and  mannys,  and  namely 
of  J)e  kyngis  regalie.  For  fje  chief  lordshipe  in  J)is  lond  of  alle 
temporalties,  boJ?e  of  seculer  men  and  religious,  perteynef  to 
))e  kyng  of  his  general  governynge.  Ffor  ellis  he  were  not 
kyng  of  alle  Englond,  but  of  a  litel  part  J?erof.  perfore  J)e  men 
))at  bysyen  hem  to  take  awey  j^ys  lordshipe  fro  ]?e  kyng,  as  don 
freris  and  here  fautours,  in  ]?is  poynt  ben  sharper  enemys  and 
traitours  J^an  Ffrensshe  men  and  alle  o)?ere  naciouns. 

Also  it  perteynej)  to  ])e  kyng,  \>t  while  a  bishop  or  an  abbotis 
see  is  voyde,  to  have  in  his  bond  al  here  temporaltees,  and  at 
his  owne  wille  to  5  eve  hem  to  prelatis.  perfore  Jje  kyng  may 
take  awey  J^es  temporaltees  from  preiatis,  whan  laweful  cause 
exiti]).  Also  )?e  kyng  owi]?  graunte  no  man  fredom  to  do  synne 
or  trespas,  but  to  take  away  J^e  fredom.  But  men  of  ]?e  Chirche 
had  fre  Hcence  to  trespace,  5if  \q  king  mi^te  not  bireve  here 
temporaltees  whanne  ]?ei  synneden  grevously.  And  so  Seynt 
Poul  techij?  )?at  eche  man  be  sugett  to  here  potestatis,  for  fer  nis 
no  power  but  of  God,  and  \o  Jjing  }?at  ben  of  God  ben  ordeyned. 
And  so  Jjei  J?at  wijjstondej?  power,  wiJ?stondeJ?  Goddis  ordy- 
naunce ;  for  whi  ?  Princes  ben  not  a  dred  of  goode  werkes, 
but  of  evele.  But  wiltou3  not  drede  a  power  ?  do  good,  and 
J70U  shalt  have  preisinge  J^erof, — jjat  is,  of  him  J?at  is  ordeyned 
in  ]?e  hi^e  astat, — for  he  is  Goddis  ministre,  or  servaunt,  to  \>q  in 
goode.  But  ^if  ])0U  have  don  evele,  fanne  drede ;  for  he  berej? 
jje  swerd  not  wiJ?oute  cause ;  ffor  he  is  Goddis  servaunt,  vengere 
in  wra)7j>e  to  him  J^at  doj?  evele.  And  ]?erfore  by  nede,  or  of 
nede,  be  ^e  suget,  or  undurlout, — not  oonly  for  wrajjj^e,  but  also 
of  conscience.  Al  |)is  sei]?  Seynte  Poul,  of  whiche  auctorite  it  is 
to  knowen  to  alle  men,  Jjat  clerkes  owen  to  be  suget  of  nede  to 
j?e  kynggus  power;  ffor  Seynte  Poul,  j?at  puttej)  alle  men  in 
subjeccioun  to  kyngis,  outtakej?  nevere  on.  And  so  seculer 
power  owe])  and  is  bounden  to  ponisshe  by  just  peyne  of  his 
swerd,  l^at  is,  worldly  power,  trynauntis  rebellinge  a^ens  God 
and  trespassing  a5ens  man  by  what  kyn  trespas;  and,  }>at  is 
more,  to  chastise  his  sugetis  by  peyne  or  turment  of  here  body. 
And  no  drede  muche  more  he  may  ponisshe  hem  by  takynge 
awey  of  here  temporaltees,  |?at  is  lasse  j?an  bodily  peyne.  per- 
fore seculer  lordis  don  ))is  ri^tfuUy,  si})  J)is  is  don  by  comaunde- 


LETTERS  AND   DOCUMENTS. 


517 


3.  That  tithes 
and  ofTerintjs 
ought  to  be 
given  to  or 
ft'ithhcid  from 


I  sain,  ii,  17. 


I  Saiii.  ii.  30. 


merit  of  \t  apostoile  and  by  ordinaunce  of  God.  perfore  it  is 
pleyn  of  }?es  resouns  and  auctoritees ;  and  seculer  lordis  may 
levefully  and  medefully,  in  mony  causes,  taken  awey  temporal 
godis  50ven  to  men  of  J?e  Chirche. 

pe  Jjridde  article  is  })is;— ])at  bo})e  t}^]?es  and  oifringis  ben 
30ven  and  paied  and  receyved  by  J?at  entente,  to  whiche  entente 
or  ende  bo))e  Goddis  lawe  and  ]?e  popis  lawe  ordeyned  hem  to  ;  ^^^^^ 
be  paied  and  resceyved;  and  )?at  \€\  be  take  awey  by  j^e  same  |  Sif^^orthy"'' 
entente  and  resoun,  })at  bo))e  Goddis  lawe  and  \^  popis  lawe  '  "^'^'p'^"*^- 
ordeynen  ])at  \€\  shulden  be  wij?drawen. 

pis  axinge  is  resonable  for  manie  skilles ;  for  \t  entente  of  )?e 
makere  in  everi  lawe  shulde  be  kept,  and  most  }?e  entente  of 
God,  }?at  may  not  erre.  SoJ^ly  ))us  sai)?  Goddis  lawe,  in  }?eTirste 
Book  of  Kyngis,  l>at  >e  synne  of  Lev}^e3  children  was  fuU  gret 
bifore  God,  for  \€\  wi])drowen  men  fro  sacrifise  of  God,  taking 
by  streng}?e  or  violence  J)at  part  of  }?e  sacrifise  l?at  perteyned  to 
|?er  post.  And  God  seij?  aftirward,  Y  spekyn'ge  have  spoken, 
l?at  \m  hous  and  )?i  fadris  hous  shulde  ministre  and  serve  in  my 
si^te  evermore;  but  now  God  sai)?,  by  J)at  >ing  fer  fro  me;  but 
whoevere  shal  worshipe  me  I  shal  glorifie  him,  but  \€\  {?at  dis- 
pisen  me,  sai]>  God,  shul  ben  unnoble,  or  wipoute  honour.  Of 
which  auctorite  it  is  pleyn  and  opin,  )?at  >e  {^inggus  )>at  ben  duwe 
to  prest  shulde  not  be  axed  by  streng)?e  or  violence  or  cursinge, 
but  be  50ven  frely,  wi))Outen  exaccioun  or  constreynynge.  And 
5if  |?e  prest  be  reproved  of  God  for  his  synnis,  he  shulde  be  put 
out  of  his  office,  and  >ere  sacrifises  shulden  not  be  5oven  to 
him,  but  taken  fro  him,  as  God  comaundej?  from  )?e  hey^e  prest 
Hely;  and  anofer  trewe  man,  walkinge  in  Goddis  weyes  as 
dide  Samuel,  schulde  be  ordeyned  to  resceyve  siche  sacrifices. 
Also  in  beg)mnynge  of  Tobie  men  finden  >us :— Whan  prestis 
of  J?e  temple  wenten  to  calveren  of  gold  to  honour  hem-  for 
goddis,  of  Jeroboam  kyng  of  Israel  made,  Tobie  offride  trewely 
alle  his  firste  fruytes  and  ti))is,  so  ))at  in  ))e  })ridde  3eer  Tobie 
ministred  alle  his  tyj?is  to  proselitis  ^  and  commelingis,  or  gestis, 
and  wi)?drou5  hem  holilich  fro  j?e  wickede  preestis.  And  J?e 
book  saiej)  fat  \t  litul  child  kepte    j^es  |)ingis,  and  ojjere  siche, 


Tobit  i.  5. 


Tobit  x.  S. 


corrected ;  per  solids,  X. 


.niS 


WrCLIF'S  WORKS. 


Testimonies 
from  Scripture 
and  the 
Fathers. 


aftir  j?e  lawe  of  God.  perfore  ^if  oure  prelatis  or  ojjere  prestis, 
whatevere  l?ei  ben,  ben  opinly  blecked  by  sacrifise  of  maumetrie, 
as  wi})  covetise,  \2X  is  opinly  sacrifise  of  fals  goddys,  and  o)>ere 
grete  sinnes,  as  pride,  symonye,  and  man-quellinge,  glotonye, 
dronkenesse,  and  lecherie,  by  ))e  same  skil  ty})is  or  ofFringis 
shulde  be  wij?drawyn  from  hem  by  Goddis  lawe,  and  be  50ven 
to  poeure  nedy  men,  at  ensamiiple  of  ri^tful  Tobie. 

Also  Seint  Poul,  spekinge  to  Tymothe,  bisshop,  saij?  fus  ;— 
Be  we  paied  wi]?  >es  J^ingis,  ^if  we  ban  liflode  and  to  be  hiled 
wi)?.  And  Seint  Bernard  speki)?  j^us  in  ))is  matere  ;--Whatevere 
j)OU  takist  to  f e  of  j?in  outrage  ^  >at  is,  dymes  and  oifringis, 
beside  simple  liflode  and  streit  clo>inge,  it  is  not  )?yn,  it  is  f;efte, 
raveyne,  and  sacrilege  a.  Wherof  hit  suej>  plejoily,  J?at  not  oonly 
simple  prestis  and  curatis,  but  also  sovereyne  curatis,  as  bisshopis, 
shulde  not  axe  here  sugetis  by  constreynyng  more  J)an  liflode 
and  hilynge,  whan  fei  don  awey  alle  manere  waast,  bofe  of 
money  and  worldly  array.  Also  Crist  wip  his  apostlis  lyvede 
most  povere  lif,  as  it  is  knowen  by  alle  \t  processe  of  J^e  gospel, 
noting  chalenginge  by  exaccioun  ne  constreynynge,  but  lyvede 
simplely  and  scarly  ynow^  of  almes,  frely  and  wilfully  ^oven. 
perfore  \o  {?at  pretenden  hem  to  ben  principal  folewers  of 
Cristis  steppis,  shulde  lyve  and  walke  as  Crist  dide,  and  so  lede 
ful  povere  lif,  takinge  of  Jjingis  frely  ^oven  as  miche  as  neede 
is  for  here  gostly  office  and  no  more,  and  ]?erwi]?  be  apaied. 

Also  ]?e  popis  lawe  comaundi]?,  in  J^e  beste  part  J?erof,  ]>at 
prestis,  opyn  lechours,  taken  no  part  of  porcioun  of  goodis  of 
j?e  Chirche ;  J?erfore  it  is  lefful  to  parisshenys  to  wi))holden  here 
tijjes  for  opin  fornicacioun  of  here  curat,  and  turne  hem  into 
bettre  use.  And  muche  more  jjei  may  and  owen  to  wij^drawe  here 
tyj)is  for  grete  synnis  and  opin,— as  for  symonie,  J^at  is  heresie, 

^  Probably  written  by  mistake  for  mitrage,  altaragimn,  the  offerings  made 
by  the  people  to  tlie  altar ;  see  Ducange  sub  voce.  The  word  '  autrage '  does 
not  appear  to  occur  elsewhere;  but  that  it  was  in  use  can  hardly  be  doubted. 
Peter  Langtoft  in  his  Chronicle  speaks  of  '  alterage/  changing  the  word  but 
little,  as  was  natural  in  a  churchman  and  a  man  of  letters,  from  the  original 
Latin.^  But  in  the  time  of  Chaucer  and  Wyclif  the  popular  mode  of  pro- 
1  nouncing  and  writing  'altar'  was  awter  or  aider;  alterage  would  therefore 
become  auterage  or  autrage.  The  words  of  St.  Bernard  are  '  Qiiicquid  .  .  . 
ex  altario  retmes' 


See  ante,  p,  473,  note. 


LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS, 


519 


as  ]?e  popes  lawe  saij?,  and  for  covetise,  J;at  is  -v^oirshipinge  of 
false  goddis,  as  holy  writ  sei]>;  and  for  pride,  envye,  glotonie, 
and  dronkenesse,  si)?  bojje  by  Goddis  lawe  and  mannes  lawe 
God  curse])  siche  mennis  blissinge  and  pre}dngis.  And  Seint 
Austyn  and  Seynt  Gregory  techen  J)is  in  manie  bokes,  by  holy 
writ  and  resoun. 

Also  comunly,  whanne  parische  chirchis  ben  approprid  to 
men  of  singuler  religioun,  such  appropriacioun  is  mad  by  fals 
suggestioun,  j?at  siche  religious  men  han  not  ynow^  for  Ufiode 
and  heling ;  but  in  treu])e  \€\  han  over  muche.  Also  comunly 
siche  chirchis  ben  approprid  by  symonie,  as  \€\  witen  betere 
hemself,  payinge  a  gret  summe  of  moneye  for  sich  apropria- 
cioun,  3if  {je  benefice  be  faat.  But  what  man  led  by  resoun 
and  good  conscience  shulde  paie  to  siche  religious  men  tij)es 
and  offringis,  goten  by  falsnesse,  lesyngis,  and  symonye  ?  But 
suppose  })at  siche  parische  chirchis  weren  leeffully  goten,  ^it,  si]? 
}jei  ben  superflu  to  siche  men,  \^  ti]?es  and  oifringis  shulden 
ben  30 ve  to  povere  needy  men,  as  Seynt  Jerom  and  J>e  popis 
lawe  techen.  And  J?erfore  J^e  trewe  grete  clerk,  Robert  Grosted, 
Bisshop  of  Lincolne,  write)?  to  ))e  pope,  \2X  whan  appropriacioun 
of  parische  chirchis  is  maad  to  men  of  religioun,  of  fourtene 
grete  sinnes,  or  defautis,  ])at  comen  of  evel  curatis,  is  mad  a 
perpetuacioun,  ]?at  is,  endeles  confirmacioun. 

Also,  by  God  and  his  lawe  curatis  ben  muchel  more  bounden 
to  techen  here  sugetis  charitably  ]>e  gospel  and  Goddis  hestis, 
bojje  by  opin  prechinge  and  ensaumple  of  good  Hf,  for  to  save 
here  soulis,  ]>anne  here  sugetis  ben  holden  to  paien  hem  ty]?is 
and  offringis.  And  of  ]?is  suen  t^veye  }?ingis.  pe  firste,  3if 
curatis  don  not  here  office  in  word  and  in  ensaumple  })at  God 
comaundi}),  jjanne  here  sugetis  ben  not  bounden  to  paie  hem 
ti)>is  and  offringis.  Si))  J)e  principal  cause  for  whiche  tipes  and 
offringis  shulde  be  paied  is  awey,  ])e  payinge  of  ti]?es  shulde 
cesse.  Also,  curatis  ben  more  cursed  in  wi])drawyng  j?is  techinge 
in  word  and  ensaumple,  ]?an  ben  parischenys  wij^drawinge  ti])es 
and  offringis,  ]?0U3  curatis  dudon  wel  here  office. 

A,  Lord  God,  where  )?is  be  resoun,  to  constreyne  \t  pore 
puple  to  fynde  a  worldly  preest,  sumtyme  unable  bo);e  of  lif  and  \ 
konnynge,  in  pompe  and  pride,  coveitise  and  envye,  glotonye  ' 


Evils  which 
arise  from  tlie 
appropriation 
of  livings  by 
convents. 


The  duty  of 
serving-  a 
parish"  well, 
and  that  of 
paying  tithes, 
are  reciprocal. 


530 


WFCLIF'S  WORKS. 


4.  That  Christ's 
teaching-  re- 
specting- the 
Eucharist  may 
have  free 
scope,  and  the' 
contrary  teach- 
ing be  de- , 
stroyed. 


The  teaching 
of  the  friars 
contrary  to  the 
ancient  doc- 
trine. 


The  true 
belief. 


and  dronkenesse  and  lecherie,  in  symonye  and  heresie,  wi}> 
fatte  hors,  anH  jolye  and  gaye  sadeles,  and  bridelis  ryngynge  be 
]?e  weye  a,  and  himself  m  costy  clojjes  and  pelure,  and  to  sujBfre 
here  wyves  and  children  and  here  pore  ney^boures  perische  for 
hunger  jjrist  and  cold,  and  oJ?ere  mischieves  of  J)e  world  1  A, 
Lord  Jesus  Crist !  sij>  wij)inne  fewe  ^eeris  men  paiede  here  tij>is 
and  offringis  at  here  owen  wille  free,  to  goode  men  and  able, 
to  grete  worschipe  of  God,  to  profit  and  fairnes  of  holi  Chirche 
fi^tinge  in  eorjje,  where  it  were  leveful  and  needful  J>at  a  worldly 
prest  shulde  distroie  ])is  holy  and  approvid  custome,  constreyn- 
ynge  men  to  leve  ]>is  fredom,  turnynge  ti]?es  and  offringes  into 
wickede  uses,  or  not  so  goode  as  J?ei  weren  don  bifore  tymes !    - 

pe  four]?e  article  is  )?is, — ]?at  Cristis  techinge  and  bileve  of  }»e 
sacrament  of  his  owne  body,  ])at  is  pleynly  tau^t  by  Crist  and 
his  apostelis  in  gospeUis  and  pistillis,  may  be  taujt  opinly  in 
chirchis  to  Cristen  puple,  and  fe  contrarie  techinge  and  fals 
bileve,  brou^t  up  by  cursed  ypocritis  and  heretikis  and  worldly  ^ 
prestis,  unkunnynge  in  Goddis  la  we  ^,  ^distried. 

pe  false  feij)  tau^te  of  Anticrist  and  of  his  false  cursede  dis- 
ciplis  is  ])is,  |?at  J>e  sacrament  J^at  men  seen  wi}>  bodely  ei3e 
bitwene  Jje  prestis  hondis-is  nejjer  bred  ire  Cristis  body,  but 
accidentis  wijioute  suget,  and  ]?is  is  neijjer  groundid  in  holy 
writt  ne  reson  ne  wit,  ne  tau^te  bi  })e  moste  wiseste  olde  seyntis, 
but  only  by  newe  ypocritis  and  cursed  heretikis,  )?at  magnj^fyen 
here  owen  fantasies  and  dremes,  and  feyned  power  and  myra- 
clis,  more  ]?an  Cristis  techynge  and  his  apostlis,  and  Seynt 
Austyn  and  Seynt  Jerom  and  Seynt  Ambrose,  and  many  moo, 
wij)  J?e  determinacion  of  J?e  trewe  court  of  Rome,  J?at  is  sett 
in  }?e  beste  part  of  J>e  popis  lawe.  perfore  be  J>is  heresie  exilid 
fer  fro  Cristene  men. 

pe  ri^tte  fei)>  of  Cristene  men  is  ]>is;  ]?at  ]>is  worschipful 
sacrament  is  bred  and  Cristis  body;  as  Je^us  Crist  is  verrey 
God  and  verrey  man.  And  j>is  fei]?  is  groundid  in  Cristis  owen 
word,  in  |)e  gospel  of  Seynt  Mattheu,  Mark,  Luk,  and  bi  Seynt 


a  So  Chaucer  on  the  Monk  : — 

'  Ful  many  a  deynte  hors  hadde  he  in  stable  i 
And  whan  he  rood,  men  might  his  bridel  heere 
Gyngle  in  a  whistlyng  wynd  so  cleere. 
And  eek  as  lowde  as  doth  the  chapel  belle.' 

Prologue  to  the  Canterbury  Talcs. 


^  The  Dublin  MS.  breaks  off  in 
the  middle  of  this  word. 

c  From  this  point  the  matter  in 
the  Corpus  MS  belongs, to  a  differ- 
ent tract ;  see  Prefatory  notice. 


LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS, 


521 


Poul,  and  plejnly  in  holy  writt,  and  bi  Austyn,  Jerom,  Ambrose, 
and  most  holy  seyntis,  and  most  kunnynge  in  holy  writt.  And 
herto  accorde])  reson  and  witt  at  }?e  fulle.  In  ]>es  gospellis  is 
])e  forme  tau^t  of  Crist,  ])at  oure  Lord  Jesus  Crist  at  ]>e  soper 
toke  bred  in  his  hondis,  and  blissid  it,  and  brak  it,  and  ^af  it 
to  his  discipHs,  and  seide,  Ete  ^e  alle  of  ])is ;  ]>is  is  my  body. 
And  so  of  J)e  chalis ;  and  comaundid  hem  to  don  )?is  sacrament 
in  mjTide  of  hym.  And  Seynt  Poul,  fat  hadde  his  gospel  not 
bi  man  but  bi  revelacion  of  Jesus  Crist,  sei})  }ns  in  his  firste 
pistel  to  J?e  Coryntheis,  Ne  is  not  J?e  bred  J)at  we  breken  J^e 
comunynge  of  oure  Lordis  body  ?  And  certis  he  undirstondij) 
]>dX  it  is  so,  aftir  ]>e  speche  of  holi  writt.  perforu  in  j?e  same 
pistel  to  J>e  Coryntheis,  aftir  ]>e  forme  of  consecracion  he  clepi)? 
]>Te  tymes  ]?is  sacrament  bred.  And  j^e  gospel  of  Seynt  Luk 
sei)5,  ]?at  Cristis  disciplis  knewen  him  in  brekynge  of  }?e  breed  ; 
and  J?is  breed  was  jje  sacrament  of  \>e  auter,  as  Seynt  Austyn 
writij?.  And  in  Actibus  Apostolorum  is  seid  J)us :  And  Cristene 
men  weren  dwellynge  in  techynge  of  apostiis,  and  in  comu- 
nynge of  brekynge  of  brede.  Si]?  Seynt  Poul  seij?,  pe  breed 
}>at  we  breke  is  comunynge  of  Cristis  body,  axe  ]>es  heretikis 
where  J>is  were  sacrid  breed  or  unsacrid;  and  J^ei  moten  seie 
j)at  it  was  sacrid,  for  ellis  it  were  not  comunynge  of  Cristis 
body,  panne  moten  ]>es  heretikes  nedis  seie  ]?at  ])is  sacra- 
ment is  bred  jjat  we  breken.  And  si]>  Crist  may  not  lie, 
)>is .  breed  is  his  body,  as  he  seij?  in  ]>e  gospel.  Also  in 
canon  of  ]>e  masse,  after  ]>e  consecracion,  we  clepen  )>is 
sacrament  holy  breed  of  everlastynge  lif,  and  chalis  of  ever- 
lastynge  helpe  *. 

Also  [in]  ^  ]?e  storie  of  J^e  feste  of  ]?is  sacrament  we  clepen  it 
Juries  breed,  and  seyn,  bred  of  angelis  is  maade  bred  of  man,  and, 
hevenly  bred  ^evej)  ende  to  figuris  of  J?e  olde  lawe ;  and,  in  }?e 
same,  ]?is  is  verrey  bred  of  children  ^.     And  in  Ipis  ympne  of  ]?e 

^  supplied. 

^  '  Panem  sanctum  vitae  aetemae,  et  calicem  salulis  perpetuae.* 

'Ecce  panis  Angelorum 
Factus  cibus  viatorum, 
Vere  panis  filiorum, 
Non  mittendus  canibus. 
In  figuris  praesijjnatur. 
Cum  Isaac  immolatur,'  &c. 
From  the  sequence  '  Lauda  Sion,'  sunjj  on  the  festival  of  Corpus  Christi. 


The  sub- 
stances of  the 
bread  and 
wine  are  not 
changed  in 
consecration. 


522 


WYCLIF'S  WORKS. 


Authorities  for 
this  view, 


which  lay  lords 
ought  to  sup- 
port, and  con- 
demn the 
heretical  view 
of  the  friars. 


feste  we  reden  Jjus,  Goddis  sone  man  made  verrey  bred  of  his 
flech  by  vertue  of  his  word,  and  wyn  his  blood  *.  And  in  J^e 
secret  of  Jje  medil  masse,  on  Cristismasse  day,  we  preie  })us,  Jjat 
]?is  substamice  of  her}>e  brynge  to  us  ]?at  ]?ing  j?at  is  gostliche, 
j)at  is  Cristis  body  b.  panne  J^is  substance  schal  not  be  turned 
to  nou^t,  but  be  sacrid,  and  so  dwelle  after  f>e  consecracion. 
And  Seynt  Austyn  sei]?  in  a  sermon  fat  is  whiten  in  j)e  popis 
lawe,  ])at  ])ing  ])at  is  seyn  is  bred,  and  J^at  ]?ing  J^at  ei^en  schewen 
or  tellen  is  Jje  chalis,  but  it  is,  as  moche  as  }>e  feij?  axe]?  to  be 
lernyd,  J?e  bred  is  Cristis  body,  and  })e  chalis,  })at  is,  wyn  in  J^e 
chalis,  is  Cristis  blood  «. 

Also  Austyn  sei]?  in  a  sermon,  and  is  writen  in  ])e  popis  lawe, 
5e  schullen  not  ete  ])at  body,  ne  ^  drynke  ]?at  blood,  J^e  whiche 
blood  J)e  men  Jjat  schullen  do  me  on  crois  schuUe  schede  out  ; 
forso])e  ]?e  same  and  not  Jje  same;  J^at  same  body  and  blood 
invisibily,  and  not  J)e  same  visibely.  And  ^if  it  be  nede  J^at  ]?is 
sacrament  be  halwid  visibely,  nevere]?eles  it  is  nedeful  ])at  it  be 
understonden  unvesibily.  Also  Jerom  in  a  pistil  ])at  he  made 
to  Elvidiam,  sei]?  |)us.  Here  we  ]?at  J>at  brede  J?at  Crist  brak,  and 
blissed,  and  ^af  to  his  disciplis  to  ete,  is  J^e  body  of  oure  Saveour. 
And  in  Jje  popis  lawe,  wi]?  grete  congregacion  of  bischopis  and 
clerkis,  and  grete  avisement,  is  writen  jjus ;  I  bileve  wij?  herte, 
and  knowlech  bi  mou]?,  ))at  ]?e  bred  and  wyn  J^at  ben  putt  in  J?e 
auter  ben  after  J)e  consecracion,  not  only  |?e  sacrament,  but  ]?e 
fiesch  and  blood  of  Jesus  Crist  in  treuf)e. 

panne,  si|)  J^es  auctorites  of  Crist  and  his  apostlis  ben  algatis 
sojje,  and  also  auctorites  of  pes  seyntis  and  clerkis,  si]>  J^ei 
accorden  wij)  holy  writt  and  reson,  seie  we  ]?at  ]?is  sacrament 
is  verrey  bred,  and  also  verrey  Cristis  body,  and  teche  we  ])is 
treue  bileve  to  Cristen  men  opynly;  and  late  lordis  meyntenen 

*  corrected ;  \>at,  X. 


'Verbum  care  panem  verum 
Verbo  camem  efficit ; 
Fitque  sanguis  Christi  merum.' 

'  The  Word  made  flesh  makes  by  his 
word   real    bread  his   flesh.'      But 
Wyclif  seems   to  have   understood 
it;  '  makes  his  flesh  real  bread.' 
^  Ut    sicut   homo    genitus    idem 


refulsit  Deus,  sic  nobis  haec  terrena 
substantia  conferat  quod  divinum 
est.*  But  as  the  secret  is  said  hefore 
consecration,  it  is  difficult  to  see 
how  Wyclif  could  derive  from  these 
words  any  support  for  his  \dews. 

^  For   this    reference,    see    ante, 
p.  484,  note. 


LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS,  52^3 

J?is  treu]?e,  as  \€\  arn  bounden  up  peyne  of  dampnacion,  sij)  it  is 
opynly  y-tau^t  in  holy  writt  and  bi  reson  and  witt ;  and  dampne 
we  }>is  cursed  heresie  of  Anticrist  and  his  ypocritis  and  worldly 
prestis,  seiynge  J)at  J)is  sacrament  is  neij?er  bred  ne  Cristis  body, 
but  accidentis  wijjouten  suget,  and  j?erunder  is  Cristis  body. 
For  ]?is  is  not  tau^t  in  holy  writt,  but  is  fully  a5enst  Seynt 
Aust}^n,  and  holy  seyntis,  and  reson  and  witt.  For  Austyn  seij? 
in  many  bokis  }?at  j^er  may  non  accident  be  wijjouten  suget  ^. 

*  See  p.  409,  note. 


-*^<^<§)*= 


APPENDIX. 

ON    THE    AUTHENTICITY    OF   THE    FIFTH 
BOOK  OF  KNYGHTON'S   CHRONICLE^. 


Any  matter  which  affects  the  genuineness  or  authenticity  of 
the  original  sources  of  our  national  history  is  so  important, 
that  I  shall  be  excused  for  examining,  with  such  minuteness  as 
may  be  necessary,  the  opinion  expressed  by  Dr.  Shirley,  in  a 
note  at  p.  524  of  the  Fasciculi  Zizaniorum  and  elsewhere,  that 
what  is  commonly  called  the  'Fifth  Book  of  Knyghtons 
Chronicle'  proceeds  from  another  and  unknown  hand. 

In  order  that  my  reply  to  it  may  be  intelligible,  it  is  neces- 
sary to  reproduce  the  chief  portion  of  Dr.  Shirley's  note,  which 
is  as  follows  : — 

'  It  is  of  some  impoi-tance  to  the  history  of  this  time  to  correct  the  error 
by  which  this  fragment  has  been  ascribed  to  Knighton,  who  is  a  dry  and 
comparatively  worthless  commentator  on  Higden's  Polychronicon.  The 
writer  of  the  fifth  book  is  a  partizan  of  the  Duke  of  Lancaster,  and, 
as  such,  veiy  valuable,  as  with  the  exception  of  some  Lancastrian  frag- 
ments, which  Walsingham  unconsciously  embodies,  he  is  the  only  writer 
of  that  day  on  the  less  popular  side.  It  is  in  these  words  that  Knighton 
concludes  his  preface : — "  Insuper  opus  inceptum,  videlicet  a  conquestu 
regni  Angliae,  in  V  partes  protelare  curavi,  in  quarum  duabus  primis 
XVII  (read  XVI)  capitulorum  numenim  praecedentis  HbelH,  seriem  et 
ordrnem  literainmi  de  vocabuli  mei  expressione  sumptarum  observando, 
perorare  curavi.  Tertiam  vero  partem  et  quartam,  propter  prolixitatem 
semionis  et  eventuum  inexplicabilem  concursum  et  finis  incepti  opens  inex- 
pectabilem  visionem,  absque  tali  capitulorum  ordine  transcurrendo  annotare 
lacessitus  praeoccupavi.  Sicque  totum  laborem  praesentis  opens  in  quinque 
partes  sive  libellos  distinctos  protelando  orditus  sum."     It  mil  be  seen, 

*  See  ante,  p.  499, 


526 


WrCLIF'S  WORKS. 


I  think,  on  a  careful  reading  of  this  sentence  that  quinqtie  has  been  sub- 
stituted for  quatuor  by  some  one  who  was  perplexed  by  finding  five  books, 
but  who  has  fortunately  not  seen  that  it  was  necessary  to  recast  the  whole 
sentence  in  order  to  make  the  qtdnque  suit.  It  was  evidently  Knighton's 
intention  to  make  the  fourth  book  contain  the  events  of  his  own  lifetime, 
as  I  have  no  doubt  it  does.  And  if  we  examine  the  Chronicle  we  shall  see 
that  each  of  the  first  two  books  contains  sixteen  chapters,  the  first  letters 
of  which  form  the  acrostic  Heniicus  Cnjtthon,  Henricus  Cnithonn,  while 
the  third  book  is  only  partially  divided  into  chapters,  the  fourth  not 
at  all.' 

It  seems  to  me  that  Dr.  Shirley  has  entirely  misapprehended 
Knyghton's  meaning,  and  that,  owing  to  his  not  having  read 
the  sentence,  nor  e:^amined  the  Chronicle  itself,  with  sufficient 
care.  He  did  not  observe, — nor  did  John  Selden,  when  he 
wrote  for  Twysden  the  critical  introduction  to  the  Decern 
Scriptores, — that  not  the  first  two,  but  the  first  three  books 
of  the  Chronicle  give  in  the  initial  letters  of  the  chapters  the 
acrostic  of  Knyghton's  name.  Yet  this,  if  we  read  him  care- 
fully, Knyghton  distinctly  asserts.  For  the  clause  '  in  quarum 
....  curavi,'  may  be  translated  as  follows : — '  In  the  first  two 
of  which  [i.e.  of  the  books  treating  of  events  after  the  Con- 
quest] I  have  taken  care  to  complete  the  number  of  seventeen 
[should  be  "  sixteen  "]  chapters  of  the  preceding  hook,  by  observ- 
ing the  succession  and  order  of  the  letters  which  form  my  own 
name.'  Now  this  is  what  he  has  actually  done.  The  first  two 
books  after  the  Conquest,  Books  II.  and  III.  of  the  entire 
Chronicle,  do,  in  the  number  and  initial  letters  of  their  chapters, 
conform  to  the  'preceding  book/  Book  I.  of  the  entire 
Chronicle,  which  treats  of  events  before  the  Conquest.  In 
the  third  and  fourth  parts  after  the  Conquest,  Books  IV. 
and  V.  of  the  Chronicle,  he  has  been  unable,  for  the  good 
and  sufficient  reasons  which  he  gives,  to  follow  the  same  plan 
in  the  numbering  and  initialling  of  the  chapters.  This  is 
exactly  what  we  find  to  be  the  case  with  Books  IV.  and  V ; 
the  initial  letters  are  just  what  they  may  happen  to  be,  and  the 
number  of  chapters  much  exceeds  that  in  the  first  three  books. 
The  only  oversight  which  I  can  detect  in  the  whole  passage 
is  the  statement  that  the  work  '  videHcet  a  conquestu  Angliae ' 
was  divided  'in  V  partes.'     It  should  be  'in  IV  partes;'    for 


APPENDIX. 


527 


though  the  entire  Chronicle  has  five  parts  or  books,  the  portion 
'  a  conquestu  Angliae '  has  only  four.  With  this  shght  altera- 
tion, the  whole  passage  becomes  consistent  both  with  itself  and 
with  the  actual  condition  of  the  Chronicle ;  and  so  far  from 
furnishing  any  evidence  against  the  authenticity  of  the  Fifth 
Book,  bears  conclusive  testimony  in  its  favour. 

I  cannot  myself  detect  any  difference  of  moment  between 
the  tone  in  which  church  matters  are  spoken  of  in  the  Fifth 
Book,  and  that  which  prevails  in  the  rest  of  the  work.  Nor 
can  I  trace  any  difference  in  respect  of  style  or  language. 


o^S^4io-^- 


GLOSSARY. 


A.S.=  Anglo-Saxon.  W.V.  =  Glossary  to  Wycliffite  Versions  of  the  Bible, 
M.  =  Glossary  to  Morris'  Specimens  of  Early  English.  Hall.  =  Halliwell's 
Glossary  of  Archaic  a-nd  Pronjtncial  Words.  Nares=Nares'  Glossary. 
P.P.  =  Promptormm  Parvulorum  (Camd.  Soc.)  O.E.==01d  English. 

Vulg.  =  Vulgate  version  of  the  Bible. 


Advoutre,  avoutre,  adult ery^  i.  72. 
Affie,  to  trusty  i.  59. 
Aftir,  afterwards^  passim. 
Agilte,  to  incur  guilty  iii.  490. 
Agregge,  to  aggra-vate^  iii,  164. 
Alardid,  larded^  ii.  52. 
Alargen,  to  enlarge^  i.  93,  316. 
Aieis,  alleys y  passages^  i.  no. 
Alfier-fadir,  i.  126.   A.S.  ealdor,  chief, 

or  prince ;  as  in  Eng.  alder-man. 

kyng,  i.  289. 

maistir. 

Ancre,  anker,  anchorite ^  i.  167. 
Anemptis,  anentis,  concerning ^  i.  33. 
Apaied,  apayde,  content y  satisfied^  i.  237. 
Apperynge,  impairing^  deteriorationy  iii. 

152. 
Aquestis,  questers, prosecutors y  i.  103, 
Araile,  to  fasten  to  rails,  i.  99. 
Arette,  to  reckon,  to  number ,  iii.  481 : 

W.V. 
Arte,  to  constrain,  iii.  360. 
Artow,  art  thou. 
ASyfor  instance,  passim. 
Asee{»,  satisfaction,  compensation,  i.  17, 

55.     Fr.  assez. 
Asideli,  indirectly,  i.  324. 
Askape,  to  escape,  iii.  260. 
Aspic,  snare,  ambush,  ii.  363  ;  W.V. 
Assoyie,  assoyve,  to  absolnje. 

VOL.    ITI,  M  m 


Asterten,  to  get  anvayfrom,  escape. 

At,  that,  iii.  417. 

Atake,  to  overtake,  ii.  278. 

Atempre,  temperate,  iii.  14. 

Attende,  to  beware,  i.  223. 

A  twyn,  atwynne,   apart,  separately, 

ii.  30,  46. 
Aventid,  blown  away,  i,  219. 
Aw^e,  awe,  iii.  167. 
A^enward,  a3eynward,  vice  versa,  iii. 

452,  468. 


B. 

Bagge,  to  swerve,  i.  191. 

Baily,  bayle,  bailiff,  i.  24;  iii.  414. 

Bask,  bitter,  acid,  iii.  42.  A  West- 
moreland word  ace.  to  Hall. 

Bcitelouse,  pugnacious,  iii.  165, 

Bayle ;  see  Baily. 

Bede,  to  offer,  i.  60.     Ger.  bieten. 

Bedraden,  bed-ridden,  iii.  372. 

Bekenyng,  confession,  ii.  79.  Ger.  be- 
kennung. 

Ber-lepis,  carrying-baskets,  i.  17  «. 

Besant,  besaunt,  a  piece  of  -money,  i. 
253;  W.V.     '      ^         ^  ^' 

Besem,  besom,  broom,  i.  119.  A.S. 
besma. 

Betoke,  perf.  of  beteche,  to  recommend, 


53^ 


GLOSSARY. 


Beuperis,  htv^-^^ns^  god-fat  her  s,  i.  299  ; 

ii.  381  «. 
Biclippe,  to  embrace^  ii.  30. 
Biel,  hoil^  iii.  91. 
Bigge,  to  buy,  ii.  44. 
Bigginge,  h^%\Xig,purchase,  redemption, 

i.  69  ;  ii.  281. 
Bi-hard,  hardly,  ii.  100. 
Biheten,  bihoten,  to  promise,  i.  60,  99. 
Birle,  birlen,  to  give  to  drink,  ii.  103  ; 

iii.  43.    A.S.  byrltan,   and  byrle,  a 

cup-bearer. 
Birjjun,  burthen,  iii.  21. 
Bise,^«^  //;?m,  i.  i.     Lat.  byssus. 
Bitake,  /o  recommend,  iii.  479. 
Blabere,  ifo  talk  much  or  foolishly. 
Blec,  blekke,  to  spot  or  j^<a:/;2,  i.  147. 
Bleckidj  stained,  iii.  200. 
Blente,  blinded,  iii.  450. 
Ble]?eliche,  cheerfully,  i.  106. 
Blefeliest,  wojif  blithely,  i.  277. 
Boll,  /^«//. 

BoUun,  swollen,  ii.  261. 
Bolue,  to  s^juell  out,  ii.  266. 
Bonere,  kind,  debonair,  iii.  193. 
Bonernesse  (derived  from  the  foreg.), 

khidness,  affability,  ii.  351. 
Bood,  perf.  of  bide,  abode,  i.  99. 
Boosen,  to  stuff  or  pi  ff  out,  iii.  124. 
Boot,  buot,  boat,  i.  349. 
Borowe,  boru,  pledge,  surety,  iii.   10 ; 

W.V. 
Boruheed,  suretyship,  ib. 
Bosis,  bosses,  iii.  124. 
Bour- woman,  chamber-^voman,   ii.   9. 

A.S.  bur. 
Bregge,  to  abridge,  ii.  407  ;  W.V. 
Bretais,  battlement,  i.  191  ;  britage  in 

W.V. 
Briteysing,  a  battlemented  parapet,  i. 

191. 
Brocage,  brokerage,  iii.  280. 
Brollis,  children,  brats,  iii.  195,  439. 
Brotel,  brittle  (J),  i.  268  ;  W.V. 
Bryge,  to  catch  (?),  iii.  416. 
Brygge  or  bryke,  breach  (?),  iii.  128. 
Burioun,  burgeon,  bud,  iii.  30. 
Burioune,   buriowne,    to    burgeon   or 

sprout,  i.  15  ;  ii.  175. 
Buxum,  iii.  94 ;  from  A.S.  bugan,  to 

bend;  Gev.  beugsam,'^\\2iVit. 
Bjheste,  promise,  i.  237. 
Byknowe,  to  confess,  ii.  243. 


G. 

Canel,  canal,  ih  335- 
Caste,  practice,  proceeding,  iii.  95. 
Catel,  chattels,  property,  i.  184. 
Caucioun,  a  bill,  i.  22,     Vulg.  cautio. 
Causel,  a  clause,  iii.  406. 
Cautellous,  crafty,  i.  223. 
Can  til,  de'vice,  stratagem,  i.  96. 
Caym,  for  Cain,  iii.  241. 
Ghaffare,  to  chaffer,  bargain,  i.  286. 
Ghalenge,  accusation,  iii.  91. 
Ghapman,  a  trader,  i.  153. 
Ghariouse,  of  great  charge,  expensive, 

iii.  170. 
Ghastyng,  chasing,  iii.  323. 
Ghauel,  chawle,  jaw,  jowl,  ii.   169 ; 

W.V. 
Ghaumbren,  to  economise,  ii.  124. 
Ghaunsable,  changeable,  iii.  22. 
Ghepyng,  market-place,  i.  98. 
Ghesoun,  c^j/j^,  i.  128. 
Ghevely,  chiefly,  i.  14. 
Gheveteynes,  chieftains,  i.  128. 
Ghulle,  to  sole  ox  patch  (?),  ii.  280. 
Gister,  sister,  iii.  121. 
Glam,  pinching,  binding,  iii.  29.     A.S. 

clam. 
Glamrnen,  to  plaster,  ii.  93. 
Glarifie,  to  glorify,  i.  367. 
Gleke,  to  convey  by  stealth,  i.  300. 
Glepe,  to  call. 
Glergie,  learning,  iii.  54. 
Glotire,  to  cloister  (?),  iii.  418. 
GofFyne,  basket,  i.  121  ;  from  cophinus. 
Gommeling,  new  comer,  stranger,  iii. 

514;  W.V. 
Qovn^dimge,  something  eaten  with  bread, 

Gonceve,  /<?  comprise,  iii.  442. 
Gonjourison,  conspiracy,  i.  302.    Lat. 

conjuratio, 
Gonteke,  reviling,  i.  49  ;   W.V.  and 

C/^;z;f.  i^ales,  1.  2005. 
Goolis,  ro^/j,  ii.  121. 
Gorde,  to  agree,  i.  loi. 
Gorrepcioun,  reproof,  iii.  383  ;  W.V. 
Gorserie,  horse-dealing,  so  roguery  (?), 

iii.  283;  M. 
Gorve,  box,  basket,  iii.  329  ;  Hall. 
Gos,  cosse,  kiss^  iii.  138  ;  W.V. 
Gountre,  to  encounter,  to  meet,  i.  207. 
Gover,  to  recover,  ii.  289. 


GLOSS  A  RF. 


531 


Coystily,  costly,  iii.  369. 

Cratche,  a  ma?iger^  i.  317;  W, V. 

Creese,  to  increase. 

Cristendom,  Christianity,  baptism,  iii. 

196,  285  ;  W.V. 
Croche,   crocche,   to  seize,   to  usurp, 

i.  139.    Fr.  accrocher, 
Croke,  to  saverve,  turn  aside,  ii.  289. 
Croude,  a  fiddle,  ii.  73  ;  Nares.   Welsh 

cr^vth. 
Croyserie,  a  crusade,  i.  367. 
Culver,  culvyr,  doije,  i.  78.  A.S.  culfre. 
Curleris,  vagrants  (?),  iii.  199. 
Currours,  couriers,  messengers,  i.  229. 

D. 

Debletis,  little  de'vils  (?),  ii.  328. 

Dedeyn,  indigtiation. 

Deel,  deul,  mourning,  iii.  60,  230.   Fr. 

deiiil. 
Defien,  to  digest,  i.  89  and  n, 
Defoule,  defile,  i.  103. 
Defyed,  ^voided,  put  forth,  i.  88. 
Delve,  dolven,  to  dig,  bury,  ii.  99. 
Deme,  to  judge,  iii.  448. 
Dere,  to  hurt,  iii.  324  ;  M. 
Dereworpe,  precious,  beloved,  ii.  274; 

W.V. 
Dever,  devere,  duty,  ii.  399 ;  iii.  418. 
Devours,  divorce,  iii.  192. 
Deynely,  dignely,  qvith  dignity,  ii.  62. 
Deynte,  humble  amazement,  ii.  9. 
Dilavy,  dislavy,  lavish,  profuse,  iii.  388. 
Dilavynesse,   looseness,   copiousness,   ii. 

298.    Lat.  diluvium  (?). 
Discrasid,  ^weakened,  shattered,  ii.  215. 

Connected  perhaps  with  the  Fr. 

ecraser, 
Discrevynge,  discerning,  iii.  414, 
Dispense,  expense,  i.  191. 
Disquatte,  to  break  in  pieces  (?),  i.  246. 
Disserve,  to  be  of  service,  i.  333. 
Di3ten,  p.p.  di^t,  to  equip,  clothe,  ii.  387 ; 

W.V. 
Dole,  doole,  dealing,  distribution,  iii. 

423. 
Doppen  (for  droppen  ?),  to  drop,  i.  246. 
Doren,  to  dare,  i.  242. 
Do  to,  to  add,  iii.  70. 
Dowynge,  endonvment,  i,  96. 
Dowfe,  dove,  i.  78. 
Drecche,   to  trouble,   i.   115;    iii.   60. 

A.S.  dree  an. 


Drede,  in  phrase  '  no  drede,*  ^uoithout 

doubt,  i.  400. 
Dreint,  dreynt,  drowned,  i,  400. 
Dritte,  dirt,  i.  89. 

Drow3,  ^f^ew,  perf.  of  drawe,  1.  393. 
Drunkenlewe,  given  to  drink,  iii.  486  ; 

W.V. 
Dwelling,  tarrying,  delay,  i.  293. 
D wellinge,  ^^r;«^;2^«/,  i.  304. 
Dwy^ne,  to  dmjindle,  ii.  34. 
Dytee,  ditty,  iii.  481. 


Eche,  each. 

Eerne,  eagle,  iii.  35. 

Eft,  afterwards,  i.  5  r . 

Eggyng,  sharpening,  persecution,  iii.  20. 

Eire,  heir,  i.  352. 

Eke,  to  increase  or  augment,  ii.  202. 

Elde,  age,  i.  28. 

Enchesoun,  cause,  reason,  i.  8 ;  W.V. 

Old  Fr.  encheoir,  enchaison, 
Encortif,  fatted  Q),  iii.  36. 
Ende,  a  region  or  district,  as  in  Audley 

End,  Dale  End,  Sec,  i.  10.    Ende- 

kyn  means  country -kinsfolk. 
Engleymed,  slimy,  iii.  150  ;  Hall. 
Enke,  ink,  ii.  2. 
Enleven,  eleven,  i.  361. 
Enpeche,  to  prevent,  hinder,  iii.  317. 
Enplaster,  a  plaster,  iii.  166;  W.V. 
Enporid,  impoverished,  ii.  278. 
Ensegen,  to  besiege,  ii.  155  ;  W.V. 
Ententif,  attentive,  iii.  36;  W.V. 
Enterlasen,  to  interfere,  iii.  164. 
Er,  or,  ere,  before  that,  i.  284. 
YjX\:iQ.riS,  gardens  of  herbs,  i.  28. 
Ernes,  pledge,  earnest,  i.  142 ;  ii.  277. 
Er}»e-dene,  earthquake,  i.  244. 
Eten,  etene,  a  giant,  ii.    iii.     A.S. 

eten;  Icel.fotunn. 
Even,  own,fellociv,  i.  31. 
Even-wor]?i,  equivalent,  comparable,  ii, 

323. 
Ey,  egg,  ii.  153. 
Eyren,  heirs,  iii.  157  ;  W.V. 

F. 

Fage,  to  speak  fair,  to  coax,  i.  44 ;  ii. 

6;  W.V. 
FsLgynge,  plausible,  i.  56. 
Faioure.fiatterer,!.  72.  From  fage  Q). 
Fardel,  burden,  baggage,  iii.  208. 


:\i  m  2 


53^ 


GLOSSARF, 


Fayn,  feyn,  to  be  glad,  i.  246. 

Fay  tour,  impostor,  iii.  128  ;  P.P. 

Feele,  fele,  many,  i.  64;  iii.  415. 

Feerdful,  terrible,  iii.  21. 

Felnes,  cruelty,  i.  55. 

Fenne,  dirt,  dung,  iii.  16. 

Feringis,  terrors,  fearful  sights,  i.  220. 

Fermour, j^rwfr,  i.  23  ;  W.V. 

Ferour,  ferrour,  farrier,  a  nvorker  in 

iron,  i.  407. 
Festu,    mote^   straw,   iii.    289.     Lat. 

festuca, 
Feyre,  a  beauty,  iii.  167. 
Fleme,  to  banish,  ii.  376;   M.     A.S. 

flyman. 
Flete,  to  float,  i.  290. 
Flew3h5  shunned,  iii.  412. 
Flite,  to  flee,  flit,  ii.  404.    Chaucer. 
Flocce,  to  drift  (?),  iii.  252. 
Floon,  bolt,  dart,  i.  186.    K.%,flan, 
Folde,  to  bend,  to  turn  aside,  ii.  126  ; 

W.V. 
Foltische,  io\\i^,  foolish,  i.  309  ;  W.V. 
Forbarren,  to  obstruct,  i.  279. 
For-do,  to  do  anuay  nvith,  destroy,  i.  77  : 

W.V. 
Forfende,  to  forbid,  to  hinder,  i.  241  ; 
•     W.V. 

For))erhed,  i\}ix\^x\i^^^, priority,  iii.  78. 
For-t>ij  on  that  account,  iii.  472. 
For]?inken,  ^0  repent,  i.  279. 
ForJ)inking,  repentance,  ii.  201 ;  W.V. 
For3eve,  ^0  remit,  iii.  253. 
Founede,  founyd,  foolish,  infatuated, 

i.  131.     0,'E.fond. 
Fraytor,  freytor,  a  refectory,  i.  293  n. 
Frentikes,  madmen,  i.  26. 
Frushe,  fruysche,  to  crush,  i,  201.   Fr. 

froisser. 
Fuylen,  to  foul,  i.  313. 

G. 

Gabbinge,  idle  talk,  lies,  i.  58. 

Gar,  to  make,  iii.  42  «. 

Gegilotls,  ^wanton  nvenches,  ii.  233. 
O.  E.  giglots,    Nares. 

Geldren,  gildren,  gildrid,  to  ensnare, 
ii.  322.  From  *  gilder,'  a  North 
country  word  for  snare ;  Hall. 

GowdrwYe,  generation,  i.  391. 

Gete,  goats,  ii.  281. 

Gettere,  iii.  281.     See  Jectour. 


Gilour,  decei'ver,  i.  129;  iii.  127. 
Girde,  to  cut,  smite,  i.  388  ;  W.V. 
Glat,  glet,  mucus,  iii.  32. 
Glavere,  to  talk  idly,  to  tattle,  i.  18 r. 

Compare  Lowl.  Scotch  cla'uers, 
Glose,   interpretation,    explanation,    ii. 

403. 
Gnare,  a  snare,  ii.  363  ;  W.V. 
Gnaren,  to  snare,  i.  96. 
Gnastinge,  gnashing ;  W.V. 
Gode,  I  pray  you,  iii.  130. 
Grane,  snare,  noose,  ii.  153  ;  W.V. 
Graunten,  to  guarantee,  i,  23. 
Greggen,  to  heap  up  ;  W.V. 
Gr^A\.o\n\A,  greyhound,  ii.  359. 
Grei|?id, /r^j>^r/?^,  iii.  17;  W.V. 
Grenne,  to  grin,  iii.  434. 
Grete,  to  lament,  i.  141. 
Grucche,  grutche,  to  murmur,  iii.  434. 
Gurle,  to  gro^,  gurgle,  ii.  249. 
Gylore ;  see  Gilour. 

H. 

Haccis,  hatch,  part  of  a  door,  iii.  16. 
Hanke,  to  entangle,  iii.  28. 
Hatte,  to  be  called,  i.  365  ;  W.V. 
Haunte,   to  pursue,  practise,  iii.  422  ; 

W.V. 
Hayward ;  see  Heyward. 
1^0:^^,  principal,  capital,  iii.  162. 
Heendly,  roz^rif^owj/;',  ii.  53 ;  M. 
Heerde,  a  shepherd, 
Hegge,  hedge,  i.  29. 
Heght, ^ro7?2Zj<?^,  iii.  128. 
Heie,  to  exalt,  i.  27. 
Helde,  to  pour,  i.  32  ;  W.V. 
Hele,  health,  salruation,  iii.  28  ;  W.V. 
Hele,  ^whole,  iii.  439. 
Helen,  hele,  to  couer,  iii.  418. 
Hereberow,    herberwe,    a    harbour, 

lodging,  i.  172  ;  iii.  371. 
Hereliche,  early,  iii.  221. 
Heris,   hern,   heme,   theirs,   ii.    261  : 

W.V. 
Herris,  hinges,  iii.  16  ;  W.V. 
Herye,  to  praise,  to  glorify,  i.  107. 
Heste,  commandment,  i.  38. 
Heten,  hi^te,  to  promise,  i.  loi. 
Heved,  head,  iii.  435. 
Heynes,  highness,  elevation. 
Heywardis,  lit.  hedge-wardens,  i.  104. 

See  note  at  p.  436,  vol.  iii. 


GLOSSARY. 


5Z^ 


Hidlis,  a  secret  place ^  iii.  29  ;  W.V. 
Hidoiisen,  hydowse,  to  be  terrified  at^ 

i.  269 ;  W.V. 
Hilden,  tofiay,  iii.  331  ;  W.V. 
Hilynge,   hillynge,  clothings    co'vering, 

iii.  35,  126. 
Hi^t,  is  or  ^uas  called. 
Ho,  she,  iii.  131. 

Holes,  holys,  lavliSjpeascods,  ii.  71. 
Holet,  little  hole  (?),  ii.  281. 
Holouris,      (whoremongers,     iii.     199 ; 

Chaucer. 
Hosteler,  innkeeper,  i.  32. 
Hoten,  to  promise,  plight,  iii.  30. 
Husebonde,  a  householder,  i.  98. 
Hy,  they,  iii.  105  ;  M. 
Hydowse ;  see  Hidousen. 
Hynderheed,  ^oj/^r/ori^,  iii.  78. 
Hyne,  a  hind,  labourer,  i.  140 ;  iii.  34  ; 

W.V. 


I. 


Ilche,  each,  iii.  431. 

Iliche,  yliche,  alike,  similarly,   i.   47  ; 

ii.  49. 
Inwittis,  mental  faculties,  ii.  307 ;  W.V. 
Irrous,  angry,  i.  16. 
I3en,  eyes. 


Jape,  jappe,  trick,  gibe,  i.  410  n. 
Jectour,  a  braggart,  boaster,  iii.  195  ; 

gettour  in  Hall.     'L^t.jacto. 
Jeeste,  a  gest  or  romantic  story,  iii.  196. 
Jurour,  sqjuearer,  iii.  394. 


L. 

Largerly,  more  largely,  i.  176. 
Leepe,  iepis,  basket,  i.  64;  ii.  262. 
Leeve,  leve,  to  be  left,  to  remain  o'ver, 

ii.  286  ;  W\V. 
Lef,  \eeff,  glad,  ready,  ii.  298. 
Lefe,  I  pray  you,  iii.  257,  414. 
Leir,  mould,  soil,  iii.  31.    Lair  in  Hall. 
Lei5e,  ley^e,  to  laugh,  i.  150  ;  W.V. 
Lemman,  lemmon,  a  lo'ver,  i.  49. 
Lendis,  loins,  i.  275. 
Lerid,  learned,  iii.  152. 
Lesar,  destroyer,  iii.  470. 
Lese,  lose,  to  destroy,  mar,  hurt,  i.  327  ; 

W.V. 
Leser,  destroyer,  iii.  31. 
Lesewes,  meado^iv  pastures,  ii.  254. 
Lesyngis,  lesingis,  lies,  i.  222. 
Letti-ure,  literary   knowledge,  i.    221  ; 

W.V. 
Leve ;  see  Lefe. 
Leytis,  lightning,  iii.  66. 
Ligge,  to  lie,  ii.  419  ;  W.V. 
Lippe,  to  leap,  iii,  384 ;  W.V. 
Lite,y^at;. 
Li^t,  easy. 

Loore,  teaching,  doctrine,  i.  214. 
hoovynge,  praise,  i.  107;  M. 
Los,  loos,  praise,  fame,  ii.  271. 
Loser,  destroyer,  iii.  459, 
Losingerie,  deceit,  flattery,  iii.  196. 
Loste,  i.  49.     See  Lese. 
Louke,  to  lock,  shut  up,  iii.  42. 
Lout  en,  to  bo^iv  do^ivn  to,  ^v  or  ship,  i. 

377,89;  W.V. 

Lyme,  limb,  i.  70. 


K. 

Kitte,"/<?  cut,  i.  99,  104  ;  W.V. 
Knacke,  to  knock,  play,  iii,  482. 
Knackyng,   knocking,    strumming,    iii. 

481. 
Knave,  male,  boy,  i.  345  ;  W.V. 
Knodyn,  kneaded,  i.  223. 
Knoweliche,    to  acknowledge,  i.   196  ; 

W.V. 
Knytchis,  bundles,  \.  97  ;  W.V. 
Koud,  knonvn,  ii.  246. 
Kynde,  nature,  i.  104;  W.V. 
Kyndelis,  offspring,  broody  ii.  53  ;  W.V. 


M. 

Magry  his,  maugre  his,  in  his  despite, 
iii.  263. 

M.2ike.,fellonv, associate,!.  277;  iii.  192, 

Manasse,  menace,  i.  103  ;  W.V. 

Mangery,  a  meal,  feast,  \.  4. 

Marre,  to  perplex,  ii.  29,  117. 

Marw5,  marrow,  iii.  36;  W.V. 

Maugre,  mawgrey,  in  spite  of'i.  6 ; 
W.V. 

Maundye,  the  supper  on  Maundy  Thurs- 
day, iii.  415. 

Mawmet,  an  idol^  W.V. 

Mawmetry,  idolatry.  W.V. 


534 


GL  OSSARY. 


Mayne,  i.  53.     See  Meyne. 

yi€^\\s^  furniture y  movables,  i.  67. 

Medle,  to  mix^  i.  10  ;  W.V. 

Meefe,  to  mo've,  iii.  407. 

Menge,  to  mix,  iii.  405  ;  W.V. 

Meritory,  meritorious,  i.  61. 

Meselis,  lepers,  i.  71 ;  W.V. 

Meselrie,  leprosy,  i.  199. 

Meshese,  myschef,  uneasiness,  discom- 
fort, i.  67.    (Mysese  in  W.V.) 

Mete,  perf.  mat,  to  measure,  iii.  25, 

Meyne,  meyne3,  a  company,  retinue, 
W.V.  passim. 

Moldwarp,  molworp,  a  mole,  i.  402 ; 
W.V. 

Mone,  the  moon,  i.  107. 

Moneste,  to  admonish,  ii.  270 ;  W.V. 

Morenesse,  increase,  augmentation,  i. 
386 ;  ii.  64. 

Morewnynge,  morning,  i.  266. 

Morynge,  the  makitig  greater,  i.  65. 

Morw  3yve,  morow-^yfe,  original  en- 
dowment, i.  142. 

Mote,  mut,  must. 

Mou5]^e,  a  moth,  i.  373  ;  W.V. 

Mowe,  to  he  able,  i.  368  n.\  W.V. 

Mustre,  a  muster  or  re'view,  ii.  360 ; 
W.V. 

Mut-hall,  moot  or  meeting  hall,  ii.  123. 

Mychilnes,  muchness,  greatness,  i.  319. 

Myschif, /'^;2Kr)',  ii.  211. 

Myster,  need,  iii.  162,  414;  M. 

N. 

Neddir,  neddur,  adder,  i.  187  ;  iii.  463  ; 

W.V. 
Neer,  nearer,  iii.  69. 
Neer-hondis,  ^r^^/jj/  nearly,  iii.  288. 
Neet,  oxe7t,  iii.  36  ;  W.V. 
Neghtbors,  neighbours,  iii.  368. 
Negh3e ;  see  Nei^e. 
Neische,  to  soften,  iii.  d"^. 
Nei^e,  to  draw  near,  i.  281 ;  W.V. 
Nempnen,  to  name,  i.  79  ;  W.V. 
Nentis ;  see  Anentis. 
Nevere-}?e-lattir,  nevertheless,  iii.  27  ; 

W.V. 
Nexte,  the  last,  i.  14. 
Ney^e,  nigh,  i.  157. 
Nolle,  the  back   of  the  head,  iii.  92  ; 

W.V. 
Not  =  ne  wot,  knows  not^  ii.  263  ;  W.V. 


Not,  nou^t,  nothing. 

Noun,  nowm-power,  want  of  power, 

ii.  100  ;  W.V. 
Novelry,  novelty,  i.  20 ;  Chaucer. 
Noye,  to  hurt  or  vex,  iii.  432  ;  W.V. 
Noyous,   annoying,    vexatious,   i.    84  ; 

W.V. 

o. 

Occure,  ocur,  to  put  to.  usury,  i.  259  ; 
W.V.     See  M. 

Ofte-si}>e,  often  times,  iii.  32. 

Oker,  usury,  i.  259. 

Okyr ;  see  Occure. 

Oonhed,  unhid,  unity,  i.  144 ;  W.V. 

Ourne,  to  adorn,  iii.  193.     Lat.  or  no, 

Ouwher,  ow3where,  anywhere,  every- 
where, i.  262.     A.S.  (BgwhcBr, 

Overmeste,  uppermost,  i.  340. 

Owe,  0 !  iii.  404. 


V2.2iS,,pace,  step,  ii.  364;  W.V. 

V2i^n,  pageant,  i,  129. 

Palis,  a  palisade,  i.  25. 

Panter,  drawing-net,  iii.  200. 

VdJCisoiiQ.iiS,  parishioners,  iii.  374. 

Parre,  to  confine,  shut  up,\,  25  ;  Hall. 

Paske,  Pascha,  Easter,  Passover,  W.V. 

Past,  paast,  paste,  ii.  286  ;  W.V. 

Paste,  to  knead  up,  ii.  195, 

Payed ;  see  Apaied. 

Payren,  peiren,  to  degenerate,  iii.  418. 

Peiren,  to  impair,  i.  85  ;  W.V. 

VeluTQ,  fur  dresses,  iii.  520. 

Voxi^MXit,  penitential,  i.  38. 

Peys,  weight,  ii.  321.    Fr.  poids, 

Philargis  (?),  i.  no. 

Picche,  to  fix,  i.  137  ;  W.V. 

Pike,  to  scratch,  scrape,  i.  103. 

Pilen,  to  pillage,  strip,  ii.  419  ;  W.V. 

Fite,  piety,  iii.  193. 

Vlditrowe,  platform,  i.  194. 

"Plee,  plea,  pleading,  ii.  250;  W.V, 

Plete,  to  plead,  i.  114. 

Pleyne,  to  complain, 

Pleynynge,  complaining,  iii.  412  ;  W.V. 

Point  devys, perfectly,  i.  122. 

Pointel,  poyntel,  a  stylus,  i.  364;  W.V. 

Voot,  pot,  iii.  197. 

Fost,  placed,  situated,  i.  242. 

Pouste,  power,  iii.  44. 


GLOSSARY. 


535 


Powne,  topoundj  crush^  i.  89  ;  W.V. 

Pows,  the  pulse ^  i.  151. 

Prou,  pro  we,  ad'vantage,  i.  95  ;  ii.  206 ; 

Chaucer. 
Provendereris,  prebendaries,  in.  211; 

see  Promptorium  Parnjulorum. 
Pulment,  a  relish  eaten  ^ith  breads  i. 

299.     Lat .  pulmenium, 
Putis,  harlots^  i.  293.     O.  ¥r,pute. 

Queeme,  qweem,  to  please^  suit,  iii.  37. 
Queemely,  beco77nngly,  ii.  361.     Ger. 

bequemlich. 
Queemful,  pleasing,  iii.  9  ;  W.V. 
Queerne,  «  wi//,  ii.  408  ;  W.V. 
Queynt,  expert ^  skilful,  ii.  250. 
Quienal,  see  vol.  iii.  398  ;z. 
Quyke,  Ifvely,  'vigorous,  i.  109. 
Q^\.^Xy filthy  iii.  231 ;  W.V. 

R. 

Rabul,  rabble,  iii.  466. 

Refe,  to  take  -violently,  iii.  423.     AS. 

rafan;  Engl,  berea-ve. 
Refete,  to  refresh,  i.  352. 
Refute,  refuge,  iii.  316  ;  W.V. 
Rehetours,   a    class    of  sernjants,    iii. 

346  n, 
Rekke,  perf.  rou^t,  to  reck,  care  for ^  ii. 

114;  W.V. 
Relif,  relefFe,  relyfe,  remna-nt,  scrap, 

i.  17,  121 ;  iii.  180. 
Renaye,  to  deny,  iii.  371. 
Resoune,  to  reckon  ^ith,  call  to  account, 

i.  55. 
Ressettj  receptacle,  iii.  390;  W.V. 
Retenauntis,  retinue  (?),  iii.  478. 
Reume,  rewme,  kingdom,  W.V. 
Reve,  to  sunder,  tear  anvay,  iii.  180. 
Revelyng,  wrinkle,  iii.  194;  W.V. 
Rial,  royal,  i.  169. 
Ri^twisnesse,  righteousness,  proportion, 

i.  t68;  W.V. 
Route,  rowte,  to  snore,  to  belch,  i.  209; 

Hall. 
Route,  a  mob,  company,  i.  39. 
Rownen,  to  ^whisper,  i.  224. 
'  Rownynge,  whisper itig,  ii.  87. 
Rybawdery,  debauchery, 
Ryv^en,  to  tear,  i.  103, 


Sachil,  a  satchel  or  bag,  i.  177  ;  W.V. 
Saut,  an  assault,  ii.  365  ;  W.V. 
Schende,  shende,  to  disgrace,  ruin,  iii. 

190;  W.V. 
Schir,  sheer,  iii.  36. 
Schrapen,  ^0  scrape,  ii.  27, 
Sclaundrid,  offended,  scandalised,  i.  7 1  ; 

W.V. 
Scred)mge,  shredding,  chopping,  iii.  264. 
Scripul,  a  scruple,  ii.  201 ;  W.V. 
Scrowe,  a  scroll,  ii.  61. 
Scure,  skoure,  to  scour,  ii.  363. 
Seketour,  an  executor,  ii.  214. 
Sene-fote,  se-venfoot,  iii.  500  n. 
Senevey,  mustard,  ii.  194  ;  W.V. 
Serkelis,  circles,  i.  33. 
Sewe,  sue,  to  follow, 
SesNtve,  follower,  iii.  511. 
Shaggid,  schoggyd,  tossed  about,  i.  374 ; 

W.V. 
Sharris,  plough-shares,  1,  321. 
Sheete,  to  shoot,  i.  410  ;  W.V. 
Shente,  shameful,  ruinous,  ii.  109. 
Shir  Thursday,  Maundy  T^hursday,  i. 

325 .«. 

Shrewis,  depra'ved  or  wuorthless  per- 
sons, i.  241 ;  W.V. 

Sibbe,  of  kin ^  cognate,  iii.  86. 

Sibberide,  sybred,  kindred,  i.  376. 

Sidir,  sydre,  cider;  from  criKepa,  i.  363. 

Sidnesse,  sydenesse,  length  on  the  side, 
ii.  62. 

Sikir,  secure,  certain,  i.  157. 

Si]?,  adv.  afterwards,  then, 

Sij)is,  ti7nes,  ii.  323. 

Sittinge,7f^/^;>/^,  seemly,  i.  80. 

Si^en,  iii.  350.     See  Syen. 

Skape,  to  escape,  iii.  41. 

Skilful,  rational,  reasonable,  ii.  257. 

Skillfulli,  rationally,  purposely ;  W.V. 

Skip,  a  measure  of  corn,  i.  22  ;  Hall. 

Sle,  slee,  p.p.  slawe,  to  slay,  i.  224; 
W.V. 

Sleul'i,  slothful,  iii.  34. 

Slidir,  slippery,  ii.  4  ;  W.V. 

Smatche,  smacche,  to  smack  of  a  thing, 
i.  27. 

Smytte,  to  soil,  make  dirty,  iii.  164,  215. 
Ger.  schmutz. 

Snaperen,  to  stumble,  ii.  367  ;  W.V. 

Snoken,  to  sneak  about,  ii.  83. 


53^ 


GLOSSARF, 


Snybbe,  to  repro've,  snub,  ii.  76  ;  W.V. 

Sof!yme,  sophism,  iii,  226. 

Soi}?,  so}>e,  sothe,  true,  truth, 

Soler,  throne,  iii.  16. 

Soo]?sawe,  ^  proverb,  iii.  6  ;  W.V. 

Sooude,  soude,  pay,  (wages,  ii.  335  ; 

iii.  11;  W.V. 
Souel,  souvil,  sowvel,  pottage,  i.  63 ;  ii. 

137;  W.V. 
Souken,  to  suck,  drain,  i.  219  ;  W.V, 
Sounere,  sooner,  nearer,  i.  235. 
Soverain,  a  superior,  iii.  509. 
Sowcandely,  suddenly  (?),  iii.  241. 
Sowe,  perf.  sue,  sewe,  to  soqv,  i.  259. 
Sparlyveris,  cahes  of  the  leg,  iii.  92  :  ' 

W.V. 
Spede,  success,  iii.  466. 
Spotel,  spotil,  spotle, spittle,  i.  30 ;  W.V. 
Sprengen,  p.  p.  sprongen,  to  sprinkle- 

ii.  240 ;  W.V. 
Spreynd,  sprinkled,  ii.  287 ;  W.V. 
Squyeer,  squire,  iii.  152. 
Stalworf  e,  stal<wart,  iii.  1 8  ;  W.V, 
Steflfadris,  step-fathers  (?),  iii.  335. 
Stemne,    to    put    to     silence,    i.    43. 

Stempne,  meaning  'voice,  command, 

is   in  Hall.      Ger.   stimme ;    O.  E. 

stenjen* 
Stien,  stye,  sty^en,  to  ascend,  climb, 

i.  42,  261 ;  W.V. 
Stier,  stiver,  mounter,  climber,  iii.  18  ; 

W.V. 
Stondis,  times,  iii.  27. 
Stree,  stra^w,  iii.  428  ;  W.V. 
Streng,  string,  iii.  34. 
Stronde,  stream,  ii.  338;  W.V. 
Sturblen,   to   disturb,    trouble,  ii.   99  ; 

W.V. 
Sudarie,  napkin,  ii.  99  ;  W.V. 
Suen,  sue,  to  follow ;  W.V. 
Suynge,  suitable  to,  follo<wing,    i.  76, 

375. 
Suyngli,  accordingly,  ii.  106. 
Swelewe,  to  s<wallonx),  i.  70. 
Swiinge,  heat  (?),  iii.  65. 
Swolowhe,  slough  (?),  iii.  390. 
Syen,  to  sift,  strain  out,  ii.  383.      Dan. 

sie,  a  sieve. 


Tale-wiis,  talkative^  gos sipping,  ii.  9. 
Taliage,  tax,  i.  57;  W.V. 


Tarien,  to  impede,  delay,  i.  96;  iii.  126. 

Tellen,  to  count,  make  account  of,\.  51. 

T^ms.,  theme,  ii.  16. 

Temporaly,  mild,  ii.  326. 

Tendre,  tinder,  iiL  102. 

Tenten,  to  gi've  heed,  ii.  294. 

Thar;  see  far. 

Thropis;  see  )>rop. 

TifFynge,  adornment,  iii.  193  ;  W.V. 

Tillen,  tollen,  to  draw,  i.  139  ;  ii.  322  ; 

M. 
Tole,  tolle ;  see  Tillen. 
To-tere,  iii.  436. 
Toun,   enclosed  land,  farm,  i.  22  «, ; 

W.V. 
Tour,  towjer,  i.  191. 
Traie,  traye,  to  betray,  gi've  over,  i. 

306 ;  W.V. 
Tregettrye,   conjuring,   iii.   410;    tre- 

getour  in  W.V. 
Trenchours,  trenchers,  dishes,  i.  115. 
Treryn,  qu.  terryn,  to  excite,  stir  up  (?), 

iii.  488. 
Triacle,  remedy,  antidote,  i.  166.    Gr. 

Br\piaKr]. 
Trinel,  tryenale  ;  see  iii.  400  n, 
Trowaunt,  truaunt,  truant,  vagabond, 

i.  283,  293. 
Trowe,  to  trust,  believe,  i.  368. 
Trynauntis,  tyrants  (?),  i.  97. 
Turne,  jurisdiction,  court,  i.  48. 
Twynnen,  to  separate,  iii.  34;  W.V. 

U. 

Ugge,  to  shrink  from,  iii.  117. 
Ugglynesse,  horror,  iii.  34. 
Uggynge,  dismal,  horrid,  iii.  34. 
Umbre,  shade,  i.  355. 
Underlout,  subject,  submissive,  iii.  104: 
W.V.  ^         ^4, 

Unholden  =  unbeholden,  under  no  obli- 
gation, i.  309. 

Unnayt,  vanity,  iii.  29;  M.  A.S.  unnet. 

Unnefe,  unnef>is,  with  difficulty;  W.V. 

XJnnobley,  ignominy,  ii.  271 ;  W.V. 

Unordynel,  Without  order,  chaotic,  i.  2. 

VnpoweY,  inability,  i.  371. 

Un)>ank,  ill-will,  malice,  i.  256; 
Chaucer. 

Up,  upon,  iii.  88. 

Uplondishe,  inland^  i.  197. 

Uttir,  outer,  i.  250. 


GLOSSARY, 


oil 


V. 

Vencusshe,  to  'vanquish. 

Veniable,  re'vengeful,  ii.  189. 

Vigners,  'viries,  iii,  30. 

Viroun,  in  phrase  in  viroun,  all  round, 

ii.  311. 
Viserde,  disguised  as  by  a  *visor,  iii.  421. 
Volatilis, /o«/^r>',  i.  49  «. 

W. 

Wageringe,  iwa'vering,  ii.  154;  W.V. 
Waltrid,  rolled,  ii.  204 ;  W.V. 
Wariede,    waryed,    cursed,    iii.    17  ; 

W.V. 
Wariynge,  weriynge,  cursing,  ii.  326. 
Warly,  <warily,  i.  22,  53. 
Warnesse,  circumspection,!.  200;  W.V. 
Wawen,   to  mjanje,  shake,   i.  70,  72  ; 

W.V. 
Wedde,  ^/^^^^,  iii.  423.     A.S.  qved, 
Wedir,  woeather,  i.  269. 
Weelde,  welde,  to  overcome,  rule  onjer, 

iii.  21,  23  ;  W.V. 
Welle,  to  weld,  i.  321 ;  W.V. 
Wem,  a  blemish,  i.  77  ;  iii.  165 ;  W.V. 
Wene,  to  think,  i.  83,  274. 
Wermode,  <worm<vjood,  i.  89  ;  W.V. 
Werre,  to  <war,  i.  115. 
Wexinge,  gro^wth,  size,  i.  84. 
Whilnesse,  turning,  ii.  297  ;  W.V. 
Wicknesse,  <wickedness,  ii.  330;  W.V. 
Willard,  a  ^wilful  man,  iii.  295. 
Wilne,  to  will,  iii.  128  ;  W.V. 
Wite,  to  know,  i.  168  ;  W.V. 
Wi]?outenfor}>,  externally,  i.  81. 
Wlappe,   to  <ujrap,   i.   333;    ii.  142  ; 

W.V. 
Wlatinge,  loathing,  iii.  37  ;  W.V. 
Wlatsumnesse,  loathsomeness,  ii.  195; 

W.V. 
Wode,  wood,  mad,  furious,   iii.    40; 

W.V. 
Wonyen,  to  dwell,  iii.  29 ;  W.V. 
Woniying,  a  dwelling,  abode,  iii.  21 ; 

W.V. 
Woodnesse,   madness,    rage,    i.   153 ; 

W.V. 
Woot,  wote,  knows,  i.  221  ;  W.V. 


Worschipe,  to  glorify,  ennoble,  i.  286. 
Worbe,  to  become,  i.  326 ;  ii.  277. 
Wort3erd,  a  -vegetable  garden,  i.  331; 

W.V. 
Wra]>j?e,  to  anger,  pro'voke,  i.  371. 
Wrej?e,  wrath,  iii.  253. 
Wroten,  to  root  up,  i.  406. 


Ydel,  empty,  vain,  i.  119  ;  W.V. 
Yliche ;  see  Iliche. 
Ympne,  hymn,  iii.  482. 
Ynow3,  enough,  i.  311. 


?ar,  dar,  need,  ii.  272,  323.   Ger.  darf 
?arve,  to  be  without,  lack,  iii.  38. 
Jerfe,  unleavened,  ii.  287  ;  W.V.   A.S. 

\eorf. 
fewes,  qualities,  habits,  ii.  274 ;  W.V. 
post,  excrement,  iii.  222;  W'.V.    A.S. 

\ost. 
>ou^t,  thought,  i.  335. 
?risten,  to  thirst  for,  iii.  22  ;  W.V. 
>rop,  j'orp,  village,  i.  66. 
3urle,  to  thrill, penetrate,  iii.  27. 

3- 

3ape ;  see  Jape. 
3ate,^«^^,  i.  349- 
3ee,  ^oyN,ye,you. 
^eer,year,  i.  327. 

3eft,^i/]',  iii.  452. 

3elde,  to  yield,  repay,  iii.  43  ;  W.V. 

5ete,    to  pour,  melt  together,   ii.   147; 

W.V. 
^eve,  p.p.  5oven,  to  give. 
^Q,yea. 

^icche,  itch,  iii.  91 ;  W.V. 
^ift;  see  ^eft. 
5it,  yet,  furthermore, 
^ok, yoke,'  W.V. 
5oldes,  guilds,  i.  67. 
500I,  Tule,  ii.  301. 
3ouIe,  to  howl,  i.  200 ;  W.V. 
3ow]?e,  ^ongl^e,  youth. 
3oven,  given,  iii.  511. 


INDEX 


TO  WYCLIF^S  SERMONS  AND  MISCELLANEOUS  WORKS. 


A  Petition  to  the  King  and  Parliament^ 

iii.  507. 
A  Short  Rule  of  Life ^  iii.  204. 
Absolution,  effect  of,  conditional,  i.  1 8, 

35;  ii.  100;  bought  and  sold,  ib,; 

its  various  kinds,  48 ;  priestly,  ii. 

77,  100;   plenary,  148;   papal,  iii. 

355,  444. 

Adder,  deafness  of  the,  i.  201. 

Advent,  the,  of  Christ ;  may  be  taken 
in  four  senses,  i.  65. 

Advocates,  i.  383  n. 

Ages,  the  six,  of  the  world,  i.  99  ;  in 
the  eighth  the  world  ends,  loi. 

Anger,  the  sin  of,  iii.  134. 

Antipope,  the,  ii.  43,  314,  316;  par- 
tisans of,  192. 

Apocalypse,  visions  of  the,  ii.  308. 

Apostles,  their  threefold  office,  i.  170. 

Appeals  to  Rome ;  evils  of  the  system, 
iii.  397. 

Apprentitii  or  barristers,  i.  383  n, 

Aquila,  reference  to,  iii.  96  and  n, 

Aristotle,  ii.  5  ;  iii.  432. 

Articles,  put  upon  Lollards,  iii.  455. 

Athanasian  Creed,  the  ;  translation  and 
commentary,  iii.  7 1  and  n. 

Atonement,  definition  of  the,  ii.  236, 

275. 
Attrition,  iii.  254  ;z. 
Augustinians,  origin  of  the,  iii.  353  7i, 
Avignon,  the  pope  at,  iii.  295, 

B. 

Baptism,  infant,  ii.  328. 
Bartholomew,  St.,  i.  385  72. ;  legend  of, 
iii.  394  «. 


Bede,  the  Venerable ;  his  interpreta- 
tion of  a  miracle,  i.  35  ;  his  letter 
to  Egbert,  iii.  477. 

Begging;  forbidden  in  Scripture,  iii. 
370;  exhausts  the  kingdom,  384; 
blasphemously  defended  by  the 
friars,  410-417. 

Belief,  varieties  of,  ii.  325. 

Benedicite,  the;  translation  and  com- 
mentary, iii.  62. 

Benedict,  St.,  iii.  371 ;  his  rule,  511. 

Benedictus,  the ;  translation  and  com- 
mentary, iii.  56. 

Benets,  or  exorcists,  iii.  285  «. 

Bequests,  pious,  diverted  to  bad  uses, 
ii.  213. 

Bernard,  St..;  rebukes  Eugenius  III, 
iii.  250. 

Bible,  the,  in  English,  i.  209 ;  the  rule 
of  Christians,  iii.  495. 

Bishops,  duties  of,  i.  288;  meaning  of 
the  mitre,  289;  warlike  disposition 
of,  ii.  120 ;  excomunications  by,  159; 
worldliness  of,  281  j  ambition  of,  iii. 

335. 
Body,  properties  of  the  heavenly,  ii. 

234. 
Bradwardine,  Archbishop,  i.  324  n, 
Bretagne,  ii.  243. 
Brocardus,  i.  347  n. 
Bulls,  papal,  iii.  308. 

C. 

Cain's  castles,  iii,  348,  368. 

Canon  law,  ii.  61,419;  on  incontinent 

priests,  iii.  224;  on  church  music, 

480. 
Canonization,  as  practised  at  Rome, 

condemned,  i.  329. 


INDEX. 


539 


Canons,  order  of;  injurious  to  the 
Church,  i.  216;  brought  in  after 
monks,  iii.  345, 

Canons,  made  by  the  pope ;  not  bind- 
ing, iii.  460. 

Capped  friars,  iii.  376. 

Carmelites,  origin  of  the,  iii.  353. 

Celibacy  of  the  clergy,  i.  59 ;  not 
authorized  by  Christ,  364;  dis- 
cussed, iii.  163,  190. 

Ceremonies,  superabundance  of,  in  the 
Church,  ii.  279. 

Chanting ;  see  Music. 

Charity,  obhgation  of,  ii.  227 ;  con- 
ditions of  true,  266 ;  disregarded  by 
the  friars,  th, 

Christ;  his  baptism,  i.  80;  his  rule, 
84 ;  iii.  510 ;  his  temptation,  i.  109  ; 
sinless,  124;  his  divinity,  126;  his 
glorified  body,  142 ;  union  with, 
166;  his  precept  of  love,  155,  172; 
his  Conception,  311;  his  Nativity, 
316-320;  his  preaching,  ii.  16;  his 
'brothers,'  20;  the  bread  of  life,  82, 
165;  his  Passion,  119;  seven  last 
words  of,  128;  his  Resurrection, 
132,  142,  145;  his  Godhead,  157; 
his  redemption,  281 ;  his  Incarna- 
tion, 284;  the  light  of  the  world, 
149  ;  sole  head  of  the  Church,  iii. 
342. 

Church,  the,  must  be  reformed  by 
the  laity,  i.  245 ;  meaning  of  the 
word,  ii.  209  ;  law  of  the,  61,  240  ; 
overgovernment  of,  279  ;  invisible 
on  earth,  iii.  339,  395  ;  early  history 
of,  340 ;  friars'  doctrine  of,  395 ; 
is  not  the  clergy  only,  447, 

Church,  the  visible,  definition  of,  iii. 

395. 

Church  lands,  increase  of,  iii.-  302,  346. 

Church  property,  confiscation  of,  jus- 
tified, iii.  313. 

Church  'temporalities^  iii.  213. 

Clement  VII,  antipope,  i.  11,  97;  ii. 
192 ;  prayer  indulgenced  by  him, 
302. 

Clementines,  the,  i.  205  n. 

Clergy,  the,  are  sellers  of  grace,  i.  10  ; 
ought  to  preach  in  the  language  of 
the  people,  79 ;  their  duties,  269  ; 
their  salaries,  291  «.;  errors  of,  ii. 
29,  30,  49,  60,  89, 144,  154, 185,  229, 


2 3 1)  370;  oppressive  ordinances  of, 
240 ;  uselessness  of  several  orders 
of,  421  ;  possessions  of,  may  be 
lawfully  taxed,  200. 

Cloistered  orders,  unprofitable  to  the 
Christian  people,  i.  273. 

Com-estor,  Petrus,  i.  328  n. 

Commonalty,  duties  of  the,  iii.  147 ; 
prone  to  covetousness,  155  ;  to 
gluttony,  159  ;  to  incontinence,  166. 

Commune  Sanctorum,  offices  of,  i. 
164. 

Concerning  the  Eucharist^  No.  i,  iii.  499 ; 
No.  2,  iii.  501. 

Confession,  as  taught  by  Christ,  i.  196, 
351;  private,  ii.  87;  iii.  255;  of 
women,  ii.  175;  its  evils,  iii,  358; 
unnecessary,  461. 

Conquest,  title  by,  examined,  iii.  139. 

Consecration,  superstitiously  multi- 
plied, iii.  48  T. 

Consubstantiation,  i.  125  «.,  248;  ii. 
421 ;  affirmed  as  the  true  doctrine, 
iii.  409,  502. 

Contemplative  life,  the,  i.  383. 

Contrition,  iii.  254. 

Council  of  London ;  see  London. 

Counsels  of  Christ,  iii.  392  ;  Chris- 
tian, 451. 

Court,  the,  appealed  to  by  the  friars, 
i.  247. 

Courts,  ecclesiastical,  iii.  167,  299  ;  of 
law  and  equity,  iii.  215  «. 

Covetousness,  the  sin  of,  iii.  150. 

Crusade,  the,  to  Flanders,  i.  115,  116, 
136;  those  that  die  in  it  no  true 
martyrs,  257  ;  ii.  166  ;  against  the 
antipope,  iii.  246  «.,  329. 

Crusading,  not  taught  by  Christ  to 
Peter,  i.  367  ;  of  Christians  against 
each  other,  denounced,  iii.  140,  308, 
362,  458. 

Cursing,  proneness  of  the  clergy  to, 
iii.  336,  450;  does  not  bind,  465. 


D. 


De  Apostasia  cleri,  iii.  430. 

Be  Blasphemia,  Sfc,  iii.  402. 

De  Pontificum  Rom.  Schismate^  iii.  242. 

De  Precationihus  Sacris^  iii.  219. 

De  Stipendns  Mimjtrorum,  iii.  202. 


540 


INDEX, 


De  Veritate  Scnpiurae,  reference  to, 
i.  79  n. 

Degeneracy,  of  the  land  and  the 
population,  iii.  400. 

Despair,  reflections  against,  i.  279. 

Devil,  loosing  of  the,  i.  133  k.  ;  iii.  503. 

Dirige  or  dirge,  iii.  374. 

Disendowment,  necessary  and  pro- 
fitable to  the  Church,  i.  26  ;  should 
begin  at  Rome,  246. 

Dispensation,  papal,  ii.  422  ;  iii.  451  ; 
has  its  limits,  511. 

Dominicans,  or  friars  preachers,  i.  76. 

Double  feasts,  iii.  490  ;?. 

Dreams,  use  of,  by  the  friars,  ii.  166  ; 
iii.  247. 

Drunkenness,  evils  of,  iii.  160. 

E. 

Empire,  Holy  Roman,  enfeebled  con- 
dition of,  i.  316  n. 

Encaenia,  the,  at  Jerusalem,  ii.  105. 

Endowment  of  the  Church,  evils  of, 
i.  308,  313;  promoted  by  ladies, 
389;  protest  against,  ii.  411;  bad 
results  of,  iii.  171,  433,  474;  con- 
demned in  Scripture j  =*  234  seq.  \ 
ought  to  cease,  358. 

English  language,  plea  for  the  use  of, 
iii.  98,  100,  184. 

English  version  of  the  Bible,  i,  129; 
iii.  393  ;  vilified  by  friars,  405. 

Envy,  the  sin  of;   its  forms,  iii.  128- 

134. 

Epiphany,  sermon  on  the,  i.  342. 

Eucharist,  Wyclif's  doctrine  con- 
cerning the,  i.  125 ;  the  friars'  doc- 
trine novel,  133,  213;  unnecessary 
to  receive  it  fasting,  360  ;  St.  Am- 
brose upon,  379  n.\  definition  of,  ii. 
6,  82 ;  controversies  concerning, 
91,  112,  169,  274  ;  false  view  of 
friars,  396;  discussed,  iii.  106,  352, 
378 ;  blasphemy  of  friars  respecting, 
403-409  ;  heresy  on,  443  ;  belief  of 
Wycliffites  concerning,  483,  500, 
502. 

Eugenius  III,  Pope,  iii.  250.^ 

Europe,  distracted  state  of,  ii,  401. 

Exchange,  commercial,  benefits  of, 
iii.  159- 


Excommunication  by  bishops,  ii.  159  ; 

should  not   be   dreaded,  iii.   218  ; 

form  of  the  greater,  267. 
Exemplar  forms,  i.  127. 


Fable  of  the  envious  man  and  the 
covetous  man,  iii.  129  and  n. 

Faith,  failure  in,  of  two  kinds,  i.  93. 

Famine  in  England,  i.  244  n. 

Famulorum;  a  prayer  so  called,  iii. 
441. 

Fear,  three  kinds  of,  i.  371. 

Fees,  extorted  by  the  clergy,  iii.  285. 

Feet,  washings  of,  ii.  118. 

Festivals,  of  doubtful  utility,  i.  330; 
how  far  to  be  observed,  iii.  489. 

Fifty  Heresies,  ^c,  iii.  366. 

Fighting,  justified  in  the  clergy  by 
St.  Peter's  example,  i.  123;  this 
view  refuted,  ib. 

Five  questions  on  Lo^ue,  iii.  183. 

Flanders,  expedition  to,  ii.  166;  iii, 
349,  386. 

Forgiveness,  duty  of,  ii.  199,  251,  255. 

Founders  of  orders,  estimate  of,  iii. 
419. 

Francis,  St.,  iii.  375. 

Franciscans,  the,  i.  76 ;  iii.  448  n.\ 
their  property  vested  in  the  pope, 
303 ;  superstition  about  the  habit, 
382. 

Freedom,  Christian,  destroyed,  i.  363. 

Friars,  dangerous  to  the  kingdom,  i. 
1 9-2 1 ;  their  proneness  to  hypo- 
crisy, 57,  58,  76  ;  desert  the  way  of 
Christ,  73 ;  herd  together  in  crowds, 
147 ;  prevent  good  priests  from 
preaching,  176  ;  ought  to  work, 
178;  greedy  of  wealth,  202,  283; 
appeal  to  the  king  against  the  au- 
thor's teaching,  247  «. ;  brought  in 
by  the  devil,  274;  prevent  men 
from  leaving  them,  296 ;  enclosure 
of,  ii.  15,  299;  persecutions  by,  25, 
205;  arrogance  of,  62;  preaching 
of,  166,  173,  191;  boasted  poverty 
of,  180;  errors  of,  212,  226,  301, 
327,  334,  37 ?j  394)  404;  prayers  of, 
215  ;  uncharitable,  254  ;  vain  boast- 
ing of,  264  ;  a  useless  expense  to  the 
country,  269  ;  pride  and  covetous- 


INDEX. 


54^ 


ness  of,  288;  worldliness  of,  290; 
a  scourge  to  the  Church,  298 ;  in- 
hospitable, 303;  pretensions  of  the 
new  orders  examined,  304  ;  sin 
against  the  law  of  love,  314,  318; 
begging  practices  of,  320  ;  final 
punishment  of,  410;  unlike  John 
the  Baptist,  iii.  59,  60 ;  their 
view  of  tithes,  175  ;  their  preach- 
ing disfigures  the  gospel,  180; 
modes  of  getting  money,  199 ; 
persecute  poor  priests,  231  ;  a 
pest  to  the  country,  266;  corrupt 
in  th^  confessional,  299 ;  general 
charge  against,  348 ;  divided  be- 
tween the  two  popes,  351 ;  heretical 
on  the  Eucharist,  352  ;  ought  to  be 
suppressed,  361,  437  ;  fifty  of  their 
heresies  and  errors  enumerated, 
366-401  ;  treasonable  language  of, 
388;  their  lordly  dwellings,  397; 
they  impoverish  the  land,  416 ; 
dangerous  to  England,  445;  bur- 
densome to  the  Church,  512. 


Historia  Sckolastica^  i.  328  n. 

Holy  Ghost,  double  procession  of,  i. 

135?   14^  j    3.  doubtful  tenet,  152; 

descent  of,  ii.  303. 


I. 


Images,  worship  of,  iii.  462. 

Indulgences ;  may  be  futile,  i.  60 ; 
given  to  crusaders,  136,  137  ;  papal, 
189;  plenary,  210;  foolishly  granted, 
236  ;  one  of  two  thousand  years, 
137,  354  «.  ;  papal,  iii.  113,  243; 
futility  of,  256,  362  ;  theory  of, 
examined,  259-263. 

Infallibility  of  the  pope,  a  heresy,  iii. 

345j  407. 

Innocent  III ;  established  private  con- 
fession, iii.  255. 

Inquisitorial  proceedings,  how  to  be 
met,  iii.  426. 

Interpretation  of  prophecy,  ii.  375- 

Ire,  three  kinds  of  it  condemned  by 
Christ,  i.  1 6. 

Isidore,  reference  to,  i.  265  «. 


Games,  English,  i.  410  «. 

Genealogies  of  Christ,  i.  391* 

Gentlemen ;  their  duties,  iii.  145  ;  sin 
through  covetousness,  152  ;  through 
gluttony,  158  ;  through  lust,  164. 

Gluttony,  the  sin  of,  iii.  155- 

Gregory  the  Great,  i.  254. 

Grossetete,  Robert,  i.  171 ;  quotation 
from,  iii.  60,  1 1 1 ;  why  not  canon- 
ized, 467 ;  sermon  of,  470. 

Guilds,  i.  67  n,\  their  evil  practices, 
iii.  333- 

H. 

Habakkuk,  prayer  of ;  translation  and 

commentary,  iii.  25. 
Habit,  friars'  superstitious  regard  for 

their,  iii.  389. 
Hallowing  of  churches,  i.  282. 
Heathen,  the,  bishops  for,  iii.  512. 
Heaven,  the  joys  of,  ii.  234. 
Heresy,  almost  universal  in  the  Church, 

iii.  438. 
Heretics,  burning  of,  ii.  126. 
Hildegardis,  St. ;    her  prophecies,  iii. 

413. 


J. 

Jesselyn,  a  canonist,  iii.  248. 

Jesus,  the  name  of,  i.  336. 

John  the  Baptist,  an  example  to  the 

new  orders,   ii.    3 ;    his   work,   4 ; 

likened  to  Elias,  176. 
Judas,  why  chosen  an  apostle,  i.  403  ; 

worst  merchant,  iii.  471. 
Judgment,  Day  of,  ii.  35,  48,  222,  230, 

405  ;  near  at  hand,  iii.  172. 

K. 

Kings,  their  duties  to  the  Church,  i. 
265  ;  have  power  over  the  clergy, 
ii.  88;  the  three  at  Bethlehem,  ii. 
243. 

Knights,  an  appeal  to,  iii.  231. 


Labourers,  duties  of,  iii.  207. 

Laity,  the,  should  put  down  the  friars, 

i.  212. 
Lancaster,  the  duke  of,  iii.  508. 


54^ 


INDEX, 


Languages,  number  of,  i.  175. 

Law,  consistory  and  chapter,  i.  15  ; 
evils  of  the  canon  and  civil,  96  ; 
defects  in,  both  secular  and  eccle- 
siastical, ii.  230,  231,  419;  evils  of 
appealing  to,  250;  freedom  under 
the  New,  277 ;  Christ's  fulfilment 
of  the,  171. 

Laws,  new,  enforced  by  the  friars,  ii. 
80. 

Lawyers,  covetousness  of,  iii.  153 ; 
dishonesty  of,  332. 

Learning,  secular,  needless  if  we  know 
God's  law,  i.  310;  iii.  377. 

Legenda  Aurea^  i.  326  n.\  iii.  344. 

Letter  to  Pope  Urban,  iii.  504. 

Letters  of  fraternity,  i.  67,  380;  blas- 
phemously granted  by  friars,  iii. 
420  ;  should  be  abolished,  428. 

Light,  its  properties,  i.  268. 

Limitours,  iii.  376. 

Lincolniensij,  iii.  230. 

London,  council  of,  iii.  175,  233,  313, 
503. 

Lord's  Prayer,  the,  commentary  on, 
iii.  93  ;  another  commentary,  98  ; 
model  of  all  prayer,  221;  heresies 
against,  441. 

Lords,  duties  of,  ii.  15,  399;  iii.  206  ; 
should  control  the  clergy,  213,  240  ; 
and  strip  them  of  their  wealth,  478. 

Lordships,  proper  and  improper,  i.  36  ; 
disclaimed  by  Christ  for  his  fol- 
lowers, 386. 

Love,  of  God  to  man,  ii.  313,  325. 

Love-days,  iii.  322  «. 

Luke,  St.,  i.  391  «. 

Lust,  the  sin  of,  iii.  161. 

Luxury,  evils  of,  ii.  245. 

Lyra,  Nicholas  de,  his  Commentary, 
i.  76  n.f  86  «.,  255,  335,  398  ;  iii.  108. 

M. 

Magna  Carta,  iii.  306,  326. 

Magnificat,  the,  translation  and  com- 
mentary, iii.  48. 

Majorities,  decisions  by,  ii.  414. 

Marcial,  St.,  i.  399  n. 

Margaret,  St.,  i.  187  «. 

Marriage,  sacredness  of,  ii.  216;  its 
kinds,  iii.  188  ;  that  of  priests  law- 
ful, 190;  fees  extorted  for,  284  n. 


Martyrdom,  the  spirit  of,  wanting,  i. 
233;  iii.  185. 

Mary,  the  Virgin,  ii.  9  ;  her  five  joys, 
i.  353  ;  is  pleased  by  meekness,  356  ; 
her  high  privileges,  380;  exempt 
from  sin,  257 ;  her  Assumption, 
345 ;  her  aid  invoked,  246 ;  her 
prerogatives,  iii.  1 1  i-i  1 3 . 

Mary  Magdalene,  St.,  ii.  205. 

Masses,  private,  iii.  473. 

Matthias,  St.,  his  election,  i.  351,  395. 

Mendicancy,  forbidden  in  the  gospel, 
i.  200. 

Merchants,  iii.  334. 

Miracles,  sermons  on  the : — the  loaves 
and  fishes,  i.  17,  62,  120;  healing 
of  the  deaf  and  dumb  man,  29  ;  of 
the  lepers,  34 ;  raising  of  the  widow's 
son,  38  ;  healing  of  him  that  had 
the  dropsy,  41 ;  of  the  paralytic,  46 ; 
ii.  167  ;  of  the  nobleman's  son,  i.  51 ; 
raising  of  Jairus'  daughter,  59  ;  con- 
version of  water  into  wine,  ^6 ; 
healing  of  the  leper,  89 ;  of  the 
centurion's  sei^ant,  90;  of  the 
blind  man,  107  ;  of  the  daughter  of 
the  Canaanitish  woman,  113;  cast- 
ing out  of  the  dumb  devil,  116; 
cure  of  the  deaf  and  dumb  man, 
251 ;  of  the  blind  man,  ii.  14,  92 ; 
of  the  withered  hand,  21  ;  raising 
of  Lazarus,  97 ;  cure  of  Peter's 
mother-in-law,  65;  stilling  the 
tempest,  178 ;  cure  of  the  demo- 
niac, 203. 

Monasticism  condemned,  iii.  431. 

Monks,  injure  the  Church,  i.  216; 
hypocrisy  of,  299 ;  idle  and  un- 
charitable, ii.  257 ;  prone  to  glut- 
tony, iii.  156  ;  brought  in  late,  345  ; 
ought  to  be  suppressed,  359,  437 ; 
adopt  the  rules  of  friars,  511. 

Moon,  changes  of  the,  ii.  177. 

Mortal  sin,  disqualifying  effects  of, 
iii.  485. 

Mortuaries,  lii.  28s  n. 

Moses,  song  of,  translation  and  com- 
mentary, iii.  32. 

Music,  Church,  modern  system  con- 
demned, iii.  203,  228,  479. 

Mystical  interpretations  of  Scripture, 
i.  13,  18,  34,  39,  46,  69,  90,  100, 
107,  114,  121,  254,  374;  ii.  139^. 


INDEX. 


545 


Sins,  the  seven  deadly,  iii.  119. 
Slander,  the  guilt  of,  ii.  183. 
Sloth,  the  sin  of,  iii.  142. 
Soul,  the,  when  joined  to  the  body, 

i.  369  n* 
Spheres,  the,  iii.  64. 
State,  the,  should  be  supreme,  ii.  295 ; 

even  over  popes,  296. 
Summoning,  ecclesiastical,  iii.  166  «, 

320. 
Super  Cantica  Sacra,  iii,  1-8 1. 
Supererogatory   merits,  doctrine  of, 

assailed,  iii.  loi. 
Swearing,  to  what  extent  lawful,  iii. 

483. 
Swords,  meaning  of  the  two,  iii.  263, 
Sylvester,  Pope,  iii.  340. 

T. 

T^  Deum,  translation   and  commen- 
tary, iii.  52  ;  origin  of  the,  ib,  n. 

Temptation  of  Christ,  i.  109. 

T:he  A've  Maria,  iii.  iii. 

7^e  Church  and  her  Members,  iii.  338. 

The  Great  Sentence  of  Curse,  iii.  267. 

The  Pater  Noster  (1)  iii.  93. 
„  „      (2)  iii.  98. 

The  Se'ven  corporal  ^voorks  of  Mercy,  iii. 
168. 

The  Se'ven  spiritual  <works  of  Mercy,  iii. 

177. 
The  Ten  Commandments,  iii.  82. 
Thomas,  St.,  the  apostle,  i.  153  n. 
Thomas  a  Becket,  St.,  i.  330. 
Thunder,  nature  of,  i.  186. 
Tithes,  sufficient  for  the   clergy,  i. 

147,  199,  282 ;  may  be  withheld  in 


certain  cases,  iii.  176,  468;  evils 
caused  by  appropriating  them  to 
convents,  215  ;  cursing  for,  309- 
313;  not  due  under  the  gospel,  312. 

Trentals,  iii.  299,  374. 

Trinity,  doctrine  of  the,  i.  158-162, 
359  5  representations  of  the,  iii.  491* 

U. 

Urban  VI,  pope,  ii.   192,   319;   iii. 

506  ;  the  son  of  Antichrist,  455,; 

letter  to,  504. 
Use  of  Sarum,  or  Salisbury,  iii,  482. 
Usury,  the  sin  of,  ii.  252  ;  iii.  154. 


Vae  Octuplex,  ii.  379. 
Vengeance,  when  lawful,  iii.  136. 
Virtues,  inculcated  in  the  gospel,  i. 

261. 
Vita  Sacerdotum,  iii.  233. 
Voluntary  principle,  the,  advocated, 

iii.  360. 
Vows,  dispensation  from,  i.  81. 

W. 

War,  opposed  to  Christianity,  i.  148  ; 

its  lawfulness  discussed,  iii.  137. 
Water,  properties  of,  iii.  67. 
Wills,  making  of,  ii.  212. 
Works,  salvation  by,  i.  350. 
World,  the,  different  meanings  of  the 

term,  ii.  160. 
Wyclif,  John,  disabled  from  travelling 

to  the  pope,  iii,  506. 


VOL.    Ill, 


544 


INDEX. 


387,415;  Antichrist,  394;  pride  and 
worldliness  of,  395  ;  the  successor 
of  Peter,  412  ;  mode  of  electing, 
ib. ;  immense  patronage  of,  416 ; 
his  oppressive  government,  420 ; 
his  dispensations,  422 ;  Christ's 
enemy,  iii.  278;  the  great  plun- 
derer, 318,  319;  encourages  war, 
330;  identified  with  Antichrist, 
341 ;  how  far  to  be  followed,  505. 

Pope  Joan,  i.  241. 

Porphyry,  iii.  407. 

Poverty,  suitable  for  ecclesiastics,  i. 
313;  iii.  495;  chosen  by  Christ, 
i.  318;  advantages  of,  ii.  211; 
beauty  of,  iii.  275. 

Prayer,  efficacy  of,  ii.  153,  186  ;  iii. 
219;    general  better  than  special, 

425. 

Prayers  for  the  dead,  ii.  213,  215; 
iii.  395. 

Preachers,  rules  for,  i.  282. 

Preaching,  the  chief  duty  of  priests, 
iii.  144,  464. 

Prelates,  compared  to  the  Scribes,  i. 
7;  worldliness  of,  220;  doom  of 
false,  ii.  409  ;  worship  false  gods, 
iii.  37 ;  might  well  be  dispensed 
with,  433. 

Pride,  the  sin  of,  its  forms  and  reme- 
dies, iii.  1 2 1- 1 28. 

Priesthood,  lawful  and  unlawful  pri- 
vileges of  the,  ii.  247. 

Priests,  dignity  of  their  calling,  iii. 
143  ;  duties  of,  205 ;  misdeeds  of 
worldly,  304. 

Property,  the  right  to,  invalidated  by 
sin,  i.  260  «. ;  community  of,  iii.  473. 

Proprium  Sanctorum,  offices  of,  i.  295. 

Purgatory,  the  sleep  of,  i.  loi  ;  iii.  53, 
1 1 6?  339  j  3-  state  of  punishment, 
i.  321;  the  souls  in,ii.  100;  iii.  286. 

Quienals,  iii.  398  «. 

R. 

Regale  of  the  English  crown,  iii.  391. 
Religion,  private,  of  the  friars,  i.  6. 
Religious     orders,     their     members 

should  be  allowed  to  leave  them,  i. 

296. 


Restitution,  duty  of,  iii,  174. 
Richard  II,    King,  i.   354;   iii.  508; 

appealed  to,  503. 
Richard,  Archbishop  of  Armagh,  iii. 

281,  412,  416. 
Riches,  engender  cowardice,  i.  372. 


Sabbath,  observance  of  the,  ii.  57, 180. 

Sacerdotal  pretensions,  iii.  297. 

Sacraments,  of  priestly  invention,  i. 
119. 

Sacrilege,  the  curse  against,  iii.  325. 

Saints,  many  of  them  now  in  hell,  iii. 
466  «.;  compared,  419  ;  worship  of, 
463. 

Salaries  of  priests,  i.  291  n.\  iii.  286. 

Salt,  its  properties,  i.  267. 

Sanctuary,  abuses  of  the  right  of,  iii. 
294,  316  «.,  323. 

Schism,  in  the  papacy,  i.  228;  occa- 
sions war,  243  ;  wrongly,  246  ;  con- 
sidered, ii.  192,  403 ;  iii.  242. 

Scholastic  doubts,  i.  181,  195,  323, 
333,  376. 

Scholastic  speculations,!.  93  ;  iii.  146. 

Science  without  religion,  the  doom 
of,  ii.  408. 

Scripture,  four  modes  of  understand- 
ing, i.  30 ;  its  inner  sense,  52  ; 
scornful  language  occurring  in,  1 1 3  ; 
its  paramount  authority,  186  ;  trans- 
lated into  English,  209  ;  always  self- 
consistent,  302. 

Seas,  properties  of,  iii,  67. 

Sects,  of  monks,  canons,  and  friars, 
founded  in  error,  i.  2  8 ;  their  in- 
ordinate partizanship,  45. 

Seed,  of  God,  i.  104. 

Sergius,  the  monk,  iii.  245. 

Sermon  on  the  Mount,  importance 
of,  i.  406. 

Senjen  Heresies  against  the  Pater  Noster^ 
iii.  441. 

Sextus,  the  (of  canon  law),  i.  205  n. 

Simonists  and  Apostates y  iii.  211. 

Simony,  universality  of,  iii.  226,  488 
forms  of,  278-287. 

Sin,  mortal  and  venial,  i.  61 ;  iii.  452 
the  unpardonable,  ii.   32  ;   reproof 
of,  a  duty,  76  ;  forgiveness  of,  77 
against  the  Holy  Ghost,  iii.  120. 


INDEX. 


543 


N. 

Non-residence,  inexcusable,  iii.  493. 
Numbers,  properties  of,  i.  290  «.,  320  «. 
Nunc    Dimittisj  the,   translation   and 
commentary,  iii.  61. 

O. 

Oaths,  profane,  iii.  332,  483. 
Obedience,  monastic,  exaggerated,  i. 

82,  85. 
Octo  in  quibus  seducuntur^  &c.,  iii.  447. 
Odo,  Cardinal,  iii.  327. 
Of  Mynystris  in  the  Chirche,  ii.  393. 
OfWeddid  Men  and  Wijis,  iii.  188. 
On  the  Apostles^  Creed,  iii.  114. 
On  the  Fi've  Inner  Wits,  iii.  117. 
On  the  Fi've  Outer  Wits,  iii.  117. 
On  the  Se'ven  Deadly  Sins,  iii.  119. 
On  the  Sufficiency  of  Holy  Scripture,  iii. 

186. 
On  the  1njoentyfi<ve  Articles,  iii.  454. 
Order,  that  founded  by  Christ,  1.  82, 

84. 
Orders,  considered   as   a  sacrament, 

i.  265. 
Ordination,  fees  extorted  at,  iii.  283  «. 
Oxford,  the  school  of,  i.  93. 

P. 

Papacy,  wealth  of  the,  ii.  395. 

Parables,  sermons  on  the : — Dives  and 
Lazarus,  i.  i ;  the  bidden  guests, 
3 ;  the  lost  sheep,  8 ;  the  unjust 
steward,  2  2  ;  the  Pharisee  and  Pub- 
lican, 27  ;  the  good  Samaritan,  31 ; 
the  marriage  of  the  king's  son,  48 ; 
the  indebted  servant,  54 ;  the  tares, 
95 ;  ii.  196 ;  the  labourers  in  the 
vineyard,  i.  98;  the  sower,  102  ;  ii. 
34;  the  good  shepherd,  i.  138;  ii. 
62;  the  true  vine,  i.  165;  the  un- 
finished tower,  190  ;  the  two  kings, 
192 ;  the  talents,  252 ;  the  ten 
pounds,  257  ;  the  hidden  treasure, 
285  ;  the  pearl  of  great  price,  286  ; 
the  net,  287 ;  the  ten  virgins,  289  ; 
the  two  sons,  ii.  27 ;  the  wicked 
husbandmen,  d^d ;  the  prodigal  son, 
69;  the  importunate  widow,  186; 
the  rich  man  and  his  barns,  191 ; 


the  grain  of  mustard  seed,  194 ;  the 
king's  supper,  196  ;  the  barren  fig- 
tree,  207. 

Paradise  Lost,  i.  68  «. 

Parochial  system,  injured  by  the  friars, 
iii.  380. 

Passion  of  Christ,  the  painfulness  of, 
i.  130. 

Pastors,  their  functions,  i.  140. 

Patronage,  abuses  of,  iii.  277,  356,  357. 

Patteshull,  Peter,  iii.  366  ;?. 

Paul,  St.,  epistles  of,  ii.  221  seq. ; 
difficulties  in  interpreting  his  writ- 
ings, 224;  his  visions  and  revela- 
tions, 263. 

Pelagius,  error  of,  i.  91. 

Penance,  necessity  of,  i.  306. 

Perjury,  of  bishops  and  others,  iii. 
300. 

Persecution,  of  Wyclif  s  followers,  i. 
100,  III,  153,  338,  398;  by  pre- 
lates and  friars,  129  ;  strangling  and 
killing,  201  « ;  burning,  205 ;  must 
not  be  resisted  by  force,  212. 

Peter,  St.,  Christ's  promises  to,  i.  349  ; 
charge  to,  367  ;  original  office  of, 
ii.  412;  denies  Christ,  121;  pro- 
mises to,  iii.  250;  his  powers,  354. 

Peter's  Pence,  collected  by  the  friars, 
ii.  61. 

Pilgrimages,  evils  attending,  i.  83. 

Planets,  their  motions,  &c.,  iii.  63. 

Plato,  ii.  5. 

Play-going  condemned,  i.  250. 

Points  of  belief  ascribed  to  Lollards, 
iii.  457. 

Poor  priests,  i.  63  ;  have  lawful  mis- 
sion, 177  ;  may  preach  freely,  185  ; 
ii.  173;  persecuted,  182;  iii.  272, 
375?  393;  imprisoned,  231,  321; 
slandered,  293  ;  by  friars,  391. 

Pope,  the,  his  assumption  of  power, 
i.  40  ;  compared  to  Antichrist,  138  ; 
harmful  to  the  Church,  152;  en- 
croachments of,  225,  241  ;  his 
authority  when  to  be  despised,  232 ; 
his  appointments  to  benefices,  363  ; 
his  boat,  375 ;  arrogance  of,  ii. 
229;  his  usurped  authority,  281, 
400 ;  blasphemous  claims  of,  284 ; 
his  gifts  and  indulgences,  297,  417  ; 
confirmations  by,  323  ;  his  infalli- 
bility   and    impeccability    denied, 


THE   UNIVERSITY  OF  MICHIGAN 


i 


UNIVERSITY  OF  MICHIGAN 


3  9015  0122 


0053 


DO  NOT  REMOVE 

OR 
MUTILATE  aRD 


