Title: Select English Works of John Wyclif, Vol. I (Sermons on the
  Gospels for Sundays and Festivals)
Creator: John Wyclif (c. 1330-1384) (Thomas Arnold, Editor)
Publisher: Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1869
Rights: Public Domain
Rights basis: Published 1869; public domain by date. Archive.org item
  metadata carries an explicit `NOT_IN_COPYRIGHT` possible-copyright-status,
  checked directly against the item's own metadata, 2026-09-25, this
  session.
Source: Internet Archive item selectenglishwor01wycl
  (archive.org/details/selectenglishwor01wycl), fetched directly (curl,
  raw bytes, direct datanode) from the item's own _djvu.txt full-text
  file, 2026-09-25, this session.
Provenance note: Body text unaltered including its own OCR errors
  (Middle English orthography renders inconsistently through OCR); not
  independently spot-checked for OCR quality beyond the opening pages
  and a mid-document sample this session.

LIBRARY  OF 

WELLES  LEY  COLLEGE 


FROM  THE  FUND  OF 
EBEN  NORTON  HOR5FORD 


SELECT    ENGLISH    WORKS 


OF 


JOHN    WYCLIF 


EDITED    FROM    ORIGINAL    MSS. 

BY 

THOMAS     ARNOLD,    M.  A. 

OF    UNIVERSITY   COLLEGE,    OXFORD 


Vol.    I 
SERMONS     ON     THE     GOSPELS 

FOR 
SUNDAYS     AND     FESTIVALS 


AT     THE     CLARENDON     PRESS 
M  DCCC  LXIX 

\^All  rights  reserved'] 


^~'\Z\ 


75- 

J 


I  NTRODUCTION 


The  present  edition  of  selected  works  of  John  Wyclif,  English 
and  Latin,  was  undertaken  by  the  Delegates  of  the  University  Press 
at  the  earnest  instance  of  the  late  Canon  Shirley,  who  devoted  the 
best  part  of  ten  years  of  a  life,  alas !  too  short,  to  the  study  of  the 
works  and  the  age  of  the  English  reformer. 

At  a  meeting  of  the  Delegates  of  the  Press,  held  on  the  23rd 
of  March,  1866,  a  resolution  was  passed,  and  recorded  in  a  minute, 
of  which  the  material  portion  is  as  follows : — 

'  Dr.  Shirley's  proposal  to  prepare  for  publication  selected  English 
works  of  Wyclif  in  three  volumes  8vo  ....  was  accepted; 
and  he  was  authorized  to  negotiate  with  Mr.  T.  Arnold  .... 
for  the  editing  of  the  same  under  his  own  superintendence.' 

Dr.  Shirley  intended,  as  general  Editor,  to  have  prefixed  to  the 
works  an  elaborate  Introduction,  in  which  he  would  have  endeavoured 
to  fix  the  exact  theological  position  of  the  writer  in  reference  both  to 
his  own  and  to  later  times,  besides  probably  settling,  so  far  as  the 
means  at  our  disposal  allow,  the  chronology  and  authenticity  of  the 
immense  mass  of  writings  ascribed  to  Wyclif, — a  subject  which  Bale 
left  in  utter  confusion,  and  which  Lewis  has  done  very  little  to 
elucidate.  Such  minor  matters  as  the  critical  collation  of  MSS., 
the  preparation  of  a  text  for  the  press  based  on  such  collation, 
the  verification  of  references,  and  the  illustration  of  the  text  by 
occasional  notes,  he  desired  to  commit  to  the  hands  of  an  as- 
sistant or  assistants ;  and  it  was  thus  that  he  asked  me  to  take  a  share 

WYCLIF.  b 


ii  INTRODUCTION. 

in  the  work.  I  gladly  consented, — having  indeed  already  formed 
the  opinion  independently,  after  reading  the  Fasciculi  Zizaniorum 
and  Dr.  Shirley's  admirable  Introduction  to  that  strange  miscellany, — 
that  the  principal  works  of  the  reformer,  particularly  his  English 
works,  ought  long  ere  this  to  have  been  given  to  the  public.  Before, 
however,  any  material  step  had  been  taken  towards  the  execution 
of  his  plans,  this  good  man  and  ripe  scholar  was  cut  off  by  death. 
A  greater  share  of  the  responsibility  of  the  edition  has,  in  conse- 
quence, been  thrown  upon  me  than  was  originally  intended,  or  than, 
to  say  the  truth,  I  feel  myself  quite  competent  to  meet.  I  have  how- 
ever spared  no  pains  to  give  to  the  reader  a  faithful  and  readable 
copy  of  those  of  the  original  works,  which  it  has  been  resolved  to 
print,  and  for  this  purpose  I  have  collated,  in  whole  or  in  part, 
a  number  of  other  JNISS.,  preserved  in  various  libraries,  with  the 
excellent  Bodleian  Codex,  upon  which  the  text  of  the  following 
Sermons  is  based.  I  have  also  entered  in  the  following  pages,  and 
shall  enter  more  at  length  in  the  Introduction  to  the  third  volume, 
on  the  critical  questions  relating  to  the  authenticity  of  the  various 
works  ascribed  to  Wyclif,  so  far  as  the  discussion  is  necessary  in 
order  to  justify  the  selection  of  his  writings  which  has  been  made. 

I  desire  to  take  this  early  opportunity  of  acknowledging  the  great 
and  invaluable  assistance  that  I  have  received  in  the  task  of  editing 
from  Professor  Stubbs,  whose  learning  and  judgment,  always  most 
kindly  and  freely  imparted,  have  signally  lightened  my  labours,  often 
directed  me  into  the  true  path  of  investigation,  and  kept  me  from 
falling  into  many  errors. 

Wyclif  wrote  both  in  Latin  and  English ;  but  his  Latin  works  are 
far  the  most  numerous  and  the  most  voluminous  of  the  two.  Ninety- 
six  Latin  works  are  enumerated  in  Dr.  Shirley's  Catalogue  a,  and  only 
sixty-five  English.  It  is  proposed  in  the  following  remarks  to  give 
some  account  of  the  English  writings,  to  show  what  has  been  already 
done  towards  making  them  known,  and  to  explain  the  grounds  on 
which  the  selection  resolved  upon  in  the  present  work  has  been 
made. 

a  Catalog7ie  of  the  Original  Works  of  John  Wyclif.     Oxford,  1 865. 


INTRODUCTION,  iii 

English  writings. — Of  the  sixty-five  English  works  included  in 
the  Catalogue,  there  are  a  few  which  I  have  not  yet  had  an  opportunity 
lo  examine.  The  most  important  of  these  are  Nos.  6i  and  62,  De 
Officio  Pastorali  and  De  Papa,  the  only  MS.  of  which  is  in  the  library 
of  Lord  Ashburnham.  Another  is  the  tract  De  Schtsmate,  No.  59,  the 
only  MS.  of  which  is  in  the  library  of  Trinity  College,  Dublin. 
Others  are  Nos.  58  and  60,  short  tracts  contained  in  the  same 
manuscript.  There  are  five  or  six  others,  one  of  which,  for  reasons 
presently  to  be  given,  I  do  not  believe  to  be  authentic,  while  of 
the  rest  I  will  defer  the  examination  to  the  Preface  of  the  third 
volume. 

I  have  only  met  with  one  English  writing  of  Wyclifs,  large  or 
small,  which  was  not  included  by  Dr.  Shirley  in  his  Catalogue.  This 
is  the  Lhtcolniensis,  a  short  tract,  the  only  copy  of  which,  so  far 
as  appears,  exists  in  a  Bodleian  manuscript  (MS.  Bodl.  647).  I  have 
no  doubt  that  this,  like  most  of  the  remaining  contents  of  that  MS. , 
was  written  by  Wyclif. 

Spueious  and  doubtful  writings. — For  some  time  after  I  had 
begun  to  read  the  works  which  the  Catalogue  ascribes  to  Wyclif,  I  was 
strongly  disposed  to  question  the  authenticity  of  a  considerable  num- 
ber of  them,  for  various  reasons.  With  regard  to  some  of  these, 
farther  inquiry  has  not  removed  my  doubts,  while  in  the  case  of 
others,  that  internal  evidence  on  which  I  relied  to  establish  for  them 
the  high  probability,  if  not  certainty,  of  a  date  subsequent  to  the  death 
of  Wyclif,  has  been  proved  by  fuller  investigation  to  be  far  less 
cogent  than  I  had  at  first  supposed.  I  will  take  these  two  classes  of 
probably  spurious  and  doubtful  writings  separately. 

I.  No.  I  in  the  Catalogue  is  marked  'Early  English  Sermons;'  it  is 
a  collection  of  fifty-four  sermons  on  the  Sunday  gospels,  together 
with  five  others  on  great  festivals.  No  one,  except  Dr.  Vaughan, 
has  ever  ascribed  these  sermons  to  Wyclif;  they  exist  only  in  two 
MSS.,  and  the  partial  examination  which  I  was  able  to  make  of  them 
at  Cambridge  last  year,  convinced  me  that  they  were  the  production 
of  a  traveller  in  the  well-worn  track  of  homiletics,  who  possessed  no 
spark  of  the  erratic  and  daring  spirit  of  our  author. 

b  2 


iv  INTRODUCTION. 

Nos.  6-9  are  Commentaries  on  the  Gospels  of  Matthew,  Luke,  and 
John,  and  on  the  Apocalypse.  Even  if  they  were  certainly  authentic, 
those  on  the  Gospels,  at  any  rate,  could  not  be  considered  as  worth 
printing,  because  the  substance  of  them  is  wholly  taken  from  the 
writings  of  the  Fathers,  chiefly  from  SS.  Chrysostom,  Jerome,  and 
Ambrose,  from  Theophylact,  the  Venerable  Bede,  and  Aquinas.  The 
Commentary  on  the  Apocalypse  is  indeed  original,  but  contains,  so 
far  as  I  have  examined  it,  nothing  very  remarkable.  But  there  is 
good  ground  for  believing  that  no  part  of  these  Commentaries, 
not  even  the  prologues  and  epilogues,  is  by  Wyclif.  This  I  will 
first  endeavour  to  prove  as  regards  the  Commentaries  on  the 
Gospels. 

In  the  prologue  to  the  Comimentary  on  Matthew  occurs  the 
following  passage  ^  : — 

*  For  J)is  cause  a  synfiil  caytif  havyng  compassion  on  lewed  men 
declarij?  Jie  gospel  of  Matthew  to  lewed  men  in  Englische,  wi|> 
exposicion  of  syntis  and  holy  writ,  and  alleggij)  onely  holy  writ 
and  olde  doctours  in  his  exposicion,'  &c. 

In  the  prologue  to  the  Commentary  on  Luke  (MS.  Bodl.  143) 
we  read, — 

*  Herfore  a  caityf  lettid  fro  prechyng  for  a  tyme  for  causis  knowun 
of  God  writi]>  ]?e  gospel  of  Luk  in  Englysh  wi}?  a  short  exposicioun  of 
olde  and  holy  doctours,  to  ]?e  pore  men  of  his  nacioun.'  Farther  on 
the  writer  again  calls  himself  '  )?is  pore  caitif;'  and  towards  the  end 
he  breaks  forth  into  fierce  denunciations,  as  does  also  the  writer 
of  the  Commentary  on  Matthew,  of  the  '  ypocrisie,  tirauntrie,  and 
cursidnesse  of  Antecrist  and  his  meynee,'  by  whom  he  evidently 
means  the  hierarchy. 

Lastly,  in  the  short  prologue  to  the  Commentary  on  John  (MS. 
Bodl.  243)  occurs  this  passage:  — 

'  A  symple  creature  of  God,  willinge  to  here  in  party  Jjc  chargis  of 
symple  pore  men,  writij)  a  schort  glos  in  English  on  Jje  gospel  of 
Joon,'  alleging,  as  he  tells  us,  his  authors  '  in  general,'  and  remitting 

b  In  the  Bodleian  MS.  (Laud,  235) ;       (B.  I.   38)  is  stated  by  Dr.  Shirley  to 
— the     MS.    at     Trin.    Coll.    Cambr.       have  a  different  prologue. 


INTRODUCTION.  v 

to  '  \t  grettur  gloos  writun  on  Joon  where  and  in  what  bokis  jjes 
doctours  seyen  ))es  sentences.' 

The  strong  similarity  of  style  noticeable  in  these  three  prologues, 
particularly  in  the  first  and  second,  point  to  the  conclusion  that  they 
and  the  glosses  which  they  describe  all  proceeded  from  the  same 
hand.  If  so,  that  hand  was  certainly  not  Wyclifs,  for  he  was  never 
*  lettid  fro  prechyng,'  nor  would  he  have  been  likely  to  describe  him- 
self as  a  '  caitif.'  by  which  was  then  meant  an  abject,  obscure,  and 
despised  person.  One  would  be  rather  disposed  to  ascribe  the 
authorship  of  these  glosses  to  the  same  person  who  wrote  a  col- 
lection of  tracts  under  the  title  of  'The  Pore  Caitif,'  which  Bale, 
Lewis,  and  Dr.  Vaughan  ascribed  unquestioningly  to  Wyclif,  but 
without  cause,  as  Dr.  Shirley  was  the  first  to  show,  since  Bishop 
Pecock,  a  writer  nearly  contemporary,  tells  us  that  they  were  written 
by  a  mendicant  friar  '  pro  suo  defensorio  c.'  And  that  the  author 
belonged  to  a  religious  order,  and  therefore  could  not  have  been 
Wyclif,  might  with  some  plausibility  be  inferred  from  a  passage  near 
the  end  of  the  prologue  to  the  Commentary  on  Matthew,  where,  in 
the  course  of  an  invective  against  the  '  religiouse,'  he  says,  '  In  so 
myche,  that  if  ony  of  siche  religiouse,  bounden  to  siche  privat  tra- 
diciouns,  wolde  live  as  Crist  and  his  postlis  diden,  and  edifie  truly 
Cristen  soulis  bi  the  gospel,  the  potestatis  of  singular  novelries  crien 
hym  a  cursed  apostata  and  eretik  distrier  of  Cristendome.'  There  is 
a  tone  about  these  words,  which  certainly  tends  to  make  one  believe 
that  th6  writer  was  describing  his  own  experience. 

The  Commentary  on  Luke  is  based  on  the  '  Catena  Aurea '  of 
S.  Thomas  Aquinas,  whom  the  compiler  throughout  the  prologue 
calls  '  Alquin.'  That  on  St.  John's  gospel  is  also  based  on  the 
Catena. 

Bale,  in  his  most  inaccurate  catalogue  of  the  writings  of  Wyclif  <^, 
describes  the  gloss  on  Matthew  as  a  '  Translatio  Clementis  Lantho- 
niensis.'  But  the  Commentary  now  in  question  is  certainly  no 
translation    from    Clement    of    Lanthony    (a   monk    of   the    twelfth 

^  Fasciculi  Zizaniorum,  xiii.  note  3. 
^  IlluUrium  Britannine  Scriptorum  Snmmarmm.     Basle,  1559- 


VI  INTRODUCTION, 

century),  since  its  compiler  quotes  among  his  authorities  Robert 
Grossetete,  who  flourished  in  the  thirteenth.  Nor  again  does  it 
appear  to  be  based  on  the  Catena;  for  although  there  are  fewer 
extracts  on  the  whole,  and  those  which  coincide  in  the  two  works 
are  usually  given  more  fully  in  the  Catena,  yet  particular  extracts  may 
be  found  which  are  fuller  in  the  Commentary. 

With  regard  to  the  Commentary  on  the  Apocalypse,  internal  evi- 
dence is,  I  think,  decisive  against  its  being  the  work  of  Wyclif  The 
Introduction  seems  to  me  the  work  of  a  man  of  softer  and  less  robust 
nature.  In  his  interpretation  of  chap,  xviii.,  the  writer  expounds  the 
Scarlet  Woman  to  signify  Antichrist,  characterized  by  idolatry, 
*  mammetrie,'  covetousness  and  lechery ;  but  the  seven  hills  on  which 
she  sits  are — not  Rome,  but — the  seven  deadly  sins.  As  the  kings 
under  Antichrist  fought  against  the  Lamb,  so  the  kings  that  now 
were  fought  against  holy  Church,  and  not  only  *  in  bodily  Jjingis  but 
in  goostly  also,  for  ]?orow  |)e  tallage  ]>at  ]?ei  maken  ]?ei  bringen  jje 
simple  folk  into  synne.'  This  is  far  enough  from  the  position  of  the 
man  who  thought  that  the  secular  power  might  freely  resume  Church 
property,  and  was  bound  to  do  so  if  it  were  misused;  rather  it 
reminds  one  of  the  state  of  things  under  Henry  III.  and  Edward  I. 
Again,  the  host  that  followed  him  that  sat  on  the  white  horse, 
'  bitoknen  hem  )>at  willen  fi^te  a5en  ]>e  fend  ]?orow  lowness  and  wij) 
conventise,' — i.  e.  in  a  conventual  life ;  but  Wyclif  devoted  all  his 
powers  during  many  years  to  the  denunciation  of  the  conventual  life 
in  all  its  forms.  Again, — '  As  longe  as  Satanas  is  bounden,  holy 
chirche  regne]?,  and  is  free  to  serve  God,  and  obediejit  to pe  Prelaws' 
But  it  was  the  business  of  Wyclif's  life  to  declaim  against  the  prelates. 
Again, — '  pat  ])Q  folk  schulen  gon  in  his  li^t  bitokne]),'  that  towards 
the  end  of  the  world,  '  jje  religious  of  God  schulen  wexe  more  and 
more,  and  men  schul  forsake  worldly  blisse  for  hope  of  J>e  blisse 
above.'  But  such  a  prospect  of  the  spread  of  monkery  would  have 
been  to  Wyclif  a  most  dreary  one.  The  reader  will  probably  think 
that  sufficient  evidence  has  been  adduced  to  prove  that  Wyclif  was 
not  the  author  of  the  Commentary  on  the  Apocalypse. 

No.   24,  entitled  '  A  Short  Rule  of  Life,'  &c.,  is  conceived  in  a 


INTRODUCTION.  vii 

beautiful  spirit,  but  there  is  not  a  particle  of  evidence  to  connect 
it  with  W}xlif.  Even  the  omnivorous  Bale  has  not  included  it 
within  the  sweep  of  his  catalogue.  That  it  should  be  found  in  a 
MS.  volume  of  tracts  bequeathed  by  Archbishop  Parker  to  Corpus 
Christi  College,  Cambridge,  and  loosely  said  by  him  to  contain 
tracts  by  Wyclif,  does  not  amount  to  evidence ;  for  some  of  these 
compositions  can  be  proved  to  be  of  different  authorship,  and  the 
general  statement  of  Archbishop  Parker  must  not  be  taken  for 
more  than  it  is  worth.  Dr.  Vaughan  indeed  says  ^,  after  quoting 
a  fine  passage  from  this  tract,  inculcating  the  purest  Christian 
virtues  on  different  orders  of  men,  '  The  preacher  whose  counsels 
were  of  this  description  was  not  the  man  to  become  the  agent  of 
insurrection,  after  the  fashion  of  John  Ball  and  Wat  Tyler,  as  some 
of  his  ingenuous  opponents  have  insinuated.'  This  is  quite  true;  but 
it  would  have  been  more  to  the  purpose  to  prove  that  the  tract  is 
by  Wyclif,  instead  of  merely  assuming  it.  So  far  as  the  evidence  of 
style  goes,  I  am  myself  greatly  inclined  to  doubt  its  authenticity. 

No.  48,  a  tract  printed  by  Dr.  Todd,  in  1851,  under  the  title  'Of 
Antecrist  and  his  Meynee,'  does  not  appear  to  be  authentic.  The 
style  is  narrower  and  more  puritanic  than  that  of  Wyclif,  and  the 
allusions  to  the  persecutions  to  which  the  writer  and  his  party  were 
subjected  seem  more  suitable  to  a  later  time.  Thus  (p.  cxlviii.)  we 
are  told  that  Antichrist  '  harder  al  day  punyschij>,  as  al  day  now  men 
may  see.'  Again,  Antichrist  and  his  followers  '  kille  treue  men  in 
her  prison.'  On  the  whole,  this  language  suits  a  period  subsequent 
to  the  constitutions  of  the  archbishops  Arundel  and  Chicheley 
better  than  the  lifetime  of  the  reformer ;  and  as  the  evidence  of  style 
tends  the  other  way,  and  there  is  not  a  tittle  of  external  evidence 
attributing  it  to  Wyclif,  the  tract  not  being  included  even  in  Bale's 
list,  I  think  it  may  be  safely  struck  out  of  the  catalogue  of  the 
reformer's  writings. 

No.  47,  *  Tractatus  de  Pseudo  freris,'  found  in  a  single  MS.  at 
Dublin,  is  similarly  destitute  of  all  external  evidence  tending  to  asso- 

*   Tracts  and  Idealises  of  John  de  Wydiffe,  p.  48. 


viii  INTRODUC  TION. 

ciate  it  with  W}'clif ;  but  as  no  previous  writer  has  given  any  other 
than  the  most  general  description  of  it,  and  I  have  not  yet  been  able 
to  examine  it  myself,  the  question  of  its  authenticity  must  be  left 
in  suspense.  Nos.  51,  61,  and  64  must  be  included  in  the  same 
category ;  there  is  no  external  evidence  in  their  favour,  but  from  the 
only  MSS.  of  them  being  either  in  private  libraries  or  at  Dublin, 
I  have  not  yet  been  able  to  exam.ine  them. 

It  escaped  Dr.  Shirley's  notice  that  Nos.  49  and  50  are  merely 
extracts  from  No.  63,  which  will  be  considered  in  the  next 
paragraph. 

II.  A  considerable  number  of  English  tracts  still  remains,  chiefly 
those  contained  in  the  well-known  C.  C.  C.  manuscript  at  Cambridge, 
with  regard  to  which  there  is  indeed  some  slight  amount  of  external 
evidence  connecting  them  with  Wyclif,  but  that  evidence  is  not  strong 
enough  to  establish  their  authenticity,  should  the  analysis  of  their 
contents  lead  to  an  opposite  conclusion.  I  propose  to  enter  upon 
the  full  examination  of  the  claims  of  this  class  to  rank  among  Wyclif  s 
writings  in  the  Introduction  to  the  third  or  miscellaneous  volume 
of  the  present  collection.  I  did  indeed  at  one  time  conceive  myself 
to  have  found  a  test,  the  application  of  which  would  in  many  cases 
establish  the  non-authenticity  of  a  treatise  without  further  trouble. 
In  this,  however,  deeper  research  has  proved  that  I  was  mistaken  ; 
and  as  the  point  is  one  which  bears  upon  the  authenticity  of  a  por- 
tion of  the  sermons  in  the  present  volume, — those  for  the  Commune 
Sanctorum, — it  must  be  treated  of  here. 

Relying  upon  the  consensus  of  all  the  ordinary  English  historians, 
including  Lingard,  I  came  to  the  study  of  the  questions  aff'ecting  the 
authenticity  of  writings  ascribed  to  Wyclif  with  the  preconceived 
belief,  that  the  attempts  of  the  English  state  and  hierarchy  to  coerce 
heretical  or  erroneous  opinions  had  not,  previously  to  the  enactment 
of  the  famous  statute  commonly  called  De  Haeretico  Comburendo, 
in  1 40 1,  proceeded  to  the  length  of  inflicting  capital  punishment, 
either  on  the  gibbet  or  at  the  stake,  upon  the  holders  of  those 
opinions.  The  common  impression  certainly  is, — and  it  was  shared 
by    myself, — that    no    one    had    suff'ered    death    in    England  for   his 


INTRODUCTION. 


IX 


religious  opinions,  by  direct  infliction  at  the  hands  of  the  magistrate  ^, 
before  William  Sawtre,  the  first  victim  to  the  statute  above  mentioned. 
If  then,  in  a  tract,  the  style  and  handwriting  of  which  showed  it  to 
belong  either  to  the  end  of  the  fourteenth,  or  to  the  beginning  of 
the  fifteenth  century,  mention  was  made  of  death  by  burning  or 
hanging  as  a  fate  ever  impending  over  such  as  held  the  writer's 
opinions,  the  conclusion  was  ready,  that  the  date  of  that  tract  must 
be  subsequent  to  the  passing  of  the  statute  of  1401,  and  that  accord- 
ingly Wyclif  could  not  have  been  its  author.  Tried  by  this  test, 
the  tracts  numbered  12,  16,  18,  19,  29,  32,  33,  34,  38,  and  63  (out 
of  which  all  but  the  last,  which  is  in  the  Bodleian,  are  found  in  the 
C.  C.  C.  manuscript),  since  they  all  contain  allusions  to  *  brennyng ' 
as  a  punishment  constantly  impending  over,  or  actually  inflicted  upon, 
the  followers  of  Wyclif,  would  be  proved  to  have  been  composed 
many  years  after  the  reformer's  death  e. 

But  if  this  conclusion  were  to  be  considered  irrefragable,  it  presently 
appeared  that  it  would  aff"ect  other  writings,  which  tradition  and 
common  consent,  and  a  fair  amount  of  direct  external  evidence,  had 
hitherto  attributed  to  Wyclif.  Such  are  the  Homilies  on  the  gospels 
contained  in  the  offices  of  the  Commune  Sanctorum,  forming  the 
second  division  of  Homilies  in  the  present  edition.  In  Sermon 
LXIV.  (p.  201),  in  Sermon  LXV.  (p.  205),  and  again  in  Sermon 
LXVII.  (p.  211),  occur  passages  which  it  is  difficult  to  understand 
in  any  other  way  than  as  testifying  to  the  fact  of  a  vigorous  per- 
secution of  Lollards  going  on  at  the  very  time.  The  passages  are 
subjoined  in  a  foot-note ^^   It  immediately  became  a  pressing  question, 


f  I  use  these  words,  because  there  is 
a  case,  mentioned  by  William  of  New- 
burgh  in  his  history  (lib.  ii.  cap.  13), 
where  some  thirty  Paulician  heretics, 
having  entered  England  about  the  year 
1 1 63,  were  condemned  at  Oxford  to  be 
branded,  whipped,  and  turned  out  of 
the  city ;  after  which,  all  persons  being 
forbidden  to  harbour  them  or  give  them 
food,  they  '  misere  perierunt.'  For  this 
reference  I  am  indebted  to  Professor 
Stubbs. 

8  Wyclif  died  at  Lutterworth  in  1384. 


*>  p.  201.  '  oure  prelatis 

stranglen  and  killen  men,  and  spoilen 
hem  of  her  goodis.' 

p.  205.  '  ])is  word  counfortij?  symple 
men,  J^at  ben  clepid  eretikes  and  ene- 
myes  to  he  Chirche,  for  )>ei  tellen  Goddis 
lawe  ;  for  \€\  ben  somjained  and  repro- 
vyd  many  weies,  and  after  put  in  prison, 
and  brend  or  kild  as  worse  ban  Jeeves.' 

p.  211,  '  alle  hese  [popes  and  bishops, 
helped  by  secular  lords]  bitraien  Cristen 
men  to  turment,  and  putten  hem  to 
deejj  for  hoolding  of  Cristis  lawe.' 


X  INTRODUCTION. 

whether,  in  the  face  of  these  passages,  the  authenticity  of  at  least 
this  portion  of  the  Homilies  could  be  maintained. 

The  first  point  to  be  ascertained  was  whether  all  the  best  MSS. 
contained  the  passages  in  question,  or  whether  any  omitted  them, 
or  showed  marks  of  interpolation.  The  MSS.  of  the  first  class  in 
which  these  sermons  are  contained  are,  besides  Bodl.  788,  upon 
which  the  text  of  this  edition  is  based,  two  in  the  British  Museum 
(Bib.  Reg.  18  B.  IX.  and  Cotton.  Claud.  D.  VIII.)  and  one  at  Wrest 
Park  (No.  11),  I  have  not  had  an  opportunity  of  collating  the  last- 
named  MS.,  but  a  reference  to  those  in  the  British  IMuseum  showed 
that  in  each  of  these  passages  they  agreed  word  for  word  with 
Bodl.  788,  and  exhibited  no  trace  of  interpolation.  It  further  ap- 
peared that  in  one  of  the  homilies  for  the  Proprium  Sanctorum, 
a  division  which  in  all  the  copies  is  associated  with  that  for  the  Com- 
mune Sanctorum,  and  indisputably  formed  part  of  the  same  work 
from  the  first,  namely  in  Sermon  CII.  (p,  354),  mention  is  made  of 
Richard  II.  as  then  reigning.  Now,  on  the  supposition  that  no 
persecution  proceeding  to  the  length  of  capital  punishment  had  taken 
place  before  1401,  how  reconcile  the  mention  of  Richard,  whose 
deposition  and  death  happened  in  1399,  with  the  passages  importing 
that  such  persecution  was  actually  going  on  ? 

Being  thus  led  to  examine  narrowly  the  grounds  of  the  supposition 
above  mentioned,  I  came  upon  certain  facts  which  tended  to  throw 
doubt  on  their  sufficiency  to  carry  the  conclusion  based  on  them. 
Mr.  Bond,  keeper  of  the  MSS.  at  the  British  IMuseum,  was  good 
enough  to  point  out  to  me  a  passage  in  the  Chronicle  of  Meaux, 
lately  edited  by  him  for  the  Master  of  the  Rolls,  which  is  much  to  the 
purpose  of  the  present  inquiry.  Abbot  Burton  says  (vol.  ii.  p.  323) 
that  the  Franciscans,  or  a  section  of  them,  opposed  certain  con- 
stitutions of  Pope  John  XXII. ,  who  thereupon  caused  many  of 
them  to  be  condemned  and  burnt,  some  in  France  in  13 18,  others 
at  various  places  in  France,  Spain,  Italy,  and  Germany,  in  1330; 
and  that  among  the  severities  practised  on  this  last  occasion,  *  in 
Anglia,  in  quadam  silva,  comhusta  sunt  viri  qidnquaginta  guinque, 
ei   mulieres    ocio,    ejusdem    ordinis    et    erroris.'       This    is    indefinite, 


INTRODUCTIO  N.  xi 

certainly,  but  there  seems  no  possibility  of  questioning  its  substantial 
truth ;  and  if  it  be  true,  then  men  and  women  were  burnt  in  England 
for  heresy  before  1 40 1. 

Again,  though  no  chronicler  records  any  actual  execution  in  the 
fourteenth  century,  there  is  a  passage  in  Walsingham  which  proves 
that  it  was  threatened  by  at  least  one  bishop,  and,  considering  the 
imperfect  nature  of  the  communications  between  different  parts  of 
the  country  in  that  age,  and  the  paucity  of  records,  it  would  surely 
be  hazardous  to  assert  confidently,  merely  because  the  chroniclers 
are  silent,  that  no  such  threat  was  ever  carried  into  effect.  Speaking 
of  the  Lollards  in  1389,  Walsingham,  after  blaming  the  culpable 
remissness  of  most  of  the  other  bishops,  who  instead  of  exterminating 
these  pests  went  their  ways,  one  to  his  farm,  another  to  his  merchan- 
dise, adds  that  the  Bishop  of  Norwich,  '  sit  nomen  ejus  benedictum 
in  secula  ! '  set  an  edifying  example  of  zeal  for  the  faith,  in  that  he 
swore  that  if  any  one  of  that  perverse  sect  should  presume  to  preach 
in  his  diocese,  he  should  either  be  burnt  or  beheaded  ('  vel  ignibus 
traderetur  vel  capite  privaretur').  Walsingham  adds  that  no  Lollard 
coveted  the  honour  of  martyrdom,  and  that  the  diocese  accordingly 
remained  uncontaminated  by  their  presence  i.  If  the  Bishop  could 
threaten  this,  one  may  suppose  that  without  any  violation  of  law  it 
could  have  been  done.  And  in  fact,  if  one  reads  the  statute  of  1401 
carefully,  it  becomes  plain  that  the  legislature  which  enacted  it  was 
not  thinking  of  introducing  forms  of  punishment  hitherto  unknown 
to  and  unsanctioned  by  the  law,  but  only  regularizing  and  extending 
uniformly  over  the  country  a  penal  machinery  already  existing  and 
legal.  The  remedy  is  to  be  applied,  not  de  novo,  but  '  uberius  et 
celerius '  than  has  been  hitherto  possible ; — and  because  experience 
proves  that  the  bishops  *  per  suam  jurisdictionem  spiritualem  dictos 
perfidos  et  perversos  absque  auxilio  dictae  majestatis  regiae  sufficienter 
corrigere  nequeunt ; '  inasmuch  as  the  Lollards,  by  passing  from  one 
diocese  into  another,  can  with  so  litde  difficulty  evade  the  citations 
served  upon  them.  In  truth,  to  societies  whose  evolution  for  many 
centuries  had  been  presided  over  by  the  Catholic  Church,  the  crime 
'  Walsingham,  Historia,  vol.  ii.  p.  188  :  Rolls  series. 


xii  INTRODUCTION, 

of  heresy  appeared  so  tremendous  that  no  punishment,  however 
agonizing,  could  be  commensurate  with  its  turpitude ;  and  when 
a  provincial  council,  or  even  a  diocesan  court,  had  once  declared  the 
fact  of  heresy  to  be  proved,  and  had  handed  over  the  culprit  to  the 
grasp  of  lay  justice,  the  sheriff,  or  mayor,  or  bailiff,  w^ho  received  him, 
was  little  likely,  unless  there  was  a  speedy  and  full  retractation,  to  be 
incommoded  by  prayers  or  murmurs  from  the  people  that  execution 
might  be  stayed.  That  such  a  monster  should  both  in  body  and 
soul  be  as  soon  as  possible  got  rid  of,  erased  and  annihilated  off  the 
face  of  the  earth  which  he  cumbered,  was  the  shuddering  desire  of 
the  pious  and  the  superstitious  alike  ;  and  for  this,  fire  offered  the 
readiest  means ;  the  miscreant  might  be  reduced  to  ashes, — those 
ashes  might  be  scattered  to  the  winds ;  and  while  his  soul  commenced 
to  endure  its  secular  torments,  his  hateful  presence  would  in  no 
possible  shape  afflict  Christian  people  more.  The  legislature,  which 
ordained  that  obstinate  heretics  should  be  burned  '  coram  populo  in 
eminenti  loco,'  was  not  afraid  that  any  sympathy  with  them  in  their 
sufferings  would  be  exhibited  by  the  people.  I  have  entered  into 
these  considerations  simply  in  order  to  mitigate  the  prima  facie 
improbabihty  that  if  any  burnings  or  beheadings  had  taken  place  in 
the  last  twenty  years  of  the  fourteenth  century,  the  chroniclers  would 
have  passed  them  over  in  silence.  Things  were  changed  in  the 
sixteenth  century,  but  at  the  time  we  are  speaking  of  such  a  mode 
of  dealing  with  heretics  appeared  to  most  men  so  obviously  natural 
and  right, — so  much  a  matter  of  course, — that  one  can  better  under- 
stand how  very  severe  punishments  may  have  passed  over  absolutely 
without  record. 

On  the  whole,  then,  it  appears  that  the  mention  of  '  brennyng '  in 
these  tracts,  and  also  in  the  sermons  for  the  Commune  Sanctorum, 
is  not  conclusive  against  their  authenticity.  There  are,  however, 
in  the  case  of  the  tracts,  or  some  of  them,  various  other  difficulties, 
the  full  consideration  of  which,  as  was  said  before,  must  be  reserved 
for  the  Introduction  to  the  miscellaneous  volume. 

The  Homilies. — To  proceed  to  the  contents  of  the  present 
volumes.     It  was  Dr.   Shirley's   intention,  both  on  account  of  their 


INTRODUCTION.  xiii 

intrinsic  importance,  and  because,  among  all  the  longer  English 
writings,  there  was  the  greatest  weight  of  evidence  in  favour  of  their 
genuineness,  to  print  the  Homilies''  first.  This  intention  has  been 
carried  out,  and  the  first  two  volumes  of  the  present  edition  contain 
the  entire  collection, — Vol.  I.  giving  the  Sermons  for  the  Sunday 
Gospels,  and  those  for  the  Commune  and  Proprium  Sanctorum, 
while  Vol.  II.  contains  the  Sermons  for  the  Ferial  Gospels,  and  those 
for  the  Sunday  Epistles.  The  original  arrangement  appears  to  have 
been,  that  the  sermons  for  the  Sunday  epistles  and  gospels  should 
be  intermixed.  This  I  infer,  partly  from  the  fact  that  such  is  the 
arrangement  in  a  valuable  MS.  in  the  Bodleian  (Douce  321),  which, 
imperfect  as  it  is,  appears  from  the  forms  of  the  words  to  be  some- 
what more  ancient  than  the  manuscript  I  have  printed  from, — partly 
from  the  same  arrangement  being  followed  in  one  of  the  copies  in 
the  British  INIuseum  (Claudius,  D.  VIII.),  and  also  in  a  curious  MS. 
at  Sidney  Sussex  College,  Cambridge, — but  chiefly  from  a  discovery, 
made  in  the  course  of  my  editorial  occupations  on  MS.  Bodl.  788, 
that  the  copy  from  which  the  writer  of  that  manuscript  made  his 
transcript,  must  also  have  had  the  sermons  so  arranged  l.  As,  how- 
ever, the  majority  of  the  MSS.  adhere  to  the  separate  arrangement, 
and  there  is  no  reason  to  think  that  the  two  sets  were  written  at  the 
same  time,  or  are  in  any  way  connected  as  to  their  contents,  it  seems 
upon  the  whole  preferable  to  print  them  just  as  they  stand  in  the 
MS.  which  is  the  basis  of  the  edition. 

The    authenticity    of  these    sermons,   taken    as    a   whole,   cannot 
reasonably  be  questioned.     Although,  so  far  as  I  am  aware,  no  one 

^  No.  2  in  Dr.  Shirley's  Catalogue.  ten,  and  continued  the  transcript  of  the 

^  At  the  bottom  of  page  62  of  Bodl.  gospel  sermon  from  the  point  where  he 

788,  the  scribe  had  arrived  near  the  end  had  broken  off.     The  conclusion  is  in- 

of  the  gospel  sermon  for  the  Third  Sun-  evitable  that  the  older  copy  which  he 

day    in    Lent.     On    turning    the   leaf,  was   using    contained   the   gospel    and 

instead   of  the   concluding    portion   of  epistle  sermons  intermixed,  so  that  parts 

the  gospel  sermon,  he  has  written  down  of  two    sermons    of    each    description 

a  portion  of  the  epistle  sermon  for  the  would  often  appear  on  parallel  columns, 

next  Sunday  in  Lent ;    nor  did  he  dis-  as  may  be  seen  to  this  day  in  Douce 

cover  his   mistake  till  he  had  written  321  ;   such  being  the  case,  the  scribe's 

about  half  a  column ;  when  at  last  he  eye  on  commencing  a  fresh  page  was 

found  out  what  he  was  doing,  he  drew  caught  by  the  wrong  column,  and  thus 

a  pen  with  red  ink  through  the  portion  the  present  appearance  of  the  MS.  is 

of  the  epistle  sermon  that  he  had  writ-  accounted  for. 


xiv  INTRODUCTION. 

of  the  numerous  and  widely  separated  MSS.  which  contain  them 
names  W}'chf  as  the  author  in  a  handwriting  contemporary  with 
the  copies  themselves,  yet  they  have  all  come  down  accompanied 
by  the  tradition  of  his  authorship,  and  have  never  been  ascribed  to 
any  one  else.  Again,  the  fact  that  the  copies  are  so  numerous 
attests  their  high  popularity  in  the  times  before  the  invention  of 
printing,  and  entirely  accords  with  the  statement  of  Leland"',  that 
even  in  his  (Leland's)  age,  many  of  the  reformer's  writings,  both 
in  Latin  and  English,  were  religiously  preserved  and  diligently  read 
by  certain  persons,  '  praesertim  ilia  ver7iacula  in  plebis  gratiam 
scripta.'  Bale  names  the  several  divisions  of  the  sermons  in  his 
catalogue,  though  not  always  in  a  way  sufficient  to  identify  them 
with  certainty.  For  instance,  his  '  In  Evangelia  Dominicalia,'  with 
incipit,  '  Homo  quidam  erat  dives,'  might  just  as  well  refer  to  the 
spurious  collection  of  sermons  described  on  a  previous  page^i  as 
to  those  in  the  present  collection.  Again,  the  first  words  of  his 
*  Sermones  in  Epistolas'  do  not  tally  with  the  opening  of  the  first 
Epistle  sermon  in  our  present  copies.  But  with  regard  to  the  sermons 
for  the  Commune  and  Proprium  Sanctorum,  and  those  on  the  Ferial 
Gospels,  it  may  be  held  as  certain  that  the  works  which  he  has 
catalogued  are  the  same  as  those  now  printed.  The  authority  of 
Bale  indeed, — Bale,  who  sets  down  Wyclifs  death  in  1387,  who  takes 
him  on  a  journey  into  Bohemia,  who  assigns  to  him  a  score  of  works 
which  it  is  most  certain  he  never  wrote  ;  moreover,  who  in  his  article 
on  Chaucer,  omits  from  the  list  of  his  works  the  Canterbury  Tales, 
and  includes  Lydgate's  Falls  of  Princes, —  is,  if  uncorroborated,  of 
almost  no  value.  Happily  in  the  present  case  the  weight  of  internal 
evidence  tends  strongly  in  the  same  direction ;  the  authoritative  tone, 
the  proneness  to  subtle  and  recondite  distinctions,  so  completely  in 
harmony  with  what  we  know  of  Wyclifs  fame  in  the  schools,  the 
special  hostility  to  the  friars,  the  allusions  to  contemporary  events, 
such  as  the  crusade  of  Bishop  Spencer,  and  the  grant  of  papal  in- 
dulgences to  those  who  engaged  in  it  (p.  1 36) — events  which  occurred 
in   1383,  and  therefore  would  have  been  naturally  referred  to  in  a 

m  Commentarium  de  Scriptoribtis  Britannicis,  art.  '  Wicoclivus.*  "  See  p.  iii. 


IN  TR  O  D  UC  TI O  N.  xv 

series  of  sermons  preached  in  his  parish  of  Lutterworth  during  the 
last  two  years  of  his  Hfe,  after  he  had  been  compelled  to  retire  from 
Oxford  by  the  Council  of  1382, — lastly,  a  distinct  reference  at  the 
end  of  Sermon  XXX.  (p.  79)  to  a  Latin  work  by  the  writer,  which, 
it  can  hardly  be  doubted,  was  the  De  Veritate  Scripiurae, — all  these 
converging  proofs,  taken  in  connection  with  the  unbroken  tradition 
surrounding  the  MSS.  which  has  been  already  referred  to,  appear 
to  establish  Wyclif  in  the  authorship  of  these  sermons  beyond  all 
reasonable  doubt. 

Assuming  them,  therefore,  to  be  authentic,  the  questions  which 
next  present  themselves  for  consideration  relate,  (i)  to  the  form  they 
bear,  (2)  to  the  nature  of  their  contents. 

I.  Prefixed  to  the  Sermons  for  the  Commune  and  the  Proprium 
Sanctorum,  a  few  explanatory  remarks  will  be  found,  from  which  the 
relation  in  which  those  sermons  stand  to  the  Sarum  Missal,  and  to 
the  general  Hturgical  system  of  the  Catholic  Church  in  the  fourteenth 
century,  may  be  better  comprehended.  The  collection  of  sermons 
for  the  Sunday  gospels  (which  are  for  the  most  part  the  same  as 
those  in  the  English  Prayer-book),  needs  no  explanation.  The 
originator  of  this  style  of  sermon  in  the  Western  Church  was  Gregory 
the  Great,  whose  forty  Homilies,  explanatory  of  the  gospels  read  on 
various  festivals,  are  most  racy  and  profitable  reading.  Several  pas- 
sages in  the  opening  sermons  (see  pp.  3,  6,  9)  make  it  appear  that 
Wyclif  composed  these  homilies  more  as  drafts,  or  skeleton  sermons, 
which  a  preacher  might  take  and  fill  in  ad  libitum,  than  as  in  them- 
selves complete  discourses.  The  curious  MS.  at  Sidney  Sussex 
College  is  a  standing  proof  that  he  was  sometimes  taken  at  his  word  ; 
in  this  MS.  the  sermon  for  the  Sunday  gospel  is  usually  given  entire, 
and  followed  by  a  few  hortatory  remarks  enlarging  upon  Wyclif s 
hints;  to  these  succeeds  a  short  instruction  based  on  a  text  taken 
from  the  epistle  for  the  same  Sunday  <>. 

°  These      instructions      have     been  tion    showed   that    such    was   not   the 

hitherto    supposed  (see  Shirley's  Cata-  case ;  they  appear  to  be  original  com- 

logue,  p.  33)  to  be  identical  with   the  positions,  the   work  no    doubt    of  the 

'  Sennons    on   the    Epistles '   hereafter  amplifier  of  the  Gospel  sermons, 
to  be  printed  ;  but  a  minute  examina- 


xvi  INTRODUCTION. 

2.  To  form  a  just  estimate  of  the  doctrinal  and  moral  contents  of 
these  sermons,  to  realize  and  express  the  exact  position  which  the 
writer,  about  whom  so  much  windy  declamation  has  gone  forth  during 
the  last  three  centuries,  occupied  in  face  of  the  religious  thought  and 
life  of  his  time, — this  is  a  task  for  a  theologian ;  and  I  am  no  theo- 
logian, but  merely  a  literary  editor.  But  I  may  be  allowed  to  point 
out  that  the  opportunity  is  now  first  afforded  to  the  general  reader  of 
ascertaining  Wyclif's  opinions,  not  from  four  or  five  scattered  sermons 
or  tracts  (some  of  which  the  learned  editor.  Dr.  Todd,  by  clothing 
them  in  black  letter,  has  left  nearly  as  undecipherable  to  ordinary 
readers  as  if  they  were  still  in  MS.  p),  not  from  pamphlets,  such  as 
those  so  largely  analyzed  by  Lewis,  Lebas,  and  Dr.  Vaughan,  of  which 
a  large  proportion  are  of  highly  doubtful  authenticity, — but  from 
a  large  collection  of  sermons,  which,  if  any  of  Wyclif's  English  works 
are  so,  may  be  deemed  thoroughly  genuine.  As  some  assistance  to 
those  who  wish  to  embark  in  this  inquiry,  it  may  be  mentioned  that 
in  this  first  volume  opinions  on  the  following  important  doctrines  and 
practices  will  be  found  at  the  places  indicated:  —  on  justification, 
s-t  P-  350;  on  purgatory,  at  pp.  121,  321 ;  on  the  sacraments,  espe- 
cially the  YMohzxist,  passim,  but  see  in  particular  pp.  119,  248,  265; 
on  the  privileges,  graces,  and  power  of  Mary,  at  pp.  246,  257,  345, 
356 ;  on  Antichrist,  at  p.  350 ;  on  private  confession,  at  pp.  333, 
351  ;  and  on  clerical  celibacy,  at  p.  364. 

Formation  of  the  Text. — The  following  are  the  MSS.  which 
have  been  consulted,  with  a  view  to  the  production  of  a  correct  text 
of  the  Sermons  : — 

P  Wycliffe's  Three  Treatises  on  the  Chtrch.     Dublin,  1 85  7. 


INTRODUCTION. 


xvii 


Title  of  MS. 


Bodl.  788. 


Univ.  Library 
Cambr.  Ji.  1.40. 


Distinguishing 
Letter. 


A. 


B. 


Description. 


This  truly  excellent  MS.  contains,  in  a  small  thick 
folio,  the  whole  collection  of  genuine  Homilies, 
numbered  2  in  Shirley's  Catalogue.  As  to  its 
history,  nothing  whatever  is  known.  Not  a 
single  leaf  is  missing,  and  although  of  course 
not  free  from  errors,  it  is  one  of  those  unusually 
correct  and  serviceable  copies  which  rejoice  the 
heart  of  an  editor.  It  is  in  the  same  hand- 
writing from  first  to  last,  a  handwriting 
probably  of  the  last  decade  of  the  fourteenth 
century.  It  is  on  good  but  thin  parchment, 
sparingly  ornamented  wdth  blue  and  red  flourishes 
and  head-letters. 

This    MS.,  a  small  quarto,   is  in  the  University 
Library   at   Cambridge.     It   contains   only  the 
sermons  for  the  Sunday  gospels  and  epistles.    It 
is  on  the  finest  vellum,  and  the  handwriting  is 
of  a  very  superior  description ;  here  and  there  it 
is  richly  illuminated.     One  may  feel  certain  that 
it  was  executed  for  some  wealthy  person,  w^ho 
desired  that  no  expense  should  be  spared.    I  was 
at  first  inclined  to  rate  its  value  very  highly,  but 
the  remarkable  family  likeness  between  it  and 
A  soon  struck  me,  and  at  length  I  discovered 
a  proof,  amounting  almost  to  a  demonstration, 
that  one  must  have  been  copied  from  the  other. 
In  the  text  of  Sermon  LIII.,  '  Si  quis  diligit  me,' 
while  the  MS.  Douce  321  refers  to  the  right  chap- 
ter, John  xiv.,  A  and  B  both  fall  into  the  same 
error,  referring  to  John  xviii.      The  balance  of 
probability   against   the  coincidence  being   ac- 
cidental is  of  course  enormously  great ;    either 
then  both  MSS.  must  be  copies  from  some  earlier 
MS.,  now  lost,  which  contained  the  error,  or 
else  one  of  them  copied  it  from  the  other.    But 
the  former   supposition   is   gratuitous   and  im- 
probable;   they  have  then   copied   each  other, 
and  of  the  two  alternatives,    it  is  more   likely 
that  B,  a  partial  cdpy,  and  a  MS.  de  luxe,  is 
copied  from  A,  than  A  from  B.     The  general 
conclusion  is  that  B  is  of  no  value  as  an  original 
authority ;  it  has  however  the  merit  of  not  unfre- 
quently  correcting    errors    of  inadvertence    or 
carelessness  in  A. 


WYCLIF. 


XVlll 


1 NTRO  D  UCTION. 


Title  of  MS. 


Distinguishing 
Letter. 


Laud,  314. 


Wrest  Park,  II. 


D. 


Douce  321. 


Description. 


This  is  a  small  MS.  of  but  little  value,  in  the 
Bodleian  Library,  containing,  besides  the  tract 
called  Vae  Octuplex,  only  the  sermons  for  the 
Sunday  gospels.  The  hand  is  apparently  of  a 
period  past  the  middle  of  the  fifteenth  century. 

This  MS.  is  in  the  possession  of  Lady  Cowper, 
It  is  a  double-columned  folio ;  at  the  foot  of 
page  I  are  the  words  '  Franciscus  Comes  Bed- 
foidiae,'  and  the  date  '  1566.'  In  respect  of 
execution  it  is  of  a  medium  quality;  the  or- 
namentation is  but  slight,  and  the  writing  just 
mediocre.  There  are  two  changes  of  hand ; 
in  the  first  hand  all  the  sermons  are  written 
except  those  for  the  Ferial  gospels,  the  first 
portion  of  which  is  written  in  the  second,  and 
the  remainder  in  the  third  hand.  The  first  hand 
seems  to  be  late  fourteenth  century ;  the  third 
I  should  judge  to  be  some  fifty  years  later.  So 
far  as  my  examination  extended,  this  appeared 
to  be  a  good  and  serviceable  MS. 

In  this  MS.,  which  is  unfortunately  much 
mutilated,  the  sermons  are  arranged  in  a 
peculiar  order,  those  for  the  Sunday  gospels 
and  epistles  being  intermixed,  while  the  Pro- 
prium  Sanctorum  precedes  instead  of  following 
the  Commune.  It  is  a  good-sized  quarto,  writ- 
ten on  coarse  parchment  in  a  large  bold  hand, 
and  veiy  little  ornamented.  From  the  forms  of 
the  words  ('schal,'  'gode,'  '  pynyd,'  &c.,  instead 
of '  shal,'  '  good,'  '  p}Tied,')  it  seems  to  be  rather 
more  ancient  than  Bodl.  788.  Its  readings  are 
often  different  from,  and  not  unfrequently  superior 
to,  those  of  Bodl.  788  ;  between  which  and  itself 
there  is  no  more  connexion  or  resemblance  than 
must  subsist  between  two  MSS.  of  the  same 
work,  both  good  of  their  kind ; — each  must  be 
regarded  as  an  independent  authority.  It  is 
this  quality  of  its  readings  which  makes  this 
MS.,  for  collating  purposes,  one  of  the  utmost 
value.  Not  that  it  deserves  to  be  ranked  on 
the  whole  above  Bodl.  788;  not  to  speak  of  its 
mutilations,  it  is  disfigured  by  a  far  greater 
number  of  carelessnesses,  omissions,  and  other 
blunders  than  its  rival.     For  it  must  be  remem- 


INTRODUCTION, 


XIX 


Title  of  MS. 


Distinguishing 
Letter. 


Baroness 
North. 


Bib.  Reg.  18. 
B.  ix. 


G. 


St.  John's  Coll. 
Camb.  C.  8. 


Cotton.  Claud. 
D.  VIII. 


Wrest  Park, 
32- 

Trin.  Coll. 
Camb.  B.  2.17. 


H. 


K. 


Description. 


bered,  that  since  Bodl,  788  has  been  adopted  as 
the  basis  of  the  printed  text,  every  necessary  cor- 
rection of  it  for  which  support  is  found  in  any 
other  MS.  appears  at  the  foot  of  the  page,  while 
the  more  numerous  and  more  glaring  errors  of 
other  MSS.  are  passed  over  suh  silenlio. 

A  MS.  of  medium  quality,  in  the  possession  of 
Colonel  North,  containing  only  the  sermons  on 
the  Sunday  gospels.  From  the  forms  of  the 
words,  it  appears  to  be  intermediate  in  point 
of  date  between  the  complete  copies  already 
described  and  Laud,  314. 

This  MS.  is  in  the  British  Museum.  It  is  a  good 
and  carefully  written  text,  having  the  sermons 
for  the  Sunday  and  Ferial  gospels,  and  the  Sun- 
day epistles,  arranged  in  order  of  the  season, 
commencing  with  Advent  Sunday  ;  then  follow 
the  sermons  for  the  Commune  and  Proprium 
Sanctorum.  So  far  as  I  have  been  able  to  col- 
late it,  its  readings  differ  little  from  those  of 
BodL  788.  The  sermons  in  the  last  division 
appear  to  be  defective,  —  twenty-eight  only, 
against  thirty-eight  in  Bodl.  788. 

The  arrangement  of  the  sermons  in  this  MS., 
which  is  very  imperfect,  at  least  fifty-five  ser- 
mons being  wanting,  is  the  same  as  that  in  G, 
of  which  I  believe  it  to  be  a  copy. 

This  is  a  good  MS.,  but  imperfect  at  the  beginning. 
The  arrangement  is  nearly  the  same  as  that  of 
the  Douce  MS.  All  the  first  portion  of  the 
volume  containing  it  consists  of  a  noble  and 
apparently  perfect  copy  of  the  '  Statutes, 
Charters,  and  Customs'  of  the  university  of 
Oxford. 

This  is  a  low  class  MS.,  somewhat  dilapidated,  in 
a  hand  of  about  the  middle  of  the  fifteenth 
century.  It  is  inferior  in  every  respect  to  the 
MS.  at  Wrest  Park  (D)  already  described, 

A  handsome  folio,  moderately  ornamented.  It  is 
of  the  same  class  as  Bodl.  788,  the  arrangement 
of  which  it  exactly  follows,  down  to  the  end  of 
the  Ferial  sermons ;  the  Epistle  sermons  are 
wanting.  I  think  it  is  somewhat  later  than 
Bodl.  788,  but  my  examination  of  it  was  not 

C  2 


XX 


INTRODUCTION. 


Title  of  MS. 


Distinguishing 
Letter, 


Wrest  Park, 
38. 


Trin.  Coll. 
Camb.  B.  4. 20. 

Sidn.  Suss.  Coll. 
Camb.  A.  4.12. 


Trin.  Coll. 
Camb. B.  14.38. 

Harl.  1730. 


New  Coll. 
Oxford,  95. 


C.  C.  C.  Camb. 
336. 


M. 


N. 


O. 


P. 


R. 


Si.  John's  Coll. 
Camb.  G.  22. 


Description. 


long  or  searching  enough  to  enable  me  to  speak 
positively. 

This  is  a  still  commoner  and  poorer  copy  than  J ; 
also  decidedly  of  later  date.  Its  contents  cor- 
respond to  those  of  K;  i.e.  it  has  all  the  ser- 
mons except  those  on  the  epistles. 

This  is  a  copy,  poorly  executed,  and  exhibiting 
several  serious  lacunae,  of  all  the  seiTnons  except 
those  on  the  Ferial  gospels.  The  arrangement 
nearly  corresponds  to  that  of  Bodl.  788. 

This  is  the  remarkable  MS.  above  referred  to 
(p.  xiv).  It  is  in  a  rude  handwriting,  and 
upon  coarse  parchment,  and  conveys  the  im- 
pression of  having  been  prepared  by  some  poor 
parish  priest  for  his  own  use. 

A  small  volume,  containing  only  the  sermons  on 
the  Sunday  epistles ;  the  hand  is  rough  and 
difficult,  and  not  of  an  early  date. 

One  of  the  Harleian  MSS.  in  the  British  Museum, 
containing  only  the  Epistle  sermons,  and  ending 
defective  in  the  sermon  for  the  twenty-second 
Sunday  after  Trinity.  So  far  as  a  brief  exami- 
nation enables  me  to  speak,  it  appeared  to  be 
of  no  special  value. 

This  MS.  contains,  besides  a  complete  set  of  the 
sermons  on  the  Ferial  gospels,  seven  sermons 
on  gospels  belonging  to  the  '  Proprium  de  Tem- 
pore,' but  included  by  Wyclif  under  the  head  of 
Proprium  Sanctorum.  (See  p.  295.)  It  also  has 
one  of  the  Sunday  semions,  No.  XXXI.  The 
handwriting  is  of  the  first  half  of  the  fifteenth 
century. 

This  MS.  (wrongly  described  in  Dr.  Shirley's 
Catalogue)  contains  the  sermons  for  the  Com- 
mune Sanctorum,  and  most  of  those  for  the 
Proprium  Sanctorum  and  the  Ferial  gospels. 
My  examination  of  it  was  too  hurried  to  permit 
of  my  forming  a  definite  opinion  as  to  its  merits. 

This  is  the  MS.  containing  the  homilies  criticised 
on  p.  iii.  Besides  these  it  contains  a  poor 
and  late  copy,  much  mutilated,  of  the  sennons 
for  the  Sundays  from  Advent  to  Trinity. 


INTRODUC  TION.  xxi 

The  MS.  Bodl.  788  has,  as  has  been  ah-eady  stated,  been  adopted 
as  the  foundation  of  the  text  of  the  present  edition, — being  ab- 
solutely complete,  singularly  accurate,  and  probably  older  than,  or 
equally  old  with,  any  of  the  others,  except  perhaps  Douce  321. 
The  arrangement  of  its  contents  has  been  adhered  to  in  the  printing, 
except  that,  in  order  not  to  break  the  series  of  sermons,  the  tracts 
Vae  Octupkx  and  Of  Mynystris  in  the  Chirche  (Nos.  4  and  5  of 
Shirley)  which  follow  in  the  IMS.,  one  the  Sunday  gospel  sermons, 
the  other  those  for  the  Proprium  Sanctorum,  are  reserved  for  the 
third  volume.  The  orthography  of  the  MS.  is  almost  exactly  repro- 
duced, the  characters  \  and  5  being  retained  throughout.  The  only 
deviations  permitted  are  these :  v  is  freely  employed  in  the  printing 
in  place  of  u  in  the  MS.,  wherever  the  sound  appears  to  require  it, 
because  it  is  manifest  that,  except  at  the  beginnings  of  words,  the 
scribe  employed  the  same  characters  for  both  sounds.  He  wrote 
loue,  but  it  would  be  absurd  to  doubt  that  he  pronounced  love. 
Again,  the  character  i  is  used  in  the  MS.  both  for  that  sound  and 
for  the  sound  ofy'/  it  is  always  hist,  iniuri'e,  &c.,  instead  o^  just, 
injurie ;  I  have  therefore  printed  j  instead  of  i  wherever  the  sound 
seemed  to  require  it. 

Like  most  of  its  class,  the  MS.  Bodl.  788  contains  the  bare  words 
of  each  sermon,  and  nothing  more ;  there  are  no  capital  letters,  no 
division  into  paragraphs,  no  punctuation.  Passages  quoted  from 
Scripture  are  underlined  with  red  ink.  The  editor  is  responsible  for 
supplying  the  above-named  defects,  as  well  as  for  marginal  analyses, 
biblical  references,  and  the  verse  of  the  chapter  from  which  each  text 
is  taken. 

Of  the  transcript  of  the  MS.  the  first  part,  down  to  p.  197,  was 
made  by  the  Rev.  W.  F.  Cornish,  of  Lincoln  College,  the  remainder 
by  Mr.  William  Sorell ;  to  both  these  gentlemen  I  am  much  indebted 
for  the  general  fidelity  and  accuracy  with  which  they  performed  their 
work. 

In  conclusion,  I  have  much  pleasure  in  taking  this  opportunity 
of    returning    sincere     thanks    to    those    whose    assistance    I    have 


xxii  INTRODUCTION. 

benefited  by  in  preparing  the  present  volumes ; — to  Professor  Stubbs, 
of  whose  valuable  aid  I  have  already  spoken;  to  the  Rev.  H.  O.  Coxe, 
Bodley's  Librarian ;  the  Rev.  J.  Mayor,  the  late,  and  Mr.  Bradshaw, 
the  present,  Librarian  of  the  Cambridge  University  Library;  to 
Professor  Dunne,  of  the  Irish  Catholic  University,  who  kindly 
examined  for  me  some  MSS.  in  the  Library  of  Trinity  College, 
Dublin ;  to  Mr.  Bond,  custodian  of  the  MSS.  at  the  British  Museum ; 
to  the  Rev.  W.  Macray,  of  the  Bodleian  Library ;  lastly,  to  Mr.  Cald- 
well, Fellow  of  Corpus  Christi  College,  Cambridge,  and  the  Rev. 
J.  J.  Perowne,  Fellow  of  the  same  College. 

A  complete  Glossary  will  be  subjoined  to  the  last  volume  of  the 
EngUsh  works. 

T.  ARNOLD. 


Oxford,  October,  1868. 


CONTENTS. 


EVANGELIA  DOMINICALIA. 

SERMON  piy.st  Sunday  after  Trinity.  page 

I.  Homo  quidam  erat  dives.     Luke  xvi.  19 i 

Second  Sunday  after  Trinity. 

II.  Homo  quidam  fecit  coenam  magnam.     Luke  xiv.  i6.    .         .         3 

Third  Sunday  after  Trinity. 
II L      Accesserunt  ad  Jesum  publicani  et  peccatores.     Luke  xv.  i.         7 

Fourth  Sunday  after  Trinity. 

IV.  Estote  misericordes.    Luke  vi.  36. 9 

Fifth  Sunday  after  Trinity. 

V.  Cum  turbae  irruerunt  ad  Jesum.     Luke  v.  i.         .        .        .       12 

Sixth  Sunday  after  Trinity. 

VI.  Nisi   habundaverit  justitia  vestra    plus   quam   Pharisaeorum. 

Matt.  V.  20,       .         .         .         .         .         .         ...         .14 

Seventh  Sunday  after  Trinity. 

VII.  Cum  turba  multa  esset  cum  Jesu,  nee  haberent  quod  man- 

ducarent.     Mark  viii.  i. 17 

Eighth  Sunday  after  Trinity. 

VIII.  Attendite  a  falsis  prophetis.     Matt.  vii.  15 19 

Ninth  Sunday  after  Trinity. 

IX.  Homo  quidam  erat  dives  et  habebat  villicum.     Luke  xvi.  i.  .     22 

Tenth  Sunday  after  Trinity. 

X.  Cum    appropinquaret    Jesus    Hierusalem    videns    civitatem. 

Luke  xix.  41 24 

Ele'venth  Sunday  after  Trinity. 

XI.  Dixit  Jesus  ad  quosdam  qui  confidebant  tanquam  justi. 

Luke  xviii.  9 27 


XXIV 


CONTENTS, 


SERMON  Tivelfth  Sunday  after  Trinity.  ^^^^ 

XII.  Exiens  Jesus  de  finibus  Tyri.     Mark  vii.  31.  .         .29 

Thirteenth  Sunday  after  Trinity. 

XIII.  Beati  oculi  qui  vident  quae  vos  videtis.     Luke  x.  23.     .       31 

Fourteenth  Sunday  after  Trinity. 

XIV.  Cum  iret  Jesus  in  Jerusalem,  transibat.     Luke  xvii.  11.         34 

Fifteenth  Sunday  after  Trinity. 

XV.  Nemo  potest  duobus  dominis  servire.     Matt.  vi.  24.      .       36 

Sixteenth  Sunday  after  Trinity. 

XVI.  Ibat  Jesus  in  civitatem  quae  vocata  Naym.  Luke  \\\.  11.       38 

Senjenteenth  Sunday  after  Trinity. 

XVII.  Cum  intrasset  Jesus  domum  cujusdam.     Luke  xiv.  i.      .       41 

Eighteenth  Sunday  after  Trinity. 

XVIII.  Accesserunt  ad  Jesum  Pharisei  audientes.     Matt.  xxii.  34.       43 

Nineteenth  Sunday  after  Trinity. 

XIX.  Ascendens  Jesus  in  naviculam.     Matt.  ix.  i.  .         .         .       46 

Tiventieth  Sunday  after  Trinity. 

XX.  Loquebatur  Jesus  cum  discipulis.     Matt.  xxii.  i.     .         .       48 

Tnventy-frst  Sunday  after  Trinity. 

XXI.  Erat  quidam  regulus.     John  iv.  46.  .         .         .         .       51 

T<iventy -second  Sunday  after  Trinity. 

XXII.  Simile  est  regnum  coelorum  homini.     Matt,  xviii.  23.    .       54 

Tnventy-third  Sunday  after  Trinity. 

XXIII.  Abeuntes  Pharisaei.     Matt.  xxii.  15 5^ 

Taventy-fourth  Sunday  after  Trinity. 

XXIV.  Loquente  Jesu  ad  turbas,  ecce  princeps.     Matt.  ix.  18.        59 

Taventy-ffth  Sunday  after  Trinity. 

XXV.  Cum  sublevasset  oculos  Jesus.     John  vi.  5.      .         .         .       62 

First  Sunday  in  Ad-vent. 

XXVI.  Cum  appropinquasset  Jesus  Jerosolumis.     Matt.  xxi.  i.  .       65 

Second  Sunday  in  Ad-vent. 

XXVII.  Erunt  signa  in  sole.     Luke  xxi.  25.  .         .         .         .       68 

Third  Sunday  in  Ad'vent. 

XXVIII.  Cum  audiisset  Joannes  in  vinculis.     Matt.  xi.  2.    .         .       71 


CONTENTS. 


XXV 


SERMON 

XXIX. 

XXX. 

XXXI. 

XXXII. 

XXXIII. 

XXXIV. 

XXXV. 

XXXVI. 


XXXVII. 


XXXVIII. 

XXXIX. 

XL. 

XLI. 

XLII. 

XLIII. 

XLIV. 


Fourth  Sunday  in  Ad'vent.  pack 

Miserunt  Judaci  ab  Jcrosolumis.     John  i.  19.         .         .       74 

Sunday  ^vithin  Octa've  of  the  Epiphany. 
Vidit  Johannes  Jesum  venientem  ad  se.     John  i.  29.         77 

Octa've  of  the  Epiphany. 
Venit  Jesus  Galilea.     Matt.  iii.  13 80 

First  Sunday  after  the  Octa've. 
Cum  factus  esset  Jesus.     Luke  ii.  42.  .         .         .       83 

Second  Sunday  after  the  Octa've. 
Nuptiae  factae  sunt  in  Cana  Galileae.     John  ii.  i.      .       86 

Third  SuJiday  after  the  Octa've. 
Cum  descendisset  Jesus  de  monte.     Matt.  viii.  i.       .       89 

Fourth  Sunday  after  the  Octa've. 
Ascendente  Jesu  in  naviculam.     Matt.  viii.  23,  .92 

Fifth  Sunday  after  the  Octa've. 
Simile     est    regnum    coelorum    homini     qui    seminavit. 
Matt.  xiii.  24.  .......       95 

Septuagesima  Sunday. 
Simile    est     regnum     coelorum     homini     patrifamilias. 

Matt.  XX.  I.  .......       98 

Sexagesima  Sunday. 
Cum  turba  plurima.     Luke  viii.  4 102 


Quinquagesima  Sunday. 
Assumpsit  Jesus  duodecim  discipulos. 


Luke  xviii.  31.     106 


First  Sunday  in  Lent. 
Ductus  est  Jesus  in  desertum.     Matt.  iv.  i.        .         .109 

Second  Sunday  in  Lent. 
Egressus  Jesus  secessit  in  partes  Tyri.     Matt.  xv.  21.     113 

Third  Sunday  in  Lent. 
Erat  Jesus  ejiciens  demonium.     Luke  xi.  14.        .         .116 

Fourth  Sunday  in  Lent. 
Abiit  Jesus  trans  mare.     John  vi.  i.  .         .         .120 

Fifth  Sunday  in  Lent. 
Qiiis  ex  vobis  arguet.     John  viii.  46 124 


xxvi  CONTENTS. 

SERMON  pai^  Sunday.  pace 

XLV.         Altera  autem  die  quae  est  post  parasceven.  Matt,  xxvii.  62.     128 

Easter  Day. 
XL VI.      Maria  Magdalene.    Matt,  xxviii.  i.  .        .        .        .131 

First  Sunday  after  Easter. 
XLVII.     Cum  esset  sero  die  una.    John  xx.  19.  .        .        .134 

Second  Sunday  after  Easter. 
XLVII  I.   Ego  sum  pastor  bonus.     John  x.  11.  .         .         .         .138 

Third  Sunday  after  Easter. 
XLIX.      Modicum  et  jam  non  videbitis  me.     John  xvi.  16.  .     141 

Fourth  Sunday  after  Easter. 
L.  Vado  ad  eum  qui  misit  me.    John  xvi.  5.         .        .        .144 

Fifth  Sunday  after  Easter. 
LI.  Amen,  Amen,  dico  vobis,  si  quid  petieritis.    John  xvi.  23.     148 

Sixth  Sunday  after  Easter. 
LI  I.  Cum  venerit  Paraclitus.     John  xv.  26 151 

Whit  Sunday. 
LIII.  Si  quis  diligit  me.     John  xiv.  23 155 

Trinity  Sunday. 
LIV.  Erat  homo  ex  Phariseeis  Nychodeme.    John  iii.  i.  .     158 


COMMUNE    SANCTORUM. 

Vigil  of  an  Apostle. 
LV.  Ego  sum  vitis  vera.   John  xv.  i. 165 

Common  of  an  Apostle. 
LVI.  Hoc  est  preceptum  meum.    John  xv.  12.  .        .        .168 

The  same. 
LVI  I.        Haec  mando  vobis.    John  xv.  17.      .         .        .        .        .172 

Common  of  an  Evangelist. 
LVI  1 1.      Designavit  Dominus  Jesus.     Luke  x.  i 175 

Common  of  one  Martyr. 
LIX.         Nisi  granum  frumenti.    John  xii.  24.  ....     179 

The  same. 
LX.  Si  quis  vult  venire  post  me.     Matt.  xvi.  24.      .         .         .182 


CONTENTS, 


XXV 11 


SERMON 

LXI. 

LXII. 

LXIII. 

LXIV. 

LXV. 

LXVI. 

LXVII. 

LXVIII. 

LXIX. 

LXX. 

LXXI. 

LXXII. 

LXXIII. 

LXXIV. 

LXXV. 

LXXVI. 

LXXVII. 


Common  of  one  Martyr. 
Qui  vos  audit,  me  audit.     Luke  x.  i6. 

The  same. 
Si  quis  venit  ad  me.     Luke  xiv.  26. 

The  same. 
Nihil  opertum  quod  non  reveletur.     Matt.  x.  26. 

Common  of  one  Martyr  and  Bishop. 
Circuibat  Jesus  civitates.     Matt.  ix.  35. 

Common  of  many  Martyrs. 
Elevatis  Jesus  oculis.     Luke  vi.  20. 


PAGE 

.  185 
.     189 

•  194 
.  197 
.     201 


Matt.  X.  23.     .     206 


The  same. 
Cum  persequentur  vos  in  una  civitate. 

The  same. 
Ponite  in  cordibus  vestris.     Luke  xxi.  14.        .        .        .209 

The  same. 
Descendens  Jesus  de  monte.     Luke  \\,  17.      .        .         .214 

The  same. 
Cum  audieritis  proelia.     Luke  xyA.  ^ 218 

The  same. 
Attendite  a  fermento  Pharisaeorum.     Luke  xii.  i.   .         .     222 

The  same. 
Sedente  Jesu  super  montem  Olyveti.     Matt.  xxiv.  3.      .     226 

The  same. 
Nolite  arbitrari.     Matt.  x.  34.  .         .         .         .         .     231 

The  same. 
Egressus  Jesus  de  templo.     Matt.  xxiv.  i.       .        .        .235 

The  same. 
Dicebat  Jesus  turbis  Judeorum.     Luke  xi.  29.  .         .239 

The  same. 
Egrediente  Jesu  de  templo.     Mark  xiii.  i.       .        .        .243 

Common  of  a  Confessor  and  Bishop. 
Vigilate  quia  nescitis  qua  hora.     Matt.  xxiv.  42.  .248 

The  same. 
Homo  quidam  peregre  proficiscens.   Matt.  xxv.  14.         .     252 


XXVI 11 


CONTENTS. 


SERMON 

LXXVIII. 

LXXIX. 

LXXX. 

LXXXI. 

LXXXII. 

LXXXIII. 

LXXXIV. 

LXXXV. 


Common  of  a  Confessor  and  Bishop.  vfi^on 

Homo  quidam  nobilis  abiit  in  regionem.  Luke  xix.  12.     257 

The  same. 
Videte,  et  vigilate,  et  orate.     Mark  xiii.  33.       .         .261 

Common  of  a  Confessor  and  Doctor. 
Vos  estis  sal  terre.     Matt.  v.  13 266 

Common  of  a  Confessor  and  Abbot. 
Nemo  accendit  lucernam.     Luke   xi.  33.     .         .         .271 

Common  of  many  Confessors, 
Sint  lumbi  vestri  praecincti.     Luke  xii.  35.  .         .     275 

The  same. 
Misit  Jesus  duodecim  discipulos.     Matt.  x.  5.    .         .     280 

Common  of  one  Virgin  and  Martyr. 
Simile  est  regnmn  coelorum  thesauro.   M^//.  xiii.  44.      284 

Common  of  a  Virgin  not  a  Martyr. 
Simile  est  regnum  coelorum  decern  virginibus. 

Matt.  XXV.  I.        .         .         .         .         .         .         .289 


PROPRIUM   SANCTORUM. 

Vigil  of  St.  Andrenv. 
LXXXVI.       Stabat  Johannes.     John  i.  29 295 

St.  Andreiv. 
LXXXVI  I.      Ambulans  Jesus  juxta  Mare  Galilee.    Matt.  iv.  18.     .     301 

Octa've  of  St.  Andre^u. 
LXXXVIII.    Postquam  autem  traditus  est  Johannes.    Mark  i.  14.       306 

Christmas  Eue. 
LXXXIX.       Cum  esset  desponsata.     Matt.  i.  18.  .         .         -311 

Christmas  Day. 
XC.  Exiit  edictum  a  Cesare  Augusto.     Luke  ii.  i.     .         .     316 

St.  Stephen's  Day. 
XCI.  Ecce,  ego  mitto  ad  vos  prophetas.    Matt,  xxiii.  34.  .     322 

St.  John  the  Evangelist's  Day. 
XGII.  Dixit  Jesus  Petro.     John  xxi.  15 325 


CONTENTS,  xxix 

SERMON  cj-^g  jjoiy  Innocents.  '"^^-'^ 

XCIII.        Angelus  domini  apparuit.     Matt.  ii.  13.  .         .         .327 

Sixth  day  after  Christmas. 
XCIV.         Erat  Joseph  et  Maria.     Luke  \\.  33 332 

Nenv  Tear^s  Day, 
XCV.  Postquam  consummati  sunt.     Luke  W.  21.         .         .         .335 

Figil  of  the  Epiphany. 
XGVI.        Defuncto  Herode.     Matt.  ii.  19.  .        .        .        .337 

The  Epiphany. 
XGVI  I,       Cum  natus  esset  Jesus.    Matt.  ii.  i 339 

The  Con'version  of  St.  Paul. 
XGVI  1 1.     Ecce  reliquimus  omnia.     Matt.  xix.  27.  .         .         .342 

Candlemas  Day. 
XGIX.        Postquam  impleti  sunt  dies.     Luke  ii.  22.         .         .         .     345 

St.  Peter's  Chair.     {Feb.  22.) 
C.  Venit  Jesus  in  partes  Gesarie.     Matt.yi\\.  13.  .         .     347 

St.  Matthias'  Day. 
GI.  Gonfiteor  tibi,  Pater,  Domine.     Matt.  xi.  25.  .         .     350 

Annunciation  of  the  Blessed  Virgin  Mary. 
Gil.  Missus  est  Angelus  Gabriel  a  Deo.     Luke  i.  26.     .         .     353 

St.  Philip  and  St.  James. 
cm.  Non  turbetur  cor  vestrum.    John  xiv.  i.  .         .         .357 

Ascension  Day. 
GIV.  Recumbentibus  undecem  discipulis.     Mark  xvi.  14.  .     360 

Vigil  of  St.  John  the  Baptist.     {Midsummer  E've.^ 
CV.  Fuit  in  diebus  Herodis.     Luke  i.  5.  .         .         .         .362 

St.  John  the  Baptist.     {Midsummer  Day.^ 
CVI.  Elizabeth  impletum  est  tempus  pariendi.   Luke  i.  57.       .     364 

Vigil  of  St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul. 
CVII.  Dixit  Jesus  Symoni  Petro.   John  xxi.  15.  .         .         .     366 

Octa've  of  St.  John  the  Baptist. 
CVIII.        Dixit  Zacarias.     Luke  \.  18 367 

Translation  of  St.  Martin.     {July  5.) 
CIX.  Nolite  timere,  pusillus  grex.     Luke  xii.  32.       .         .         .     370 


XXX 


CONTENTS. 


SERMON  Octa-ve  of  St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul.  page 

ex.  Jussit  Jesus  discipulos  ascendere  in  naviculam. 

Matt,  xiv.  22. 373 

Tbe  Seven  Brothers.     (July  lo.) 
CXI.  Loquente  Jesu  ad  turbas.     Matt.  xii.  46.         .         .        .     375 

St.  James. 
CXII.         Accessit  ad  Jesum.     Matt.  xx.  20.  .        .        .        .377 

Vigil  of  the  Assumption.     (^Aug.  14.) 
CXIII.        Loquente  Jesu  ad  turbas.    Luke  xi.  27.  ...     379 

Assumption  Day.     (^Aug.  15.) 
CXIV.         Intravit  Jesus  in  quoddam  castellum.    Luke  x.  38.  .     382 

St.  Bartholomeiv. 
CXV.  Facta  est  contentio  inter.     Luke  xxii.  24.        .        .        .385 

Beheading  of  St.  John  the  Baptist.     (^Aug.  29.) 
CXVI.        Misit  Herodes.     Mark  vi.  17. 387 

Nativity  of  the  Blessed  Virgin  Mary.     {Sept.  8.) 
CXVI  I.      Liber  generationis.    Matt.  i.  i 390 

Exaltation  of  the  Cross ^  or  ^  Holy  Rood  Day  in  harvest.'' 

{Sept.  14.) 
CXVIII.     Nunc  judicium  est  mundi.     John  xii.  31.  ...     392 

Vigil  of  St.  Mattheiu. 
CXIX.        Vidit  Jesus  publicanum.     Luke  v.  27 395 

St.  Matthew. 
CXX.  Cum  transiret  Jesus.     Matt.  ix.  9.  ....     397 

Michaelmas  Day. 
CXXI.        Accesserunt  discipuli  ad  Jesum.     Matt,  xviii.  i.       .         .     398 

Vigil  of  All  Saints.     {All  Halloa  Eve.) 
CXXII.      Respiciens  Jesus  in  discipulos.     Jo/^«  xvii.  11.  .         .     402 

All  Saints'   Day. 
CXXIII.     Videns  Jesus  turbas  ascendit.     Matt.  v.  1.       .         .         .     406 


EVANGELIA    DOMINICALIA. 


HERE    BIGYNNEX 


&E    SONEDAI    GOSPELIS, 


EXPOWNED  IN  PARTIE. 


pE    FIRSTE    SONEDAI    GOSPEL    AFTER    TrINITE    SONDAI. 

[SERMON     I.] 

Homo  quidam  erat  dives. — Luyk  xvi.  [19.] 

Crist  telli))  in  |?is  parable  how  richessis  ben  perilouse,  for 
li3tli  wole  a  riche  man  use  hem  unto  moche  lust.  A  parable 
is  a  word  of  stori,  )>at  bi  \2X  hydej?  a  spiritual  witt.  pe  stori 
telle]) ; — \fere  was  a  riche  man  jjat  disuside  his  richesse  in  pride 
and  in  glotonye,  for  he  was  cloJ?id  in  purpur  and  bise,  ))at  ben 
prescious  clojjes  bojje  rede  and  white ;  and  so  he  was  an 
ypocrite,  )>at  shewide  him  to  j)e  world  bo))e  austerne  and  dene, 
as  worldly  men  done.  And  over  |>is,  ech  daie  was  he  fedd 
shynyngly,  bo|)  for  shynyng  of  vessel  and  prescious  food,  and 
pere  was  a  pore  7nan  liynge  at  his  •^ate  pat  was  clepid  Lazarus, 
full  of  sore  biles  ;  and  he  wolde  be  fillid  by  crimimes  pat  felden  fro 
pe  riche  mannes  bord,  but  no  mail  ^af  him  hem^,  for  avarise  of 
))e  lord,  but  pe  houndis  of  pe  lord  comefi,  and  lickide  his  biles; 
and  ))is  signifiej?  compassioun  of  riche  mennes  servantis,  jiat 
})ey  have  of  pore  men ;  but  jjei  ben  lettid  to  helpe  hem.  And 
it  is  maad  by  Goddis  wille  pat  pis  begger  was  deed;  and  was 
born  by  aungelis  into  Abrahams  bo  sum ;  pis  riche  man  was  dede, 

^  This  additional  clause  is  found  in  the  Vulgate ;  '  et  nemo  illi  dabat.' 
WYCLIF.  B 


The  parable 
of  Dives  and 
Lazarus. 


r 


WFCLI  F'S 


but  not  solempnely  to  God,  a7id  he  was  buried  in  helle^,  in  token 
j)at  he  shulde  ever  dwelle  there.  Abrahames  bosum  is  clepid 
a  place  of  reste  |?at  holy  soulis  restiden  inne  bifore  Cristis 
ascensioun.  And  here  may  we  see  jjat  j?at  neij^er  riche  men  ne 
pore,  in  j^at  jjey  ben  sich,  be  blessid  in  hevene ;  sith  Abraham 
|)e  riche  man  toke  Lazarus  into  his  bosum ;  but  disuse  of 
richesses  and  impacience  of  pore  men  ben  dampned  of  Crist ; 
and  ellis  not  siche  men ;  and  J)ei  ben  not  preisid  of  Crist  but 
bi  contrarie  virtues.  ]>is  riche  man  lifte  up  hise  iyn  in  hise 
tur mentis  of  helle,  and  si'^  Ahrahame  a/erre,  and  Lazarus  in  his 
lappe ;  afid  he  criede,  Fader  Abraham,  have  ??iercy  on  me,  and 
sende  J?e  lazar  hidir,  wetynge  his  Jjmgres  eende  in  water  to  colde 
my  tonge,  for  Y  am  tormentid  in  pis  flawme.  pe  manner  of 
speche  of  holy  writt  is  to  undirstonde  by  names  of  bodi  ver- 
tues  of  j?e  soule,  |)at  dwellen  for  a  tyme  in  siche  bodies :  and 
so,  for  })is  riche  man  was  boostful  in  speche  and  likerous  in 
foode,  he  was  tormentid  in  vertu  of  his  tunge ;  and  ]?us  men 
in  weye  to  blis,  whanne  \€\  traveilen  in  sutil  and  medeful 
werkes,  |?ei  swagen  in  a  maner  J)e  peyne  of  dampned  men ; 
for  jjei  have  slakyng  of  })er  peyne  in  );at  ])at  J)ey  hopen  to  have 
fewer  felowis  in  helle,  to  be  peyned  wi]>  hem.  And  Abraha?n 
seide  tope  riche  man,  dampnyd,  Sone,  have  mynde  hoiv pou  haddist 
lust  in  this  lyfe,  and  Lazar  peyne,  and  perefore,  bi  rigt  jugement 
of  God,  he  is  now  confortid  and  pou  art  now  iurmeiitid;  for  he 
sufferide  peyne  paciently  and  J)Ou  toke  j?i  lusts  synfulli.  And 
sum  men  jjenken,  for  jjis  dampnid  riche  man  clepid  Abraham 
his  fadir,  and  Abraham  clepid  him  a5en  his  sone,  jjat  he  was 
an  Ebreu,  and  Abraham  was  his  fadir;  but  Abraham  answeride 
him,  bi  treu|?e  \2X  God  tolde  him,  J>at  pere  was  a  myche  void 
place  stab  lid  betivene  hem,  derke  and  unordy?iel,pat  lettid  dampned 
men  to  come  to  hem,  al  ^i/ pei  wolden,  or  hem  come  to  dampned 
men  :  for  |)ei  desiren  it  not,  and  5if  sum  seintis  coveiten  kyndely 
to  comferte  jjer  frendis,  ])ey  have  stronger  wille  to  confourme 
hem  to  Goddis  wille,  and  men  may  neijjer  falle  fro  hevene  to 
helle,  ne  flee  fro  helle  to  hevene  at  |)er  owne  wille.  But  pe 
riche  man  preied  Abraham  to  sende  Lazar  to  his  fadir  hous,  for 

»  '  Sepultus  est  in  inferno  : '  Vulg. 


SERMONS. 


he  hadde  fyve  brejjeren,  and  he  wolde  pai  pet  weren  warnid  to 
avienden  hem  of  her  lyf;  not  for  charite  |)at  men  dampned  in 
helle  have  to  lyvyng  men  or  ellis  to  dampned  men ;  for  as 
seintis  in  hevene  wanten  envye,  so  dampned  men  fallen  in 
charite ;  but  he  dredde  him  of  his  peyne  Jjat  he  shulde  have 
by  dampnyng  of  hise  bre))ren ;  for  he  assentide  to  hem  in  )>er 
wickide  lyf.  But  Abraha?n  seide  to  him  pat  pei  have  Moyses  and 
prophetis  in  jjer  bokes  jjat  }>ei  writen,  heere  pei  hem  spedely,  and 
kepe  ]>ei  Goddis  commandementis ;  and  pis  riche  dampned  man 
seide  to  Abraham,  Nay,  Fadir  Abraham,  but  if  ony  of  dede  men 
wende  to  hem  and  warne  hem,  pei  shal  do  peiiaunce,  and  flee  \^x 
dampnacioun.  But  Abraham  seide  a^en,  |)at  yf  pei  heeren  not 
Moyses  and  prophetis  pat  spaken  by  God,  pei  shall  not  trowe  to 
dede  men;  for  \tx  wordes  ben  of  lasse  evydence,  and  it  falli|> 
not  to  God  to  make  a  newe  lawe  and  newe  miraclis  for  ech 
man  j?at  shal  be  dampned,  as  Crist  wolde  not  come  doun  of 
J>e  crosse  to  conferme  the  fals  Jewis. 

In  a  ]>is  Gospel  may  preestis  telle  of  fals  pride  of  riche  men, 
and  of  lustful  lyf  of  my3ty  men  of  jjis  worlde,  and  of  longe 
peynes  of  helle,  and  joyful  blis  in  hevene,  and  J>us  lengjje  j?er 
sermoun  as  J>e  tyme  axi|).  And  marke  we  how  J)is  gospel  tellij) 
]jat  jjis  riche  man  was  not  dampned  for  extorsioun  or  wrong  \2X 
he  dide  to  his  nei^bore,  but  for  he  failide  in  werkes  of  mercy ; 
and  ]?us  shulde  we  warne  boj?  o  man  and  o]>er  how  sum  men 
shal  be  dampnyd  more  felly  for  raveyne,  and  sum  shal  be 
dampnyd  more  softly,  for  misusinge  of  Goddis  goodis. 


t?E   SECUNDE   SONDAI   GOSPEL   AFTER   TrYNYTE. 

[SERMON     II.] 

Homo  quidam  fecit  coenam  magnam. — Luc.  xiiii.  [16.] 

pis  gospel  movejj  men  bi  witt  of  a  parable  to  desire  spedely 
to  come  to  hevene.    We  shal  undirstonde  jjat  eche  worde  of 

»  The  language  of  this  concluding       to  publication  than  to  delivery  from 
paragraph  shows  that  these  homi-       the  pulpit, 
lies  were  written  rather  with  a  view 

B   2 


Directions  to 
preachers  how 
to  enlarge  on 
the  parable. 


The  parable 
of  the  bidden 
guests. 


WrC  L  I F'S 


Col.  iii,  II. 


Goddis  lawe  is  so|>,  al5ates  if  some  men  undirstonde  it  falsely ; 
for  so  ]>ey  undirstonden  God,  and  3it  ]>e\  maken  him  not  fals : 
and  so  pryve  undirstondinge  of  })is  holy  Gospel  is  al3ates  so]>, 
and  )?e  storye  boJ?e.  pe  Gospel  telli]>  J>at  pere  was  a  man  pat 
makide  a  greet  soper  and  clepide  pereto  many  men.  pis  man  is 
Jesus  Crist,  ]?at  is  bojje  God  and  man;  and  |>is  grete  soper 
is  the  grete  mangery  ])at  seintis  in  hevene  shall  eten  of  Goddis 
bord;  and  J)is  shall  ever  last  wijjout  irkyng  or  noye,  for  ^ere 
shal  nojjing  faile  j)at  seintis  wolen  desire.  And,  for  j)is  shal 
be  jje  laste  mete,  it  is  well  clepid  a  soper,  for  soper  is  ])e  laste 
mete  jjat  man  taki])  in  \t  daie.  And  for  foure  causis  it  is  a 
greet  soper,  for  )>e  Lord  is  grete  jjat  make)?  ]?is  soper,  so  Jjat  no 
man  but  he  may  make  siche  a  soper;  also  the  peeple  is  grete 
and  many  |>at  sitte)?  at  }>is  soper ;  also  Jje  mete  is  prescious  jjat 
\€\  soupen  wij?,  sij?  Crist  is  al  maner  of  mete  and  drynke,  |)at 
\t\  be  fed  \vij> ;  also  ))e  tyme  of  sittyng  at  })is  soper  is  wi|)Outen 
eende.  pis  lord  clepijj  many  to  |)is  soper ;  for  jjere  nys  no  man 
but  3if  he  longe  sum  weie  after  blise ;  for  ech  man  longi})  after 
good,  and  ]?e  last  good  «nd  best  in  which  oonly  man  shulde 
reste  is  blisse.  But  ])e  gospel  sei|)  jjat  many  men  ben  clepid, 
and  fewe  ben  chosen,  for  alle  men  \2X  God  3eve]7  desiryng  to 
blis  ben  clepide,  but  al  oonly  |)ese  ben  chosen,  \2X  lasten  in  love 
of  God  to  jjer  ending  day,  for  to  alle  siche  and  oonly  siche 
haj?  God  ordeyned  blisse.  And  he  sente  out  his  servawitis  in 
houre  of  pis  soper  to  seie  to  men  clepid  hereto  to  come,  for  now  alle 
pingis  ben  redy.  pe  hour  of  |)is  soper  is  tyme  of  jje  Incarnacion, 
for  in  J)at  tyme  was  heven  first  persid*,  and  men  sett  first  in 
hevene  wij?  Crist,  pis  servant  sent  out  is  the  manheed  of  Crist, 
wij)  hise  membris  )>at  here  lyveden  wij)  him,  as  Joon  Baptist  and 
oJ)er  apostlis  and  o]?er  trewe  servauntis.  Alle  |)ingis  were  redy ; 
for  the  Godhede  and  manhede  of  Crist  was  for  ])at  time  redy 
to  fede  seintes  in  hevene,  and  Crist,  as  Paul  sei);,  is  alle  jjingis 
in  alle  men  j)at  shal  be  savyd,  and  ri^t  so  his  lawe  is  |>e  first 
and  jje  laste  and  fully  ynou5,  after  which  shulde  be  noon  other 
lawe.  For  Anticristis  lawe,  cloutid  of  many,  is  full  of  errors, 
and  disseyvej?  many  men,  as  law  of  Sarasyns  and  of  |)ese  newe 

a  '  pierced  '  is  used  in  the  sense  of  penetrated,  or  forcibly  entered. 


SERMONS. 


ordris.  And  as  jje  gospel  seij?,  at  siche  ?nen  bygan  togiper  for  to 
excuse  hem;  for  al  )>ese  men  and  al  oonli  siche  jjat  tellen  more 
bi  siche  lawe  |)an  bi  Goddis  lawe  excusen  hem  to  come  j^e  ri3t 
weye  to  hevene.  And  as  |)ere  is  jjre  maner  of  synne,  so  j>re 
maner  men  excusiden  hem  fro  )>is  soper.  \te  first  seide  pal  he 
hadde  bow^l  a  toun  and  was  nedid  to  go  out  and  see  it;  and  )>is 
bitokene]?  proude  men,  |)at  for  worldly  lordship  wenden  out  fro 
}>e  weye  of  God,  and  occupien  her  wittes  about  worldely  hey- 
nesse;  and  for  })e  first  seide  jjat  )?is  was  nedeful,  ]?erefore  he 
preide  pe  lordis  ?Tiessanger  to  have  him  excusid.  pe  seconde  seide, 
bat  he  hadde  boici^t  fyve  yockis  of  oxen ^  and  he  wente  to  assay  hem, 
and  perefore  he  preide  him  to  have  him  excusid.  pes  fyve  yockis 
bitokenen  plente  of  worldely  goodis ;  for  traveil  and  foure  pro- 
fitis  |)at  comen  of  oxen ;  and  for  |jis  bisynesse  turne]?  rundely 
in  hemsilf  j^erefore  it  is  well  seide  Jjat  )?ere  ben  fyve  yockis. 
And  for  siche  worldely  men  ben  yockid  togijiere  wij?  jje  fend 
and  )?e  world,  J>erefore  the  gospel  clepij?  hem  yockis.  pe  pridde 
man  seide  jjat  he  hadde  wedded  a  wyf,  and  perefore  my^te  not  come. 
pis  |?ridde  bitokene]?  men  |>at  ben  overcomen  wij?  fleishly  synne, 
as  glotonye  and  lecherie ;  and  })es  men  more  beestly  excusen 
hem,  not  curteysly,  as  jjese  two  first  diden ;  but  seien  shortly, 
\z.y  may  not  come,  pe  first  two  men  excusiden  hem  by  ]?is,  |>at 
J)ey  wolen  be  lordly  to  distroye  Goddis  enemyes,  and  ]jei  wolen 
be  riche  to  helpe  pore  men ;  but  j^e  ]?ridde,  ])at  ha])  his  fleish 
as  his  wyf,  maister  of  his  soule,  is  an  uncurtais  fool ;  and  })ere- 
fore  he  answeride  ]?us.  pe  servaunt  turnide  ayn  and  tolde  his 
lord  pe  answer  e  of  pese  pre  men;  for  every  creature  sei]>  to  Crist 
fully  himsilf.  But  Jjc  lord  was  wroo}>  wi]?  excusacioun  of  ]>ese 
beden  foolis,  and  bad  his  servaunt  wende  out  into  stretis  of  Jje 
citee,  more  and  lasse,  and  brynge  into  J)is  feeste  })is  })re  maner 
of  men,  pore  feble  men,  pore  blynde  men,  and  pore  lame  men. 
pese  J)re  ben  Goddis  prisoneris,  \2X  bo})e  God  and  man  helpen 
wi])  almes.  And  it  semeth  Jjat  ])ese  and  noon  o])er  shal  come 
to  hevene,  for  who  shal  come  to  hevene  but  if  he  be  pore  in 
spirit ;  who  shal  come  to  heven  but  ^if  he  be  feble  in  spirit  and 
nedid  to  have  mercy ;  who  shall  come  to  hevene  but  3if  he  bi 
li5tned  of  his  blindnesse ;  and  who  shal  come  to  hevene,  but 
he  ]?at  halte})  now  hi5e  in  vertues  and  now  low  in  synnes } 


WFCLIF'S 


Directioni  to 
preachers. 


Certis  noon  but  ]?e  lord  of  )?is  feeste ;  and  to  siche  bodili  pore 
men  teche}>  ))is  gospel  men  to  do  her  almes  ;  for  we  shall 
sue  Crist,  ]?at  doi|)  specialy  his  greet  almes  to  jjese  )?re  men, 
and  of  jjese  ))re  maner  of  men  many  comen  to  heven.  But 
Goddis  servauntis  bo|>e  of  men  and  aungelis  seien  after  jjis 
secounde  maner  of  clepyng,  Lord,  it  is  done  as  poti  comandisi, 
and  ^it  pere  is  a  voide  place,  for  men  \2X  shulden  soupe  wi|>  }>ee; 
for  |)is  maner  of  clepyng  of  men  to  |>e  joie  of  hevene  fille|>  not 
hevene  of  men  J>at  God  ha))  ordeyned^  to  blis,  and  herfore  ]?e 
Lord  of  hevene  in  his  jjridde  clepyng,  Jiat  shal  be  -in  tyme  ny5 
))e  daie  of  dome,  biddep  his  servantis  go  out  into  weyes  and  htgges 
and  constreynen  men  to  entre  pat  my  hous  be  fillid.  For  now  in 
]je  laste  daies,  whan  preestis  ben  tumid  to  avarice,  stonys  shal 
crye  and  constreyne  preestis  jjat  maken  hem  a  privat  religioun 
as  an  hegge  and  ojjer  men  \2X  suen  hem  in  J)e  brode  weye  to 
helleward, — ])ese  stoonys,  \dX  ben  my3ty  men  in  jje  worlde,  shal 
constreyne  boj^e  preestis  and  peple  for  to  entre  into  hevene 
bi  holding  of  Goddis  lawe,  for  drede  of  takinge  of  her  goodis 
and  punishinge  of  her  bodies  shal  constreyne  hem  by  drede 
to  kepe  ])is  streyte  wey  to  hevene.  And  so  |>e  noumbre  of  men 
\2X  God  ha})  ordeyned  to  blisse  mut  nedis  be  fillid,  maugre 
Anticrist.  But  Crist  seip  to  his  Apostlis,  pat  noon  of  pe  firste 
men  pat  God  clepid  to  pe  mete  and  wolde  not  come  shal  taiste  his 
souper  in  ye  bhsse  of  hevene.  For  God  ha|)  ordeyned  whiche 
men  shal  be  saved  and  which  shal  be  dampned,  and  boj)  j)ese 
noumbres  mote  nede  be  fulfilled ;  and  lordis  for  her  profit 
moten  nedes  helpe  herto,  and  Anticristis  feynynge  mote  nedes 
be  knowun. 

Here  may  men  touche  of  alle  manere  of  synne,  and  specialy 
of  false  preestis,  traitors  to  God,  \2X  shulden  treuly  clepe  men 
to  blise  and  telle  hem  ye  wey  of  ))e  lawe  of  Crist,  and  make 
knowe  to  |)e  peple  the  cautelis  of  Anticrist. 


'  So  in  B ;  the  Bodleian  MS.  has  ordeyne);>. 


-^:-rK-:-^- 


SERMONS. 


7 


I^E   ^RIDDE   SONDAY    GOSPEL   AFTER    TrYNYTE   SONDAY. 

[SERMON     III.] 

Accesserimt  ad  Jesum publicayii  et peccatores. — Luc.  xv.  [i,] 

In  \\%  gospel  telli]?  Crist  two  parablis  of  comfort,  how  his 
peple  shal  be  saved  al3if  preestis  grutchen  jjere  a5en,  bo|?e  prelatis 
and  religiouse,  for  her  pryde  and  coveitise.  pe  story  of  })is 
Gospel  telli}>  how  puhlicanis  a7id  sinful  men  weren  comyng  to 
Jesus  to  here  his  lore ;  and  he  tretide  hem  graciously  as  a  good 
lord;  but  scribis  and  Phariseis  gruchiden  ayns  pis  and  blas- 
femiden  ayns  Crist,  and  seiden,  He  ete  wip  hem  unlawfully ;  and 
)7is  dede  may  figure  J>ingis  ]jat  falli]?  now,  sij?  prelatis,  as  scribis, 
and  religiouse,  as  Phariseis,  grutchen  a3ens  trewe  preestis, 
membris  of  Crist,  j?at  communen  wi]>  commounes  as  publicanis 
and  seculer  lordis,  as  sinful  men ;  and  seien  it  fallij?  not  to  hem 
to  knowe  Goddis  lawe.  For  jjei  seien  it  is  so  hey,  so  sutil 
and  so  holy,  j>at  al  oonly  scribis  and  Phariseis  shulden  speke 
of  |?is  lawe.  And  |)es  seculer  prelatis  may  wele  be  clepid 
scribis,  for  \€\  bo])e  more  and  lasse  writen  ))e  money  jjat  \€\ 
pilen  of  ))e  peple  more  bisily  j?an  Jiei  prynten  in  her  soulis  ))e 
knowyng  of  Goddis  lawe.  And  jies  religiouse  ben  Pharisees : 
for  Jjei  ben  divydid  fro  ]?e  comoun  maner  of  lyvynge  bi  hir 
rotun  rytys  as  Pharisees  weren.  pre  causis  j^ere  ben  whi  ]7is 
hevenly  leche  resseyvede  freely  ]?es  synful  men  and  eet  wi|? 
hem, — ffirst,  for  he  wolde  converte  hem  to  confusioun  of 
proude  prelatis  ])at  lettiden  \t  fredom  of  Goddis  lawes  to  have 
hir  cours ;  by  ]?is  shulden  \€\  mekely  knowe  \2X  heynes  of  state 
maki]>  not  a  man  evermore  beter  to  God.  pe  seconde  cause 
is,  \2.\  Crist  wolde  5yve  his  preestis  in  tyme  of  grace  lore  and 
ensample  to  do  wisely  so,  and  to  stonde  for  )je  fredom  of 
Goddis  lawe.  pe  )?ridde  cause  is, — for  Crist  wolde  she  we  his 
general  lordship  and  savynge  not  oonly  of  Jewis  but  of  he|)ene 
men  in  dyverse  statis.  pese  prelatis  wolden  fayn  jjat  all  Goddis 
lawe  were  hongynge  on  hem  for  to  spuyle  )?e  puple ;  for  ]?anne 


Prelates  and 
monks  arc 
compared  to 
the  Scribes 
and  Pharisees. 


8 


WFC  LI  F'S 


Exposition  of 
the  parables  of 
the  lost  sheep 
and  the  lost 
piece  of  money. 


Ps.  cxix.  176. 


wolde  jjei  telle  ])is  lawe,  and  put  j?ereto  fals  undirstbndinge,  as 
]>ei  my^ten  have  more  wynnynge  of  jje   puple.  —  ^  pe    first 
parable  stondij?  in  a  question  of  Crist;  he  axijj  which  man  of 
hem  hadde  an  hundrid  shepe  to  kepe,  and  he  were  nedid  to  save 
hem  ech  on,  and  he  hadde  lost  0071  of  he7n;  ne  wolde  he  not  leeve 
fourescore  and  iiyntene  in  a  sikir  deserte  and  go  and  seke  pis  lost 
sheep  til  pat  he  fond  it;  and  when  he  hadde  founden  it,  wolde  leien 
it  on  his  shuldris  wip  joie  and  whanne  he  comep  hoom,  he  clepep 
togidre  his  frendis  and  fiei-Sfboris,  and  seip  to  hem,  Be  ye  gladde 
and  panke  me,  for  Y  have  founde  yny  sheep  pat  was  perishid. 
Certis  V  seie  to  you  pat  pere  shal  be  joie  in  hevene  up07t  oon  synful 
man  pat  doip  penaunce,  ■^he  po   viore  pan  up07i  foure  score  and 
nyntene  ri-^t-wise  pat  have  710  nede  of  pe7iaunce.     pis  man  is  Jesus 
Crist  \2X  was  of  j)e  Jewis,  and  he  was  herty  and  wyse   and 
hadde   in  his  kepynge  |)e   aungelis  confirmed  in   hevene,  and 
wij)  hem  mankynde.     Nynty  and  nyne  bitokene))  jjes  aungelis, 
for  j>es  nyne  ordres  }>at  ben  knytted  in  Crist ;  and  }'is  00  she  ep 
is  mankynde,  |>at  acordi]?  more  to-gider  ))an  jiese  nyne  ordres 
of  aungels.     pis  00  sheep  |?at  was  lost  perishide  by  synne  of 
Adam,  as   })e  psalme  sei|?.     Hevene   is  clepid  disert  by  many 
enchesouns,  for  it  is  selde  visited  of  men,  jjat  slowly  comen 
j?idir,  and  it  is  not  tilid^  as  is  er)>e  here  \v\\  us,  and  it  is  florishid 
wij>  goostly  trees   \2X   evermore  ben   grene,   for  grenesse    in 
virtues  may  nevere  faile  in  hevene.     And  ))is  is  a  sykyr  place ; 
for  fendis  tempten  men  not  j)ere.     Crist  lefte  |)is  aungel  kynde 
dwellyng  in  hevene ;  for  Crist  toke  not  angels  kynde  but  toke 
here  mannis  kynde,  and  bi  his  greet  virtue  he  suffride  peyne 
as  ojjer  men  ])re    and    \x\\Xy  3eer,   and   brou3t    mankynde    to 
hevene,  and  bade  ]>e  aungelis  his  frendis,  and  man  next  him 
in  manhede,  rejoyeshe  hem  \\\\  him,  for  he  hadde  saved  man- 
kynde   \2X   was    perishide.      And  bi    |)is    aungels    in    hevene, 
mankynde,  and   feendis,  shulde   be   gladde  bi  resoun  ;   for  J)e 
more  \2X  ben  dampned  \q.  more   is  fendis  peyne,  and  j)us  is 
more  joie  in  hevene  of  J;is  00  sheep,  jjan   of  nyne  ordris  of 
aungels   \2X   neden   noo   penaunce,   for   J>ei    synneden    nevere. 
pis  o  sheep  \2X  is  mankynde  synede  for  J)e  more  parte,  and 

1  For  '  tilled  '  (?)  D  has  tylud;  C  tillid. 


SERMONS. 


was  quykid  bi  Crist,  })at  was  oon  wij?  his  bre{?eren ;  and  he, 
al3if  he  my3te  not  synnen,  suffride  peyne  for  his  sheep.  And 
more  joie  is  in  hevene  of  him  and  his  membris  })an  of  nyne 
ordris  of  angelis,  for  J)ei  ben  beter  and  lyveden  more  medefuUy 
as  trewe  kny^tis  of  God.  pe  seconde  parable  of  Crist  stondij) 
in  ))is,  |>at  a  wjyse  womman  pai  hadde  ten  dragmes,  yf  she  hadde 
lost  oon,  she  wolde  li'^tne  her  lanterne,  tiirne  up  hir  house  to  seke 
pis  lost  dragme,  and  whan  she  hadde  /ounden  it,  she  wolde  make 
joie  as  it  was  seid  bifore  of  him  |)at  lost  ))e  sheep.  —  IT  pis 
womman  is  Jesus  Crist,  wysdom  of  )7e  fadir ;  jjese  ten  dragmes 
ben  his  resonable  creaturis,  for  J)ei  ben  maid  alle  to  ymage  and 
licnesse  of  )je  Trinite.  pe  ten])e  dragme  )>at  was  lost  is  man- 
kynde,  ]je  lanterne  |>at  was  li3tid  is  })e  manhede  of  Crist,  jjc 
turning  up  of  ]?is  house  is  changinge  of  statis  )?at  ben  maid  in 
))is  world  by  manhede  of  Crist.  For  jje  angel  wolde  not  suffren 
Joon  to  knele  and  worshipe  him,  for  his  lord  was  Joones  bro|>ir, 
and  j?e  aungeHs  weren  hise  servauntis ;  and  so  many  |>ingis  of 
)?is  world  weren  tumid  up  so  down,  si]>  evry  parte  of  ]>is  worlde 
was  beterid  bi  Cristis  manhede. 

We  may  touche  in  J)is  gospel  what  spedij>  men  and  what 
)>ing  lettij)  men  for  to  be  saved,  for  men  mote  nede  do  penaunce 
in  berynge  of  jjis  sheep,  and  have  li^t  of  jjis  lanterne  for  to 
fynde  jjis  lost  dragme. 


pE  FOURhE  SONDAI  GOSPEL  AFTER  TrYNYTE. 

[SERMON      IV.] 

Estote  misericordes. — Luc.  vi.  [36.] 

pis  gospel  movej)  men  to  mercy  a^en  ]?e  ypocrisye  of  j>es 
false  Pharisees,  and  Crist  biddij>  first  generally  men  to  be 
merciful  as  your  fadir  is  merciful.  For  whanne  a  general 
word  is  seid  bi  himsilf,  it  shal  be  taken  for  )je  most  famous. 
pere  ben  many  fadris,  as  fadir  of  kynde,  and  fadir  of  lore,  but 
})e  mooste  propre  fadir  is  he  )>at  maki]?  men  of  nou3t,  for  he  is 
fadir  of  mennis  bodies,  and  fadir  of  her  soulis,  and  in  vertue 


Directions  to 
preachers. 


The  duty  of 
showing  mercy, 
and  the  sin  of 
rash  judgment. 


lO 


WFCLIF'  S 


!    The  clergy 
sellers  of 
grace. 


The  evils  of 
rash  judgment. 


of  him  worchen  all  o]?er  fadris.  And  ]?is  fadir  shulden  we  sue 
in  alle  our  werkes,  for  al3if  we  may  not  atteyne  to  jjis  fadir, 
nejjeles  |?o  dedis  ben  nou3tis  jjat  ben  not  ensaumplid  and 
wrou5t  by  ]jis  fadir.  pe  mercy  of  ]>is  fadir  can  we  not  telle 
fulli,  for  he  is  ]>q  mooste  worcher  jjat  may  be  in  ]?is  world,  and 
he  cannot  worche,  but  3if  he  medle  mercy,  for  he  wrou3t  by 
mercy  whan  he  made  }>is  worlde,  si]>  he  dide  good  to  angelis, 
and  makide  hem  perfit,  and  brou3te  hem  to  heyer  state  wi|)- 
outen  her  disert.  And  so  when  he  doi|?  good  to  eny  creature, 
he  makij)  it  perfit  of  his  pure  grace,  si]?  God  Almi3ty,  al  witty, 
and  al  godely,  cannot  worche  but  3if  he  worche  by  mercy. 
Be  we  Jjan  mercyful  for  goodnesse  of  God.  pe  lest  mercy  of 
men  is  among  clerkis :  ]?at  wolen  not  3yve  goodis  of  grace  but 
3if  |)ei  sillen  hem,  and  ]?erefore  ])is  synne  is  heresie  before  God, 
]je  most  and  jje  first  })at  parte)?  men  fro  God,  for  ]?ei  weyen  her 
wynnynges  more  |?an  })er  God.  And  herfore  all  |?at  we  done 
shulde  be  done  in  Goddis  name,  to  wirchip  of  oure  God,  and 
profit  of  his  church.  3he  3if  we  ben  holden  bo|)e  to  God  and 
man  by  resoun  of  dette  to  do  a  good  dede,  loke  )?at  ))is  reson 
be  first  hidde  in  our  |?ou3t,  and  so  no  man  may  excuse  him 
fro  werkes  of  mercy  as  no  man  may  wante  werkes  of  a  good 
wille,  for  ]?at  werke  is  )?e  first  and  heiest  in  man.  First  shulde 
a  man  have  mercy  of  himsilf,  and  mercy  of  his  modir,  ]?at  is 
Holy  Chirche;  and  Jian  ha]?  he  mercy  of  all  his  ende  kyn^-.  pe 
secound  word  of  Cnsi  /orbedij?  fool  jugemenl ;  and  resoun  of  ]?is 
stondi])  hereinne  ]?at  God  may  not  folily  juge  ony  man;  and 
so  as  oure  wille  ha}?  nede  to  be  clo]?id  wi]?  mercy,  so  oure 
undirstondinge  ha]?  nede  to  have  ri3t  jugement.  For  many 
men  wenen  to  be  merciful  to  ypocritis,  and  ]?ei  done  harm  to 
men  to  which  ]?ei  wenen  do  profit;  and  many  men  wenen 
to  juge  ]?er  bre]?eren,  and  3it  }?ei  jugen  falsely  and  cruely  of 
many ;  and  eche  man  shulde  tempere  sich  jugement  aftir 
God,  for  God  in  his  jugement  may  not  faile  for  resoun.  pe 
|?ridde  word  bidditj?  Cristen  men  beware  of  foly  dampnynge 
up  peyne  of  per  dampnacion ;  and  al  3if  ))is  seme]?  no  comoun 


■■'  ende  kyn.  There  is  no  difference 
of  reading  in  the  MSS.  The  phrase 
seems  to  mean  '  remoter  kindred,' 


as  '  ende-men  '  signifies  '  borderers ' 
in  Anglo-Saxon. 


SERMONS. 


II 


synne  among  men,  ne|?eles  al  maner  of  men  synnen  herynne ; 
and  prelatis,  ))at  dampnen  men  in  maner  of  j)er  cursyng.  And 
ofte  tymes  ]>ei  witen  not  how  |>ei  ben  to  God ;  and  by  reputa- 
cion  J)at  shulde  be  take  of  Goddis  lawe  )jes  men  done  well  as 
God  biddij)  hem  do.  Lordis  jugen  ofte  tymes  j?at  ojjer  men 
done  amys,  whan  j>ei  displesen  hem  in  J?ir  wronge  wille ;  as  we 
dampnen  Clement^  wi)?  his  fautours,  and  ))ei  dampnen  us,  and 
o  king  dampnijj  his  adversarie,  and  he  dampnij)  him  a5en,  and 
comounes  dampnen  proude  men  and  ojjers  to  be  ypocrites. 
And  comounly  foly  jugement  is  jjing  jjat  men  knowen  not,  for 
jjei  leden  not  jier  witt  after  Goddis  lawe,  for  j^ei  presumen  as  j?e 
fende  to  kunne  jjat  ]>ei  knowen  not. — ^  pe  fourjje  and  |>e  fif])e 
word  biddip  men/or-^yve  and  'T^yve  sum  maner  0/ goodts,  and  so  shal 
God  ravarde  hem.  And  not  al  oonly  God,  but  seintis  in  hevene, 
shal  rewarde  men,  after  jjat  j?ey  have  done  here  to  hem.  For  jjese 
fyve  dedisi  alargid  to  alle  men  mut  have  sum  men  seintis  in 
hevene.  And  jjese  seintis  shulen  reward  men  here  in  abound- 
ance  of  foure  ]>ingis ;  first,  jjei  shal  rewarde  men  in  a  good 
mesure,  for  seintis  in  hevene  done  beter  to  men  |>an  j^ei  diden 
to  hem  here  in  \\s  lyf ;  and  where  men  diden  scarsely  good  to 
jiir  brejjeren,  seintis  fillen  trewe  men  wi])  all  manere  of  goodis; 
and  |)is  fillyng  is  not  votde  but  sadly  replenchid'^,  and  at  \^  laste 
//  is  heepid  as  myche  as  it  wole  take.  And  siche  metyng  of 
corn,  of  mele,  or  ojjer  ]?ing,  wolde  be  preisid  among  men  fer 
}>e  largenesse  of  )>e  meter ;  and  J)is  J?ing  men  have  here  in  her 
bosum,  but  God  fillij?  jie  substance.  For  certis  in  sich  mesure 
as  men  mesuren  to  her  brejjeren  shal  it  be  mesurid  to  hem  bi 
jugement  of  God.  ^\i  })e  mesure  be  good,  ])ei  shal  have  good 
a3en,  and  5if  )>e  mesure  be  unjust,  |)ei  shal  have  peyne  a3en. 
And,  for  defaute  in  al  J)is  comij)  of  ypocrisye  of  prelatis,  ]>at 
shulden  teche  pleynly  Goddis  lawe  and  not  j?er  er|)ly  wynnynges, 
})erfore  sei|>  Crist  in  his  parable,  |>at  y/J>e  blyfide  lede  pe  blynde 
bope  fallen  inpe  dike.     But  for  Crist  shulde  be  oure  maister,  and 


^  After  dedis  D  inserts  aren.     A  and  C  agree  with  B. 
sadly  replenysched,  D. 


voydid  but 


*  This  allusion  fixes  the  date  of      which  latter  year  the  anti-pope  Cle- 
the  composition  of  these  Sermons  to       ment  VII  died, 
a  time  between  1378  and  1394,  in 


12 


WrC  L/F'S 


Directions. 


Peter  fishing 
in  the  Sea  of 
Galilee. 


we  shulden  not  strange  from  him,  we  shulden  leeve  |>es  ipocritis 
and  sue  ))e  lore  of  ])is  good  maister,  sij>  he  may  not  leve  treu]>e, 
ne  faile  in  teching  of  trujje.  And  j>us  shulden  men  ben  perfit, 
and  flei  the  rote  of  falshede.  And  j)es  prelatis  have  of  }>ere 
maistris  comounly  |?is  m2inere,  J>a/  J^ei  can  see  a  7?iot  in  hir  bro- 
per  eye,  but  a  beem  in  per  owen  iy  pe?ike  pei  not  oon.  For  ])ere 
witt  is  sett  to  spuyle  and  to  accuse,  and  not  for  to  helpe  hem 
ne  o)7er  men,  and  |)erefore  her  coveitise  blindij?  hem  Jjus  ;  but 
bi  lore  of  Crist  men  shulden  sei  to  hem,  Vpocrite,  cast  first pe 
beeme  out  o/pifi  owne  eye  and  pan  ?7iaist  pou  poke  beter  pe  mot  fro 
pi  bropir. 

Here  may  men  see  |?at  sugettis  shulden  blame  prelatis  whan 
]jey  seen  opynly  greet  defautes  in  hem,  as  defaute  of  Goddis 
lawe  in  keeping  and  teeching ;  for  jjis  is  a  beeme  bi  which  j>e 
fende  binde]?  his  hous  and  ]>t\  shulden  knowe  j^es  as  }jei  shulden 
fele  the  lore  jjereof. 


pE   FYFhE   SONDAI   GOSPEL   AFTER    TRINITE. 

[SERMON    v.] 

Cum  turbae  irruerunt  ad Jesum. — Luc.  v.  [i.] 

pE  story  of  )>is  gospel  teilij?  good  lore,  how  prelatis  shulden 
teche  folk  under  hem.  pe  story  is  pleyn,  how  Crist  stood  by  pe 
river  of  Genazerep,  and  fisher  is  comen  doun  to  waishe  perynne  per 
nettes  ;  and  Crist  wente  up  into  a  boot  pat  was  Symonis,  and  preiede 
him  to  move  it  a  litel  fro  pe  lond,  and  he  sate  and  tau^te  the  peple 
out  of  the  boot.  And  whanne  Crist  ceesside  to  speke,  he  seide  to 
Symoun,  Lede  pe  boot  into  pe  hey  see,  and  late  out  your  nettis  to 
takyng  of  fishe.  And  Simoun  answerynge  seid  to  him,  Comand- 
our,  al  pe  ny^t  traveilinge  token  we  nou^t ;  but  in  pi  word  shal 
Ylosepe  nett.  And  whan  pei  hadden  done  pis,  pei  token  a  plentenouse 
multitude  of  fishe,  and  per  nett  was  broken.  But  pei  bekeneden  to 
per  felowis  pat  weren  in  pe  toper  boot,  to  come  and  helpe  hem;  and 
pei  comen  and  filliden  bop  botes  of  fishe,  so  pat  wel  ny^  were  pei 
bope  dreynt.     And  whanne  Petre  hadde  seen  pis  wounder,  he  fell 


SERMONS, 


13 


om. 


dowi  to  Jesus  kftee,  and  seide,  Lord^  go  fro  ine  for  V  am  a  syymful 
7nan.     For  Petre  held  him  not  worj)i  to'  be  wi})  Crist,  ne  dvvelle 
in  his  cumpanye :  for  woiindir  came  to  hem  alle  in  takynge  of  pes 
fishes.     And  so  woimdride^i  fames  and  foon,  Zebedes  sones,  pat 
weren  Sy??iojidis  felowis.     And  fesus  seide  to  Sy mound,  Fro  pis 
tyme  shalt  pou  be  takynge  mefi.      And  pei  seiten  per  bootis  to  pe 
londe,  and  forsook  at  pat  pei  hadden,  and  sueden  Crist. — H  Byfore 
we  go  to  spiritual  undirstonding  of  })is  gospel,  we  shal  wyte  )>at 
Jje  same  Cristis  disciple  J^at  was  first  clepid  Symoun,  was  clepid 
Petre  after  of  Crist,  for  sadnesse  of  bileve  jjat  he  toke  of  Crist, 
which  Crist  is  a  corner  stoon,  and  groundi]?  al  treu|>e.     Over 
|)is  we  shal  undirstonde  )>at  ))e  apostlis  were  clepid  of  Crist  in 
many  degrees ;  first  \€\  weren  clepid  and  acceptid  to  be  Cristis 
disciplis ;  and  yet  \€\  turneden  a3en,  as  Crist  himsilf  ordeynede, 
to  lyve  in  j>e  world.     After  |>ei  were  clepid  to  see  Cristis  myra- 
clis,  and  to  be   more  homely  wi})  him   })an   \t\  weren  before ; 
but  yet  ))ei  turneden  a^en  to  \q  worlde  by  tymes,  and  lyveden 
worldely  lyf,  to  profit  of  folk  |?at  )?ei  dwelten  wi}?.     And  on  ))is 
wyse   Petre  James    and  Joon   wenten    now   to   fishe.     But   j)e 
)?ridde  clepyng  and  ))e  moost  was  jjis, — )>at  jje  Apostlis  for- 
soken  holly  j^e  world  and  worldly  jjingis,  and  turneden  not  a3en 
to  worldly  lyf,  as  after  |)is  miracle  Petre  and  his  felowis  sueden 
Crist  contynnely.     It  is  noo  nede  to  depe  us  in  ]>is  stori  more 
|>an   ))e  gospel   telli]>,  as   it  is  no   nede  to  bisie   us  what  hi^t 
Tobies  hound.     Hold  we  us  apaied  on  |)e  mesure  \2X  God  ha]? 
30vun  us,  and  dreeme  we  not  aboute  newe  pointes  jjat  jje  gospel 
leve)>,  for  )?is  is  a  synne  of  curiouste,  J^at  harmej?  more  |)an  pro- 
fitij).     pe  story  of  )?is  gospel  telli|>  us  goostly  witt,  bo]>  of  lyf  of 
))e  churche  and  medeful  werkis,  and  |)is  shulde  we  undirstonde, 
for  it  is  more  prescious.     Two  fishingis  \2X  Petre  fishide  bito- 
kenej)  two  takingis  of  men  unto  Cristis  religioun,  and  fro  \q 
fend   to   God.     In   |)is   first   fishinge   was   \q   nette  broken,  to 
tokne  jjat  many  men  ben  convertid,  and   after  breken  Cristis 
religioun ;   but  at   \t   seconde   fishinge,  after  Jje   resurrectioun, 
whan   ))e   nett  was   ful   of  many  grete  fishes,  was   not  |)e  nett 
broken,  as  j>e  gospel  sei]?;    for  J>at  bitokene))  seintis  J>at  God 
chesi|)  to  hevene.     And   so  J>ese   nettis   \2X  fisheris   fishen  wij? 

A. 


Degrees  of 
vocation  to  the 
apostleship. 


Tobit  vi.  I. 


Mystical  inter- 
pretation of 
the  gospel. 


14  ^  WYCLIF'S 

bitokene]?  Goddis  lawe,  in  whiche  virtues  and  treu}jes  ben 
knyttid ;  and  o)>er  propretees  of  nettis  tellen  propretes  of 
Goddis  lawe ;  and  voide  places  betweene  knottis  bitokenej?  lyf 
of  kynde,  \2X  men  ban  beside  vertiies.  And  foure  cardynale 
virtues  ben  figurid  bi  knittyng  of  Jje  nett.  pe  nett  is  brood 
in  |>e  bigynnyng,  and  after  streit  in  ende,  to  teche  j>at  men, 
when  })ei  ben  turned  first,  lyven  a  brood  worldely  lyf;  but 
afterward,  whan  jjei  ben  depid  in  Goddis  lawe,  |>ei  kepen  hem 
streitlyer  fro  synnes.  pese  fisheris  of  God  shulden  waishe  |)ere 
nettis  in  |)is  ryver,  for  Cristis  prechours  shulden  chevely^  tellen 
Goddis  lawe,  and  not  medle  wij?  mannis  lawe,  |)at  is  trobly 
water ;  for  mannis  lawe  conteyne)?  sharpe  stones  and  trees,  bi 
which  jie  nette  of  God  is  broken  and  fishis  wenden  out  to  J)e 
world.  And  |>is  bitokene]?  Genasare[)''^,  )?at  is,  an  wounderful 
bir)5e,  for  ]>e  birjje  by  whiche  a  man  is  borne  of  water  and  of 
)>e  Holy  Goost  is  myche  more  wounderful  {)an  mannis  kyndely 
bir])e.  Summe  nettis  ben  rotun,  sum  han  hoolis,  and  sum  ben 
unclene  for  defaute  of  waishing ;  and  ])us  on  }>ree  maneres 
faile])  jje  word  of  preching.  And  mater  of  ]?is  nett  and  brek- 
ynge  ]?ereof  3yven  men  greet  mater  to  speke  Goddis  word,  for 
vertues  and  vices  and  treujjis  of  \t  gospel  ben  mater  ynow 
to  preche  to  |>e  peple. 


pE   SiXTE   SONDAI   GOSPEL   AFTER   TrINITE. 

[SERMON     VI.] 

Nisi  habundaverii  justitia  vestra  plus  quant  Pharisaeorum. — 

Matt.  v.  [20.] 

It  is  seide  in  jie  nexte^  gospel  what  nettis  preestis  shulden 
have  for  to  drawe  men  fro  |je  see  of  }>is  worlde  to  ))e  drye  lond 
of  ))is  lyf.      pis  gospel  telli}>  of  |>e  devylis  nett,  in  which  he 

'  clenli,  B. 

*  Gennesaret  is  really  a  corrup-       appears  to  derive  it  from  the  Greek 
tion  of  the  older  name,  Chinnereth       yepv6.M  or  y^vfais. 
(Smith's   Diet.   Bible);    but  Wyclif  '^  «fx/^.  Meaning /i^  Ms/,  proximus. 


SERMONS. 


15 


fishij)   and    drawt    men  to    helle.       Cristis    nett    is    knytt    wij) 
ri3t-wisenesse  to  God  aboven  men,  to  creatures  binejje  men,  and 
to  aungels  in  o|>er  side  of  men ;  and  |)is  clepi})  God  fully  rijt- 
wisenesse,  and   feyned  falsely  ri3t-wisnesse  of  ypocritis  clepij) 
Crist  not  ri3t-wisnesse,  al3if  ypocritis  clepen  it  so,  but  of  scribis 
and  Pharisees,  }>at  is  to  seie,  unri3t-vvisnesse,  feyned  as  it  were 
ri3t-wisnesse,  of  scribis  and  Phariseis.     And  as  Crist  seij).  But 
yfyour  rii^t-wmiess  passe  a  point pe  feyned  ri'^t-wisnesse  of  scribis 
and  Phariseis^  y  shal  jievere  come  to  hevene.     We  may  undir- 
stonde  by  scribis  and  Phariseis  men  of  jje  fendis  chirche,  as  we 
diden  before ;   so  |)at   scribis  ben  clepid   seculer   prelatis,  and 
Phariseis  ben  clepid  |)ese  newe  religious,     pes  men  maken  hem 
a  ri3t-wisnesse  bi  hemsilf  as  \t\  maken  hem  a  lawe  of  Anticrist ; 
and  certis  j)is  law  may  Crist  never  conferme ;  and  so,  as  Poul 
sei)>,  j>es  Anticristis  disciplis  heyen  hem  over  Crist,  bo|>  over  his 
godhede  and  over  his  manhede.     For  ri3t-wisnesse  generaly  is 
fulfillinge  of  lawe,  and  so  fulfillinge  of  Goddis  lawe  is  verrei 
ri5t-wisnesse ;  and  fulfillinge  of  mannis  lawe  is  Anticristis  ri3t- 
wisnesse.     And  so  jjre  degrees  ben  in  |)e  law  of  scribis;   ])e 
first  and  |)e  moost  is  in  J)e  Popis  welle ;   and  as  men  of  \t 
worlde  seien,  J>ere  is  welle  of  ri]?t-wisnesse ;  but  jjei  gon  ofte 
biside  ))e  ri3t  for  jjer  roten  ground ;  \t\  tristen  on  ri3t  of  mannis 
lawe,  and  gone  ofte  biside  |)e  so]?e.    And  3it  jjei  excusen  j?is  fals 
lawe,  and  seien  it  mut  nede  juge  fals,  for  ellis  it  faillide  in  his 
cours,  and  ri3t  of  )>e  worlde  were  fordone.     But  j?ei  jjenken  not 
how  Crist  forsoke  to  juge  bi  mannis  lawe,  teching  jjat  eche  juge- 
ment  ]?at  is  not  done  by  Goddis  lawe,  is  jugement  of  |?e  fend, 
and  we  witen  not  where  it  be  ri3t.     And  \2X  man  is  a  fool  |?at 
jugij)  after  ony  law,  and  woot  not  whe])ir  he  juge  bi  God,  or 
ellis  by  jugement  of  )>e  fend ;  and  3if  men  avysiden  hem  on  ]?is 
resoun,  noone  shulde  juge  bi  mannis  lawe.     And  )>is  fals  031 
is  more  feyned  in  consistorie  law  and  in  chapitre  lawe.     For 
algatis  ))ei  supposen  ]?at  witnesse  may  not  faile,  or  ellis  |)e  juge 
may  not  faile  ]?at  jugi]?  after  fals  witnesse ;   and  of  |)is  roten 
blasfemye  come)?  many  fals  jugementis.     Juge  we  bi  03!  con- 
science \2X  God  tellijj  or  specifiej)  and  leve  we  mannis  jugement, 
and  suffre  we  fewe  wrongis  J>at  faile,  for  mo  wrongis  shulen  be 
don  for  foli  of  mannis  dome,     pe  ri3t  of  \t  Phariseis  buriounej? 


Prelates  and 
friars,  like  the 
Scribes  and 
Pharisees, 
make  for  them- 
selves a  new 
righteousness 
and  a  new  law, 
which  Christ 
will  not 
confirm. 

2  Thess.  ii.  4. 


Consistory  law. 


i6 


WVCLIF'S 


Matt.  V.  22. 


I  Kin.  xviii.  27. 


I  John  iii.  15. 


to  harme  of  ]>e  Chirche,  not  oonly  among  hemsilf,  ])at  holden 
al  ]7ing  wel  done  Jjat  is  done  bi  jjer  ordre,  al3if  it  be  a  foly  feyned 
by  mannis  witt,  but  how  ever  J?ei  may  gete  good  bi  coloure  of 
]>is  feyned  ordre,  jjei  clepen  it  hey  ri^t-wisnenesse.  For  ]>q 
ground  good  and  holy  triste  we  to  Cristis  religioun,  for  ))at  is 
beter  j)an  jjes  newe;  for  ellis  we  comen  not  to  hevene,  but 
shulen  be  dampned  wij?  ypocritis.  And  witt  of  ))ese  scribis  is 
so  myche  sett  in  worldely  goodis,  |>at  \)t\  clepen  not  ri3t-wisnesse 
but  5if  it  be  of  worldely  catel  jjat  is  geten  by  mannis  lawe,  al3if 
Goddis  lawe  dampne  it.  And  so  j)e  fals  Phariseis  tau3ten  men 
pat  Goddis  lawe  defendip  ^  riot  hut  man-slau^ter  or  oper  sensible 
wrongs  and  not  o)?ir  pryvey  wrongs  ]?at  is  worse  roote  hereof; 
and  |)is  were  blasfemye  in  God,  to  leeve  |?e  worse  and  dampne 
))e  beter.  And  herfore  declarij?  Crist  |>re  manere  of  wickid  ire. 
\ie  first  ?naner  of  ire  is  whaji  a  man  is  wrappid  wipouten  resouyi, 
and  sich  is  coupable  ayns  God  to  be  jugid  to  helle.  For  )?is  un- 
kyndely  venym  a3en  |>e  state  of  innocence  is  roote  of  malice 
wi))Oute-forJ),  }>at  in  caas  is  lesse  y vel ;  and  for  j)is  cause  men 
usen  whan  |)ei  drawen  to  Jjer  dee]?  to  for3eve  men  alle  wrongis, 
and  axe  men  mercy  of  here  synne.  \>e  secounde  degree  of  pis 
ire  is  whanne  a  man  hap  conseyved  wrappe  and  brekep  out  in 
scorneful  wordis  of  his  first  conseyved  ire.  So|)ely  ire  may  falle 
to  men  for  to  venge  Goddis  cause,  and  so  may  men  scorne 
o))er,  for  |jei  folily  synnen  in  God,  as  Hely^  scornede  ))e  preestis 
of  Baal.  But  bo)?e  jies  ben  perilous,  and  herfore  he  jjat  scorni}> 
Jjus  is  coupable  to  falle  in  conseile,  where  his  foli  shal  be  hardid, 
til  j)at  he  falle  to  more  synne.  \)e  pridde  degree  of  pis  ire  is 
whan  a  mart  spekip  folily,  as  he  pat  sclaundrip  a  man  or  reprevep 
him  falsely ;  and  pat  man,  as  Crist  seip,  is  coupable  of  pe  fier  of 
helle,  for  his  ire  is  turned  to  hate,  and  as  Seint  Joon  seij),  al 
siche  been  men  sleeris,  jjat  ben  wor})i  to  be  dampned.  And  so 
shulden  men  kepen  charite  bojje  in  wille  and  in  word,  and  not 
oonly  spare  strokis,  as  Fariseis  falsely  seiden.  And  herfore 
shulden  irrous  men  axe  mekely  for3yvenesse,  for  3if  jiei  wanten 
charite  al  is  yvel  whatever  jjei  do.     And  })erfore  if  pou  offre  pi 

^  forfeiidi\>,  B  and  C. 

a  Hely.    Elias. 

WYCLIF. 


SERMONS. 


17 


gifie  to  God,  ]?at  )>e  scribis  preisen  myche,  afid  pou  penke  pat 
pi  broJ?ir,  for  j)i  synne,  hap  a  cause  ayns  pee,  leeve  pi  off  ring  at 
pe  aider,  ajid  go  first  to  be  accordid  wip  him.  For  meke  offringe 
in  mannis  herte  is  betere  |>an  offringe  wi]?oute-for|).  And  3if 
|)i  brojjir  be  ferre  fro  ]?ee,  Goddis  lawe  is  so  resonable,  ]?at  it 
suffisi]?  ]>at  |>ou  go  out  of  ire  and  be  recounsilid  in  herte  wij? 
him,  and  in  hool  purpos  to  make  asee])^  as  soone  as  \o\x  goodly 
mayst.  By  |)is  lore  may  we  see  how  ferre  it  is  fro  scole  of 
Crist  for  to  chide  or  to  plede  or  to  fi3t  as  men  now  done. 


I^E    SEVEN>E    SONDAI   GOSPEL    AFTIR    TRINITE. 

[SERMON     VII.] 

Cum  turba  multa  esset  cum  Jesu,  7iec  haberent  quod 
majiducarent. — Mark  viii.  [i.] 

For  alle  werkis  of  Crist  ben  good  lore  to  Cristen  men,  to 
teche  hem  how  Jjei  shal  lyve  for  to  gete  |>e  blisse  of  hevene, 
|?erfore  ]?is  gospel  of  Crist  telli]?  how  he  bi  boj^e  his  kyndis  did 
a  miracle  of  mercy  in  fedynge  of  \q  nedy  folk.  Whan  myche 
peple  was  wip  Jesus,  and  pei  hadden  not  to  ete,  he  clepide  his 
disciplis  iogidere  and  seide,  V  have  rup  upon  pe  peple,  for  pei  have 
sued  me  pree  daies,  and  now  pei  han  not  for  to  ete,  and  if  Y  lete 
hem  go  fastinge  home,  pei  shal  faile  in  pe  weye,  for  sum  of  hem 
comen  fro  ferre.  And  his  disciplis  seiden  to  him,  Whereof  my^te 
a  man  fede  pis  folk  here  in  pis  waste  place. ^  And  Crist  axide 
hem,  how  many  loves  pat  pei  hadden,  and  pei  seiden  seven.  And 
Crist  commandide  pe  peple  to  si  tie  doun  on  pe  erpe;  and  takynge 
pes  sevene  loves  and  doinge  pankingis  to  God,  he  brak  hem,  and 
-i^af  hise  disciplis  to  putt  to  pe  puple,  aiid  pei  -i^aven  pis  breed  to  pe 
puple.  And  pei  hadden  afewe  litil  fishis,  and  hem  he  blesside  and 
makide  his  disciplis  ^yve  hem  to  pe  peple.  And  pe  peple  eet,  and 
was  fulfillid ;   and  y.t  pei  gedriden  sevefi  berlepis^  of  relif  pat 

'  asee\>,  B ;  asse\>,  D.     See  Glossary. 

■■^  That  is, '  carrying-baskets,'  from       a  basket.     Both  WycHffite  versions 
the  A.S. '  beran,'  to  bear,  and  '  leap,'       have  '  leepis '  at  the  same  passage. 

SERMONS.  C 


The  miracle 
of  the  loaves 
and  fishes. 


t8 


WVCLIF'S 


Mystical  inter- 
pretation of 
the  miracle. 


was  laft.  And  per e  was  of  pe  puple,  hungry  and  longe  fastmge, 
as  it  were  foure  pousand,  and  Crisie  lefte  hem,  and  lete  hem  go 
home,  pe  gospel  tellij)  of  siche  two  feestis  ])at  Crista  maade 
here  in  er])e.  In  j^e  first  weren  fyve  ])Ousaund  fedde,  and  in  l^e 
to])ir  fom-e  |>ousand,  and  ]?is  was  jje  seconde  feste,  as  seint 
Mark  telli]?.  And  of  greet  witt  weren  ];es  two,  as  seintis  beren 
witnessed;  for  two  is  ]?e  firste  noumbre  ]?at  come]?  after  oon- 
heed,  and  herfore  men  clepen  it  a  noumbre  wi])Outen  fame ; 
for  it  is  ]7e  first  noumbre  ]?at  partij?  fro  unite ;  and  certis,  if  no 
man  hadde  partid  from  God  bi  synne,  it  hadde  be  noo  nede  to 
make  siche  feestis ;  for  ech  man  shulde  redely  have  mete  whan 
him  nedide,  as  beestis  han  gras^  in  plentenous  pasture.  And 
so  bi  |)is  bodili  werk  of  merci  of  Crist  ben  we  tau3t  to  which 
men  we  shulden  do  sich  almes ;  for  Crist  techi])  in  jje  gospel 
of  Luke  Jjat  we  shulde  feden  siche  J>at  have  greet  nede,  and  if 
we  feden  o))ir  men,  biside  Jjc  resoun  of  almes,  j^e  fruyte  of  oure 
almes  in  ]?at  is  awey.  And  so  curatis  ]?at  ben  better  occupied 
about  spiritual  nedis  shulden  for  ]?er  feblenesse,  fer  fro  state 
of  innocence,  take  bodily  almes  to  perfourme  jjer  office,  3he  3if 
\€\  ben  stronge  in  bodi  in  reward  of  o])er  men ;  and  J?is  title  of 
almes  is  mooste  acording  to  preestis ;  but  in  state  of  innocens 
shulde  ]?is  almes  be  awey ;  for  men  shulde  have  redily  fruyt  \2X 
|>ai  hadden  nede  of;  and  |>is  feblenesse  of  bodi  is  falle  to  men 
for  synne.  Crist  \2X  was  bo]>e  God  and  man  hadde  not  J?is 
feblenes,  for  he  my3t  have  mete  whan  and  wher  he  wolde ;  but 
we  shal  wite  J>at  our  Jesus  Crist  dide  more  miracle,  and  bad  hise 
disciplis  serve  \q  puple  at  jje  mete,  to  teche  us  Jjat  we  ben  myn- 
ystris'  and  not  autouris  of  miracle.  And  ])us  he  quykide  Lazarus, 
and  made  his  apostolis  efte  to  lose  him,  to  teche  ]?at  he  for3eve]> 
\q  synne,  and  his  vikeris  shewen  it  to  ]?e  puple.  But  ]>ei  assoilen 
on  o|>ir  weye,  as  prestis  in  ])e  olde  lawe  telden  bi  signis  of  the 
olde  lawe  )?at  men  weren  cleen  of  lepre.  And  3if  Jje  Pope  and 
his  vikeris  wolden  studie  wel  ]?is  mater,  jiei  shulden  leve  to  assoile 
men  so  largely  in  )>is  fourme,  for  our  bileve  techi]?  us  \2X  no 
viker  assoilej^e  here,  but  in  as  myche  as  Crist  assoile]>  first  him 
whom  he  assoile]>  in  virtue  of  Crist.     We  shal  see  moreover 


'  This  is  the  reading  (if  B.    A  lias  wittis.         "^  '^o'xn'^;  gresse,  C  ;  grace,  A. 


SERMONS. 

|)at  |)e  folke  j^at  Crist  fedde  here  weren  fedde  comounly,  and 
not  by  maner  of  })is  world,  for  to  dampne  riche  mannis  maneris 
])at  feden  hemsilf  coosdy,  and  ordeyne  strange  and  likerous 
mete,  and  in  greet  multitude,  and  excuse  hem  herbi  j^at  relif 
goiJ>  to  pore  men,  for  pore  men  my3ten  many  mo  be  beter 
fedde  wij>  comoun  metis ;  and  so  )ns  is  a  likerous  pride,  how- 
ever we  gabben  to  God.  But  go  we  nere  to  ]je  witt  )>at  jje 
gospel  techij?  us,  and  we  shall  see  ]>at  eche  preest  shulde  be 
viker  of  Crist,  and  take  of  him  oyle  of  grace,  and  so  in  a  maner 
be  Crist,  and  fede  ])e  puple  goostly  wi]?  )>e  wordis  of  God ;  for 
nei|?er  Crist  ne  hise  Apostlis  hadden  ay  bodily  mete  to  fede 
folk  |)us ;  and  Crist  techijj  us  in  ])is  ]?at  goostly  fode  is  beter 
J)an  J)is,  and  in  token  herof  ]jis  secounde  feste  was  algatis  lasse, 
but  goostly  feeste  shulde  encreese,  Jjat  ha]?  fulli  ende  in  hevene. 
pese  sevene  loves  ben  sevene  bokes  of  ]?e  newe  testament,  and 
foure  gospellis,  and  ]?erwi]3  stories  of  )>e  Apostlis  wisdom,  of 
bokes  of  Poul,  and  Apocalips  of  Joon.  pese  fewe  litil  fishes  ]>at 
|jei  hadden  to  companage  ben  pistHs  of  reule  of  James  and 
Petre  and  Joon  and  of  Judas,  pe  seven  berlepis  of  rehf  ben 
alle  l^e  sentences  of  seintis  after,  bi  which  jjei  feden  trewe  men 
by  delyng  of  Goddis  la  we.  For  many  ben  fedd  by  reUf  ]?at 
kouden  not  ete  ]>is  hole  mete,  pe  multitude  of  just  men  ben 
l^es  foure  |)Ousaund  men,  jjat  Crist  graunti)?  her  owne  wille  to 
go  to  ])e  house  of  hevene. 


Te  ei3t>e  Sonedai  Gospel  aftir  Trinite. 


[SERMON     VIII.] 


Attendite  a  falsis  prophetis. — Matt.  vii.  [15.] 

pis  gospel  biddi])  Cristene  men  to  he  ware  wip  false  prophetis, 
pat  cometi  in  eloping  0/  sheep.  And  ]?es  wordis  may  be  applyed 
unto  fals  freris ;  for  so]?e  ]?is  lore  of  Crist  wolde  he  not  5yve  in 
tyme  of  grace,  but  if  siche  men  weren  for  to  come  which  J^ei 
shulden  flee.  And  so,  be  ]?ei  freris  or  be  ]?ei  o]7er  jjat  speken 
falsely  in  ]jer  prechinge,  oure  good  maister  Crist  bad  ]?at  we 

C  2 


Attack  upon 
the  Friars, 


20 


WFCLIF'S 


False  doctrines 
introduced  by 
them. 


Their  covet- 
ousness. 


shulden  be  ware  wi]?  hem.    pei  ben  prophetis,  in  J>at  |5ei  speken 

aferr  of  ]>q  dai  of  dome,  of  blisse,  and  of  peynes ;  and  J?us  seij) 

Crist  Jjat  he  sende]?  prophetis  to  men  |>at  ben  of  fals  fei]?,  and 

})ei  shal  tormente  hem.     And  it  is  noo  doute  ]?at  ne  siche  men 

ben  profetis,  and  ]?ei  ben  false  prophetis;  if  |?ei  lyven  j>us  ]jat 

l^ei  shapen  her  lyf  and  her  wordis  boj^e,  more  for  ypocrisie  and 

wynnynge  of  ]>e  peple  jjan  for  worship  of  God  or  helj^e  of  her 

soule.     If  |)ei  fynden  novelry  in  Jjer  fals  habitis,  and  ^it  lyven 

as  yvel  as  o]?ir  comoun  men,  who  shulde  drede  of  hem  Jjat  ne 

})ei  ben  fals  profetis  ?     Al  ]>er  founden  signes  J)ei  shewen  oJ>ir 

men,  ])at  \e\  shulden  crye  ]?er  holynesse  over  o])ir  Cristene  men. 

But,  Lord,   whi   shulden  Jjei   do   j^us.?    si|>  holynes   shulde  be 

privy,  and  |?ei  my3ten  lyve  as  holy  lyf  wiJ>outen  siche  signes. 

Certis  it  seme]?  no  cause  but  if  it  be  ypocrisie,  ]>at  ]?ei  shewen 

to  \e  peple  ]?er  holynes  as  Phariseis  doen,  and  so  to  be  more 

told  by,  and  li3tlyer  to  wynne  goodis,  for  take  awey  ]?is  eende, 

and  her  signes  serven  of  nou3t.     And  as  Crist  sei]?  a  good  lore 

to  knowe  hem  were,  to  marke  per  fruytis,  |)at  specialy  comen 

of  hem.     Wei  Y  wote  jjat  j^e  Churche  profitide  before  freris 

camen  in,  and  si]?en  han  ben  sowen  many  fals  lores,  boj^e  in 

Jjer  religioun,  and  preisyng  of  scribis ;  as  we  seen  of  ])e  sacrid 

oost,  of  ]?e  begginge  of  Crist,  of  lettris  of  ]?e  brej>heed,  and  o)>ir 

worldely  lyvynge.      pe   knowyng  of  siche   signes  shewi]>  wel 

|)er  fruyte,  how  jjei  ben  chargeous  to  |?e  peple,  and  fals  in  jjer 

entent;  for  greet  noumbre  and  costlewe  housis  and  greet  dis- 

pensis  of  ])is  world,  wi|>  reulynge  of  worldely  causis,  tellen  what 

ende   jjei  worchen   fore.     And   herfore   sei]?  Crist,  ]>at  pei  ben 

wipiitne  wolves  of  raveyne^;   wulves  ]?ei  ben  if  })ei  loven  more 

catel  ]>an  mennis  soulis,  and  open  jjer  mouj)  to  heveneward  to 

feyne  preestis  power,  jjat  nei]>ir  ]?ei  can  grounden  in  |>e  lawe  of 

God,  ne  it  may  not  falle  to  God  himsilf,  and  bi  |?is  power  |?ei 

spuylen  ]?e  puple  of  ]jer  goodis,  and  not  assoilen  hem  freely  for 

to   save   |>er  soulis.      And  bi   |)is   fruyte  may  men  knowe   \q 

falshede  of  j)es  wolvys,  for  we  shal  wite  as  bileve  ]?at  who  love]? 

more  mannis  good  jjan  he  love]?  hel]>e  of  his  soule,  he  is  wulf 

and  fendis  child.     And  }iis  may  men  wel  see  by  J)es  preestis' 

'  So  in  B.     A  has  rayne. 


SERMONS. 


21 


bisynesse ;  and  herfore  seij?  Goddis  word,  ])at  men  gederen  not 
of  pomes  grapi's,  to  glade  men  goostly  \vi|),  7ie  gidere  not  figis  of 
breris,  for  as  j)es  trees  han  not  of  kynde  to  brynge  to  men 
siche  fruytis ;  so  siche  children  of  ]>e  fend  fedcn  not  men 
goostly,  nei])ir  wi}>  figis  of  bileve  ne  wi]?  grapis  of  devocioun, 
but  )?ei  han  more  bisynes  to  spuyle  fro  men  ]?er  worldely  goodis, 
as  bo]?e  jjornes  and  bryres  reven  fro  sheepe  Jjer  wolle.  And 
J)us  ech  good  tree  ]?at  God  ha]?  ordeyned  to  jje  hous  of  heven, 
herep  here  good  friiyte  and  pe  yvel  tree  berip  venym;  for  ri^t  as 
Goddis  children  may  not  do  but  good  |)ing,  so  children  of  ])e 
fend  may  not  do  but  harmful  |)ing.  For  ri3t  as  fendis  semen 
to  do  good,  and  it  turne]?  at  |?e  ende  to  ]?er  harm,  so  Goddis 
children  semen  to  do  yvel,  but  God  turnej?  it  to  j^er  good.  And 
to  |)is  witt  sei]j  ]7e  word  of  Crist,  pat  a  good  tree  may  not  bere  yvel 
fruyte,  ne  an  yvel  tree  good  fruyte.  For  ]>e\  may  not  turne  as 
])e  wynd,  for  alle  ]?ingis  J>at  shal  come  mut  nedis  come  as  we 
taken  here;  and  so  eche  tree  here  in  jjis  world /a/  makip  not  pus 
good  fruyte,  shall  be  fellid  a7id  putt  to  pe  fier  to  brenne  in  helle 
wi]>outen  ende.  And  ]>us  bi  fruyte  of  preestis  shulen  56  knowe 
whos  \€\  ben,  and  herby  bewar  wi]>  hem,  for  condicions  of  her 
maistris.  And  it  sujjicib  not  to  seie,  Lord,  Lord,  but  it  nedi]?  to 
lyve  wele  to  a  mannes  lyves  ende;  and  so  it  suffici]?  not  to 
preestis  to  seie,  God  be  wij?  you,  but  Jjei  mut  seie  wele  in  herte 
and  wele  in  mou|;e  and  lyve  wele,  for  ellis  a  man  shal  not  be 
saved  ne  bro3t  to  liknes  of  ^q  Trinite.  Ne  j)is  lore  is  not  oonly 
constreyned  to  fals  freris,  but  generaly  to  preestis,  jjat  seien  ])at 
J)ei  han  care  of  mennis  soulis ;  for  worchyng  bi  ri3t  lyf,  endid 
after  Goddis  wille,  maki]?  a  man  Goddis  child  and  come  to  ])e 
bUsse  of  hevene.  . 


Men  are  jus- 
tified by  works. 


■#:^HKHK^~ 


22 


WFCLIF'S 


The  parable 
of  the  unjust 
steward. 


Interpretation 
of  the  parable. 


)-^E   NYNhE   SONDAI   GOSPEL   AFTER    TRINITE    SONDAY. 

[SERMON     IX.] 

Homo  quidam  erat  dives  et  hahebat  villicum. — Luc.  xvi.  [i.] 

pis  gospel  telli])  how  men  shulde  make  hem  frendis  of 
worldely  goodis,  for  reward  ]jat  \€\  shulden  have  aftir  in 
hevene.  pe  parable  telli]>  how  a  7nan  hadde  a/er?}iour,  as  keper 
of  a  toun^,  pat  was  defamyd  to  him  as  he  hadde  wastid  his 
goodis ;  but  not  al  fulli,  for  he  hadde  spendid  hem  unwarly, 
but  jje  lord  hadde  j^e  worship,  ^is  lord  clepide  pis  fermour  and 
seide  pus  to  him,  How  heere  Y pus  of  pee,  pat  pou  wastist  my 
good.-*  ^i/e  a  rekenynge  of  pi  bailly  ship,  for  pou  maist  he  no 
longer  in  pis  office.  And  pis  servant  seide  wipyne  to  himsilfe, 
What  shal  V  do  ?  for  my  lord  takip  fro  me  pis  office;  delve  may 
V  not,  and  me  shamep  for  to  begge;  but  Y  woot  what  Y  shal  do, 
pat  whan  Y  am  removed  fro  pis  office,  opir  tenauntis  of  pe  lord 
shal  resceyve  ?ne  into  pere  housis,  for  goodis  ]?at  Y  shal  do  to 
hem :  while  Y  am  in  ])is  office.  And  he  gaderide  togidere  alle 
pe  dettours  of  his  lord;  and  axide  pe  first  how  myche  he  oui^t  his 
lord;  and  he  seide  he  ou^te  him  an  hundrid  barels  of  oyle.  And 
he  seide  to  him.  Take  pi  caucioun  and  sittc  soo7ie  and  wryte  fifty 
barellis.  And  efte  he  seide  to  anopir.  How  myche  owist  pou? 
And  he  seide  he  ou^te  an  hundrid  skippis  of  corn,  (pis  mesure 
of  corn  is  more  {jan  a  quarter.)  And  he  badde  him  take  his 
lettris,  bi  which  he  was,  bounden,  and  wryte  four e  score.  And 
pe  lord  prfiside  pe  bailly  of  wickidnes,  for  he  hadde  warly  done; 
for  children  of  pis  worlde  be?i  more  ware  pajt  children  of  li-^t  in 
per  kynrede.  In  |)is  parable  we  shulden  wite  ))at  Crist  is  ))is 
lord,  )>at  is  kyng  of  kyngis  and  lord  of  lordis ;  J)is  bailly  of  J)is 


*  '  toun,'  from  the  A.S.  verb  tynan, 
to  hedge  in  or  enclose,  had  origi- 
nally pretty  nearly  the  same  mean- 
ing as  the  word  '  clearing '  has  in 
our  colonies  now ;  it  was  the  piece 
of  land  enclosed  from  the  forest  or 
moor  and  made  habitable  for  men, 


From  a  single  clearing,  it  came  to 
be  applied  to  the  whole  cleared 
and  enclosed  land  in  any  particular 
locality,  and  so  to  the  principal 
collection  of  dwellings  forming  the 
homes  of  the  cultivators  of  such 
land. 


SERMONS.  23 

lord,  or  keper  of  his  litil  toun,  is  eche  man  of  ])is  world,  seme 
he  never  so   greet,  for  emperoure  or  kyng  is  tenaunt  to  ]?is 
lord  and  keper  of  his  litil  toun,  to  regard  of  Cristis  greet  lord- 
ship.    For  Crist  is  lord  of  hevene  and  helle  and  al  ))is  er|>e, 
5he  lord  of  al  |)is  world,  wi]?  goodis  of  it  opyn  and  hidde,  and  no 
conquerrour  my^te  ateyne  to  lordship  of  al  \>\s  erjje,  for  Alis- 
aundre  and  Julius  leften  myche  to  conquere,  and  God  wolde 
not  |)at  })er  lordship  were  more  here  in  erj>e,  techinge  us  j>at  j>e 
fend  prince  of  J)is  world  haj)  but  litil  lordship  of  children  of 
pryde,  al3if  he  be  now  partener  wi]?  Crist  of  mo  servauntis 
of  |?e  fend  ]jan  shal  come  to  hevene.     But  Crist  is  chefe  lord 
of  |?e  fend  and  al  his  lymes,  and  J>ei  mut  nedis  serve  him  o]?ir 
wele  or  yvel,  doinge  wel  |>at  ]?ei  shulden  do,  or  ellis  suffringe 
peyne.     And  si]?  Crist  ha]?  lent  ech  man  here  al  |)at  he  ha]?,  and 
wole  axe  of  ])is  streite  rekenynge,  how  he  dispendi]?  it,  to  ech 
m.an  of  ]?is  world  may  })is  parable  be  applied ;  and  whanne  men 
dispenden  not  warly  Goddis  goodis,  ]7anne  ]?ei  ben  defamyd  to 
him  as  }>ei  hadden  wastid  hem,  but  di spending  of  alle  goodis 
mut  sowne  to  Goddis  worship.     For  alle  men  shulden  knowe 
})at  alle  ]?es  ben  Goddis  goodis,  and  he  wole  J^at  ]>e\  be  spendid 
})us  to  profit  of  his  Churche,  and  so  spekyng   of  })is  lord  is 
movynge  of  mennys  conscience,  and  })us  God  telli]?  to  men 
bo})e  more  and  lasse,  how  he  knowi])  her  traytery,  whan  Jjei 
done  amys,  and  hou  ])ei  ben  nedid  to  die  from  ])is  office,  and 
hou  ]?ei  ben  nedid  to  God  to  rykene  for  ]?is  servyse.     And  sum 
han  drede  how  J^ei  shal  lyve  after  ])is  lyf,  for  after  }?er  dee]>  J)ei 
may  not  delve,  or  do  medefulli  to  Jjer  soule,  and  shameful  ]jing 
it  is  to  begge  o]?er  of  men  ]>2X  here  lyven,  or  of  seintis   in 
hevene,  but  as  ]?ei  witen  J>at  Jjei  shulden  helpe  after  ])at  men 
han  her  deserved  while  ])ei  lyveden  here  in  }?is  lyf.     And  so  ])is 
fermour  grantide  J)re  ]?ingis  J)at  men  shulden  knowe  here  in 
})is  lyf.     First  he  grantide  Jjat  aftir  ])is  lyf  he  my3t  not  wirche 
medefulli.     Aftir  he  grantide  ]>at  he  shulde  shame  to  begge 
more  ])an  he  hadde  disservyd.     And  so  stronge  beggers  here 
on  lyf,  ben  more  unshameful  }jan  ben  soulis  or  in  helle  or  in 
purgatorie,  ]?at  wolen  not  axe  but  ]?at  ]?ei  han  disservyd,  for  })ei 
witen  ]?at  it  were  veyn  to  axe  more  of  J^er  God.     But  J)is  baily 
turnede  wisely  him  to   a  good   conseil ;    })at  while   he  lyvede 


H 


WFCLIF'S 


here  in  erjje  he  shulde  make  men  his  frendis  wij?  goodis  of 
God  |)at  he  kepi]?,  and  jjei  shulde  helpe  him  whan  he  is  deed. 
And  ]jus  it  perteynej)  to  kingis  first  to  do  worship  to  God,  and 
si]>  to  do  ri3t  to  }?er  servauntis  and  so  to  alle  men  under  hem. 
And  ]?is  discharge  may  baillies  do  wi])Outen  injurie  to  God ; 
for  sum  men  J^enken  J)at  J?is  bailly  ]?at  for3afe  fifty  barels  of  oile 
and  ]?erto  twenty  skippis  of  corn,  dide  wronge  to  his  lord,  and 
so  jje  lord  preiside  him  not  wele ;  but  we  shal  wite  ]?at  ])is  lord 
is  God,  and  J>is  bailly  lord  of  |jis  world,  and  so  God  approve]> 
wele  for^yvynge  of  mannis  rente ;  and  wi]?  graunte  of  |>e  cheef 
lord,  baillyes  may  for^yve  ]>er  dette ;  and  so  it  were  a  medeful 
jjinge  to  worldely  lordis  to  for^yve  dette,  and  discharge  jjer  pore 
tenantis  of  many  chargis  ]?at  Jjei  ben  inne.  And  so  as  ])is  mi3te 
falle  in  dede,  j^at  ]>\s  bailly  was  worldly  wyse,  so  hevenly  prudence 
my3te  falle  to  children  of  li3t,  but  ))e  first  prudence  falli]?  more 
comounly  |)an  jje  secoande  unto  men,  for  pryde  and  coveitise 
of  goodis  blyndi]j  men  to  do  almes,  but  herfore  goodis  of  for- 
tune ben  clepid  bi  a  fendis  name,  )?ingis  of  wickidnessis,  for 
jjei  ben  ofte  unjustly  delt.  But  conseil  and  bidding  of  Crist, 
j?at  is  chefe  lord  of  alle,  \?>  J?al  vien  make  hem  frendis  here  of  siche 
goodis  of  ivickednesse. 


Pe  ten^e  Sondai  aftir  Trinite. 

[SERMON      X.] 

Cum  appropinquaret  fesiis  Hierusalem  videns 
civitatem. — Luc.  xix.  [41.] 

pis  a  gospel  telli])  generaly,  what  sorewe  men  shulden  have 
for  syne,  si]?  Crist,  J)at  my^te  not  do  synne,  wepte  so  ofte  for 
synne.  For  we  rede  J?at  Crist  wepte  Juries,  and  eche  tyme  he 
wepte  for  synne.  And  so  tellij)  our  bileve  in  storye  of  ])e 
gospel,  pat  fesus  seynge  Jerusalem  wepte  J?ero?t,  for  j^e  synne  of 


"  In  the  margin  of  B  here  occurs 
the  following  note,  in  a  late  fifteenth 
century  hand  :   '  Noat  this  specially 


of  thee  clergy  the   only  hurt   unto 
thee  Churche  of  Christe.' 


SERMONS, 


25 


it,  and  seide  pat  if  pou  knewe  ))us  synne,  |>ou  shuldist  wepe  as 
Y  do  nowe,  and  certis  in  pis  dai  of  pee  pat  shidde  be  comen  in 
pees  to  pee,  if  jjou  woldist  receyve  ]>is  day  and  pees  of  it,  as  |?ou 
shuldist,  for  atle  pes  pingis  j?at  j^ou  shuldist  cunne  ben  now  hidde 
fro  pi  iyn.  For  daies  sJial  come  in  pee,  for  synne  ]>at  ])0U  shalt 
do  in  me,  and/m  eftemyes  schuJen  emyrojipee  as  a  palis  al  aboute, 
and  parre  pee  iti  fernsalem,  as  sheep  ben  par  rid  ifi  a  foold,  atid  pei 
shal  felle  pee  to  pe  erpe,  and  pi  children  pat  ben  in  pee,  and  pei  shal 
not  leve  in  pee  stoon  liynge  upon  a  stoo?t,  pat  pei  ne  shal  be  removed, 
and  ]>i  -svallis  al  distried,  and  |)e  cause  of  al  j)is  shal  be  j^e  un- 
kynde  unknowynge  pat  pou  wolt  7iot  knowe  pe  tyme  pat  God  bi 
grace  hap  visitid  pee.  Alle  |)es  wordis  weren  shewide  in  dede, 
as  Josephus  maki]?  mynde  of  hem,  how  Titus  and  Waspasian 
j)e  secounde  and  fourty  ^eer  aftir  jjat  Crist  was  steied  to  hevene, 
comen  at  solempnite  of  Paske,  and  ensegiden  Jerusalem,  and 
distrieden  men  and  wallis  uttirly  ])at  |>ei  founden  J^ere.  And  |)is 
is  a  pryvy  synne  wij?  which  \e  fend  blindi]?  men,  jjat  J)ei  sorewen 
not  more  for  synne  J>an  |)ei  done  for  o]>ir  harm ;  for  |>us  wille 
is  mysturned,  and  men  fallen  to  serve  God.  And  herefore 
techi])  Crist  hise  apostlis  ]?at  ))ei  shulden  not  be  aferd  for  perelis 
]?at  shal  come  for  to  venge  synne  |)at  is  done,  but  j^e  moste 
drede  of  alle  shulde  be  to  falle  in  synne,  for  ])at  is  worse  ]?an 
])e  peyne  jjat  God  ordeyned  to  sue  herof.  And  J)us  in  foure 
affecciouns  ])at  ben  groundid  in  mannis  wille  stondi]>  alle  mannis 
synne  |>at  he  doijj  a3ens  God,  for  if  sorwe  and  joie  of  man  and 
hope  and  drede  were  reulid  wel,  his  wille  were  ordeyned  unto 
God,  to  serve  him  as  it  shulde  do.  After  |)is  telli]?  })e  storye 
how  fesus  wente  into  pe  temple  and  caste  out  bope  bieris  and  seller  is, 
and  seide  to  hem  pat  it  is  writun,  Myn  hous  shulde  be  an  hous  of 
preier,  but  ye  have  inaad  it  a  define  ofpeves.  Aftdfor  a  long  tyme 
after  he  was  eche  day  techinge  in  pe  temple.  And  in  ]?is  dede  ])at 
Crist  dide,  he  techi]?  his  Chirche  to  bygynne  for  to  purge  his 
seintuarie,  ]?at  ben  preests  and  clerks  ])erof,  ]?at  ben  ])e  moost 
cause  of  synne,  and  sij)  purge  o|>ir  partis,  whan  |>e  rote  is  dis- 
tried.— IT  And  ]?is  telde  Crists  wending  into  \q  temple  after  |)es 
wordis,  as  5if  he  wolde  seie  in  his  worching,  pe  cause  of  synne 
)7at  Y  have  told  is  wickednesse  of  preestis  and  clerkes,  and 
herfore   Y   bigyne    at    j^e   temple,   not    to   distrie    hem    in    her 


Reformation 
must  begin 
from  tlie 
clergy. 


26 


WYCLIF'S 


Priests  are 
incorrigible. 


persones,  but  to  take  from  hem  cause  of  her  synne,  and  ordeyne 
|)e  Churche  in  temporal  goodis  as  Y  have  ordeyned  hem  to 
lyve.  And  it  is  al  oon  to  seie  \2X  J)ese  goodis  ben  ]?us  sacrid 
and  ^yven  to  preestis  ]>at  no  man  may  take  hem  fro  jjes  preestis, 
and  to  seie  ]?at  Anticrist  ha]?  so  weddid  ])es  goodis  wi]?  preestis 
\2X  noon  may  make  |>is  dyvors ;  for  preestis  ben  uncorrigible ; 
but  ])es  defamaciouns  shulde  preestis  flee  wi]?  al  ])ere  my^t,  and 
preien  ]?at  \€\  weren  amendid  bi  ]je  ordenance  of  Crist.  For 
resoun  shulde  teche  hem  Jjat  \€\  ben  worse  ]?an  frentikes,  and 
so  Jjei  hadden  nede  to  be  chastisid  til  Jjis  passion  were  fro  hem. 
For  what  man  wolde  bi  resoun,  kepyng  a  man  in  frenesie,  ^yve 
him  a  swerd  or  a  knyf  bi  which  he  wolde  slee  himsilf .?  or  who 
|)at  kepte  a  man  in  feveris,  and  wiste  wele  hou  he  shulde  be 
reulid,  and  ]?at  ]>is  mete  or  Jjis  wyne  were  contrarye  to  his  hel|>e, 
wolde  5yve  him  at  his  wille  ]?is  foode  ]?at  shulde  anoye  him  1 
so,  si]>  preestis  have  goodis  of  men  bojje  of  lordis  and  comouns, 
and  \€\  disusen  hem  |)us,  \€\  my3ten  and  shulden  by  charite 
wijjdrawe  ]?es  brondis  J)at  J>us  done  harme  to  preestis,  and  in 
mesure  and  manere  5yve  |)es  goodis  to  preestis  ]jat  he  himsilf 
ha]?  ordeyned  him  and  hise  to  have  siche  goodis.  And  })is  may 
bi  charite  be  wi])drawen  by  ]?e  ^yvers  ])erof,  si]?  no  man  may  do 
yvel  to  men  and  not  do  good  to  ]?e  same  men,  but  if  he  be  a 
quyke  fend,  }?at  we  shulden  not  putte  to  seculers.  And  to  })is 
ende  shulden  clerkes  traveile  and  procure  ]?at  ]?is  ]?ing  were  done 
bo}?e  for  love  of  Goddis  lawe  and  for  love  of  clerkes  and 
comouns,  and  ^if  ]?e  fend  by  envie,  ]?at  is  enemye  to  charite, 
sei}?  ]?is  ]?ing  may  not  be  done  by  ]?e  lawe  ]?at  now  is  sett,  he 
sei]?  ]?at  Anticristis  lawe,  founden  a^ens  Goddis  lawe,  is  strenger 
}?an  charite,  and  Anticrist  strenger  ]?an  Crist.  For  ]?is  ende 
shulden  clerkes  wepe  and  preie  God  ]?at  his  ordrenance^  were 
kepte  in  his  streng]?e  and  Anticristis  lawe  putt  abac. 


^  ordenaunce,  B. 


^oWog^ 


SERMONS. 


27 


Y'E    ENLEVENJ'E    SONDI   AFTIR    TrINITE. 

[SERMON      XL] 

Dixit  Jesus  ad  quosdat)i  qui  confidehant  tanquam 
justi. — Luc.  xviii.  [9.] 

pis  gospel  telli|>  in  a  parable  how  J?at  men  shulden  be  meke 
and  not  justifie  hemsilf  and  dispise  ojjir  men,  for  ]?is  is  a  spise 
of  pride  Jjat  men  clepen  ypocrisie  pis  parable  telli]?  J>at  two 
men  ivente  itito  the  temple  for  to  preye,  pe  toon  was  a  Phariseie 
and  pe  tapir  was  a  publican.  pe  Pharise  stood  as  a  proud 
man  and  preiede  pes  pingis  hi  himsilf;  God,  Vpanke  pee  for  Y 
am  not  as  opir  men  of  pe  world,  robberis,  unjust  meji,  avoutrers,  as 
pis  publican^;  Yfast  twies  in  pe  woke,  and  "^yve  tipes  of  alle  my 
goodis.  Andpe  publicafi  stood  aferre,  and  wolde  not  lifte  his  iyn 
to  heven,  but  he  smote  upon  his  breest,  to  figure  true  confessioun, 
and  seide,  God  be  helplich  to  me  pat  am  synful.  But  Crists  juge- 
ment  sei]?  ]?at,  pis  puhlica7ie  wente  hoom,  made  ri^tful  fro  pis 
Pharise  for  Jje  mekenesse  ]?at  he  h2ididie,  for  ech  pat  pus  heiep 
himsilf  shal  he  ?nade  lowe,  bi  peyne,  and  he  pat  mekip  him,  bi 
grace,  shal  be  heyed,  by  mede  of  God.  Of  ]?is  gospel  may  we 
wite  how  Jje  firste  spice  of  pride,  J>at  is  ypocrisie,  envenymej? 
gretely  ]?e  churche,  and,  for  ]7is  ypocrisie  is  comounly  amounge 
religiouse,  ]?erfore  biddi]?  Crist  his  disciplis  beware  wi]?  sour  dow 
of  Pharisees,  and  Crist  himsilf  expowne]?  and  seij),  it  is  ypocrisie. 
Phariseis  ben  seid,  as  departid  from  o])ir  puple,  and  weren 
religiouse  in  Cristis  tyme,  as  Saduceis  and  Esses.  And  al  J^es 
|?ree  ordris  of  men  Crist  distried,  and  savyd  ])e  persones,  si]? 
bo])e  Poul  and  Nichodeme  weren  Phariseis,  as  Goddis  lawe 
sei]?.  And  si]?  al  Cristis  dedes  ben  ensaumples  to  trewe  men, 
many  men  }>enken  J?at  ]7es  newe  sectis  shulden  be  distried  and 
])e  persones  saved,  for  ])us  ordeynede  Crist  maister  best  of  alle ; 
and  Y  clepe  sectis  newe  mannes  ordres,  ]?at  oon  sue}?  ano]?ir  as 
he  shulde  sue  Crist,  and  so  eche  secte  smatchi]?^  many  synnes ; 

^  S*  in  B  ;  puf^lTcan,  A.  ^  smacchi\',  B. 


The  parable  of 
the  Pharisee 
and  the 
Publican. 


Application  to 
the  mendicant 
orders. 


28 


WFCLIF'S 


but  if  it  be  ])at  sect  which  Crist  himsilf  made,  Jjat  Goddis  lawe 
clepij?  secte  of  Cristene  men,  for  we  shal  bileve  jjat  Crist  may 
not  do  synne  in  3yvynge  of  his  reule  to  lede  Cristene  men. 
And  so  ]jis  secte  is  \e  beste  ])at  ony  man  may  have,  sij?  Crist, 
ahnygty,  ahvitty,  and  alwilful,  ordeyne  J?is  sect  covenable  for 
eche  man;  but  ojjir  newe  sectis  founden  bi  mannis  witt  mut 
nedis  smatche  synne  for  errour  of  |>e  fynder.  And  ri3t  as  ]jer 
weren  ]?re  suche  sectis  in  Cristis  tyme,  so  \qi  ben  now  monkes, 
chanouns,  and  freris;  and  dyvysyons  in  J)es  ]?ree  seien  dyvy- 
siouns  in  mennis  wille.  Al  Jjes  ]?ree  sectis  mote  nedis  smatche 
errour,  si]?  Jjei  grounden  a  perpetuel  reule  to  all  men  of  J)es 
ordres  J)at  ]?e  gospel  lefte  by  wisdom  of  Crist;  and  it  were 
woundirful  |>at  ]>es  synful  foolis  shulde  fynde  a  betere  reule  ])an 
Crist  himsilf  fond.  For  who  shulde  make  a  reule  to  men  jjat 
he  knowe]?  not,  ne  ha]>  no  maistrie  of  hem,  ne  techyng  to  kepen 
it .?  but  o  complexion  and  oon  elde  axi)?  o  manere  of  lyvynge 
and  anoj^ir  anojjir,  ])at  ]?es  patrons  knewe  not.  And  so  oonly 
oure  patron  Crist,  Jjat  is  boJ)e  God  and  man,  calengi]?  as  propre 
to  himsilf  to  grounde  siche  ordres,  and  herfore  seint  Poul  and 
Petre,  wi]?  ojjir  apostolis,  fledden  to  grounde  siche  ordris  for 
drede  of  blasfemye.  And  it  were  more  suffrable  to  dwelle 
amonge  Sarazynes  or  o})ir  paynym  sectis  as  doen  many  Crista 
men  J)an  to  dwellen  among  sectis  of  jjese  newe  religiouse.  And 
])at  |?ei  seien,  j^at  jjei  ben  erberis  betir  j^an  comoun  pasture,  for 
erbis  of  vertue  ]>at  growen  in  hem,  certis  makinge  of  erberis 
in  a  comoun  pasture  wolde  distrie  ]?is  pasture  and  lyf  of  ]?e 
comouns,  bojje  for  dichyng  and  begging  and  delvynge  of  tounes. 
And  3if  we  marke  alle  siche  erberis  in  Engelond,  ];at  ben  plantid 
of  newe  in  comoun  Cristis  religioun,  as  J)ei  spuylen  ])e  reme- 
naunt  of  temporal  goodis,  so,  jsat  is  more  deel,  ]?ei  spuyle  hem 
of  vertues,  for  alle  Cristene  men  shulden  be  of  oo  wille,  and 
variaunce  in  siche  sectis  makij)  variaunce  in  wille,  and  gendrij? 
discencioun  and  envye  among  men.  And  herfore  ordeynede 
Crist  but  ]?ree  partis  of  \q  Churche,  ech  to  have  nede  and 
helpyng  of  o]?ir ;  but  certis  it  is  not  ])us  of  ]jese  new  religions. 
Of  })is  treujje  may  be  maad  such  a  good  resoun.  It  is  a  greet 
synne  of  two  }nngis  to  chese  jjc  worse,  whan  a  man  may  as 
freely  have  \»t  betere  as  Jje  worse ;   but   ])ese   new  ordris  ben 


SERMONS, 


29 


worse  |ian  J>e  sect  of  Crist,  and  it  is  more  li3t,  more  fre,  and 
more  perfit,  })an  ony  o])ir  sect  |)at  man  may  chese.  And  her- 
fore  it  is  a  synful  errom-  to  chese  siche  sectis,  si])  ])e  ordre  of 
Crist  wole  betere  occupie  at  jje  fulle  |>an  ony  siche  sect  founden 
of  men.  And  so  sij)  ])ese  patrons  han  no  leeve  of  God  to  make 
siche  erberis  in  his  comoun  pasture,  law  of  ]?is  cheef  lord  shulde 
distrie  J)es  sectis,  si|?  Crist  love])  more  his  comomies  ])an  })es 
newe  erberis.  And  ])us  mene}>  ])e  gospel  ])at  })e  })ridde  servaunt 
of  God  shal  constreyne  men  to  entre  and  soupe  wi])  him  in 
hevene,  bo])e  men  in  comoun  weyes  and  ])es  ]>at  dwellen  in 
heggis,  and  ])us  was  Poul  constreyned  to  crepe  out  of  his  hegge, 
and  holde  ]>e  sect  of  Crist,  forsakinge  })e  sect  of  Pharisees ;  and 
])us  ])is  publican  J)at  was  a  comoun  laborer  was  beter  ])an  ])is 
Pharisee,  as  })is  gospel  sei]). 


fE   TWELFj'E    SONEDAY    GOSPEL   AFTIR   TrINITE    SONDAY. 

[SERMON      XII.] 

Exiens  Jesus  de  fmibus   Tiry. — Mask  vii.  [31.] 

pis  gospel  telli])  a  myracle  of  Crist  to  make  men  to  love  him 
and  trowe  in  his  power;  how  a  deef  man  and  a  doumbe  was 
helid  of  Crist.  Jesus  wente  oute  oj pe  contree  oj  Tirus  and  he 
cam  by  Sidoun  to  pe  water  of  Galile,  and  he  cam  pouri,  a  cou?itree 
pat  7nen  clepen  Decapolws,  w^hich  contre  conteynej)  ten  citees 
wi])ynne  him,  and  vieii  of  pe  contre  hrou^ten  to  him  a  deef  man, 
and  doumbe  also,  and  preieden  Crist  to  putte  to  him  his  hond, 
for  ])ei  conseyvedeh  ])at  bi  ])is  shulde  Crist  fully  hele  hym.  And 
Crist  toke  pis  syke  man  aside  fro  pis  puple,  and  putte  his  fingres 
into  bope  his  eeres,  and  spittinge,  ivip  his  fyngir  Crist  touchide  his 
tonge,  and  Crist  lokynge  into  hevene  wip  a  deulful  chere  seide  to  pis 
syke  man,  Be  pi  wittis  opened;  and  anoon  weren  his  eeres  ope?ied 
for  to  here,  and  pe  bond  of  his  tonge  was  opened  for  to  speke  ari-i,t. 
And  Crist  bade  pes  7nen  to  publishe  not  pis  myracle;  but  ever  pe 
more  pat  he  bad  pus,  ever  pe  more  pei  prechiden,  and  ever  pe  more 
pei  woundriden,  and  seiden  amonge  hemsilf  pat  Crist  hadde  done 


The  healing  of 
the  deaf  and 
dumb  man. 


30 


WFCLI  F'S 


Four  senses 
in  which  Holy 
Writ  is  to  be 
understood. 


allej?i7igis  we!e,/or  he  viade  deefe  to  heere  and  doumhe  men  to  speke. 
It  is  seid  comounly  ]?at  holy  writt  ha]?  foure  undirstondingis. 
pe  first  undirstondinge  is  pleyne,  bi  letter  of  j^e  storye.  pe 
secounde  undirstondinge  is  clepid  witt  allegoric,  whan  men  un- 
dirstonden  bi  witt  of  |>e  lettre,  what  ]?ing  shal  falle  here  bifore 
)?e  dai  of  dome,  pe  ])ridde  undirstondinge  is  clepid  tropologik, 
and  it  techi]?  how  men  shulden  lyve  here  in  vertues.  pe  fourJ>e 
undirstondinge  is  clepid  anagogike,  and  it  tellij?  how  it  shal  be 
wi)>  men  ]?at  ben  in  hevene.  We  shulde  knowe  ]?is  secounde 
witt  of  ]>e  gospel,  for  it  is  bileve  of  Cristene  men  in  er]>e ;  we 
shulden  bileve  |)at  mankynde  felle  fro  J>e  staat  of  innocence  for 
Adams  synne  and  Eve,  and  Jesus,  God  and  man,  bou3te  man- 
kynde fro  J)e  fendis  prisoun,  as  J)is  gospel  tellij?.  And  so  oure 
Jesus  wente  fro  J^e  lond  of  Tirus,  whan  he  wente  fro  ])e  bosim 
of  }>e  fadir  of  hevene,  for  Tirus  is  makyng*,  and  God  made  of 
no3t  bo])e  aungels  and  men  and  al  |)is  brood  worlde.  He  cam 
bi  Sidon,  ]jat  is  angel  kynd,  whan  he  grette  oure  Lady  bi  servise 
of  angel,  and  |>is  angel  Gabriel  wi])  all  o]>irs  stondinge  heelden 
pees  wi]?  God,  and  leften  jje  firste  synne,  and  Sidon  is  hel])e  or 
leevynge  siche  synne.  But  oure  Lord  Jesus  wente  out  to  j?e 
water  of  GaHle,  for  he  took  \q  staat  of  man  slydun  from  inno- 
cence ;  for  Galile  is  a  wheel^  whirlinge  or  passinge ;  and  so  dide 
mankynde  aftir  J^at  it  hadde  synned.  Crist  came  ]?ur3  ]>q  cuntre 
]?at  hadde  ten  citees,  for  he  cam  bi  alle  men  |)at  weren  segid 
wi]>  ]?e  fend;  and  jjes  men  ensegid  |?us  ben  al  ]?es  citees,  and 
mankynde  jjus  ensegid  bryngij)  to  Jesus  hir  kynde,  ]?at  was  deef 
and  dombe  by  ])e  synne  of  Adam,  ffor  ])ei  leften  to  heeren  God 
and  herden  jje  fend,  and  trowiden  to  |)e  fendis  lore,  and  lefte  ])e 
lore  of  God,  and  so  weren  Jjei  deef  to  heere  of  God  what  jjei 
shulden  do.  Jesus  took  mankynde  ]?at  ])us  was  syke,  not  in 
ech  persone  but  singulerly  in  oon,  and  Crist  putt  his  fyngirs 
in  eres  of  jjis  dombe  man,  whan  he  appliede  his  virtue,  sutili 
worchinge,  for  to  teche  man  how  he  wente  fro  God,  and  wi]>  his 
spotle  he  touchide  his  tonge,  whan  he  5af  him  virtue  to  herye 
God  ri3tli.     And  so  Crist  hadde  sorewe  of  J)es  two  synnes  of 


a  TzAr,  the  Hebrew  name  of  Tyre, 
signifies  a  rock. 

^  Galil,  whence  Galilee  is  derived, 


means  in  Hebrew,  circle,  or  circuit. 
(Smith's  Diet.  Bib.) 


SERMONS. 

man,  and  bad  jjat  ]je  bond  of  his  witt  shulde  be  opened.  But 
Jesus  bad  }>at  J?ei  shulden  not  preisc  him  herfore  bi  his  man- 
hede,  and  for  J)is  mekenesse  |)ei  preisidcn  him  more  bi  his 
godhede,  and  seiden  so]?  })at  he  made  alle  ]?ingis  wele,  for  he 
made  deef  men  to  heeren  and  dombe  men  to  speken.  For  men 
deefid  in  Goddis  lore  he  made  to  heere  what  God  spake  in 
hem,  bo{)  in  mandementis  and  conseilis ;  and  herbi  |?ei  lerneden 
to  speke ;  and  so  ]>yq  miraclis  did  Crist  togidere,  in  savynge  of 
mankynde;  he  made  men  deef  bi  synne  to  heere  what  God 
spak  in  hem,  and  men  dombe  fro  ri3t  speche  to  speke  opynly 
Goddis  lawe,  and  so,  biside  ]?es  virtues  to  heere  and  to  speke, 
God  moved  mankynde  to  do  as  |)ei  shulden ;  and  so  mai  men 
see  how  myche  ]?ei  ben  to  blame  )?at  ben  dombe  and  deef  in 
)iis  manere  of  worching. 


31 


PE   t)RITTEN>E   SONDAY   GoSPEL   AFTIR   TrINITE. 


[SERMON     XIII.] 


Beati  ocuU  qui  vi'deni  quae  vos  videtis. — Luc.  x.  [23.] 

pis  gospel  telli]?  bi  a  parable  how  eche  man  shulde  love  his 
even  cristene ;  and,  for  si^t  pryntid  in  us  of  manheed  of  Crist 
techijj  ]?is  lore  graciously,  jjerfore  bigynne]?  Crist  and  sei]?  on 
]?is  manere.  Blessid  hen  pe  eyen}  pat  seen  pat  '^e  seen;  for  Y seie 
to  ^ou,  pat  many  kyngis  and  prophetis  wolden  se  pat  y  seen  and 
siyn  hem  not,  and  here  wordis  pat  y  heeren,  and  her  den  hem  not. 
And  to  a  wyse  man  of  tawe  roos  and  temptide  Crist,  attd  axide, 
Maistre,  what  shal  Y  do  to  have  pe  blisse  of  hevene  ?  For  he 
wiste  wele  bi  skile  Jjat  it  was  not  ynou3  ^^  see  j?e  manheed  of 
Crist  for  to  come  to  heven;  for  many  ])ingis,  as  Scario]?  and 
bestis,  si5en  Crist,  ]?at  weren  not  able  to  have  blisse.  But  Crist 
seide  to  pis  tegistre.  What  is  writun  in  pe  lawe  ?  how  redist  pou  ? 
And  he  answeride  and  seide,  pat  pe  laive  biddip  pat  a  man  shulde 
love  pe  Lord  his  God  of  al  his  herte  and  of  al  his  soule,  and  of  at 
his  strengpis,  and  of  al  his  mynd,  and  his  nei'ifiore  as  hni  silf 

'  i^en,  B ;  eytie,  C. 


The  parable 
of  the  Good 
Samaritan. 


32 


WYC  LI  F'S 


Interpretation 
of  the  parable. 


And  Crisi  seide  to  hhn  pat  he  answeride  J'i'^t;  do  he  pis  indede, 
and  he  shal  lyve  in  blisse.  But  pis  lawier  wolde  jiistifie  himsilf, 
and pej'/ore  he  axide,  ivho  was  his  nei'ipore.  And  Crist  tolde  him 
a  parable^  ]?at  was  sutil  in  witt,  for  Crist  lokyfige  on  him  seide 
him  pis  parable^  how  a  man  wente  doun  fro  Jerusalem  into  Jerico 
and  felde  in  pefes  handis,  pat  dispiiyliden  him  a7id  fastiden  many 
sores  on  him  and  wenten  and  leften  him  halfe  quyke.  And  it  Jell 
pat  a  preest  passide  pe  same  wey ;  and  he  si-^  him  lye  pus  hirt,  and 
wente  awey  and  helpide  him  not.  And  a  deken,  ivhan  he  ivas  fii-^ 
pe  place,  and  si-),  him  sich,  passide  awey.  But  a  Samaritan  making 
his  weie  bi  pat  place  cam  bi  side  him,  and  j/3  his  state,  and  hadde 
mercy  on  him;  and  he  cam  nyy,  and  bond  his  woundis,  and  helde 
in  hem  bope  oile  and  wyn,  and  put  him  upon  his  hors,  and  brou^t 
him  in  to  stable  of  a  toun,  and  per e  he  did  cure  oj  hi?n.  And 
anopir  dai  he  toke  two  pens,  and  "^aj  hem  to  pe  hosteler,  and  bade 
him  have  cure  oJ  him,  and  seide  pus.  What  ever  pou  -s^yvest  over, 
whan  Y  come  ayn  Y  shal  pay  pee.  And  whan  Crist  hadde  seide 
]?is  parable,  he  axide  of  ]?is  man  of  lawe,  which  oJ pese  pree  men 
semede  him  to  be  nei^bore  unto  pis  syke  man  pat  Pus  Jell  into  beves 
handis.  And  he  seide,  pat  pe  pridde  man,  pat  dide  mercy  on  him. 
And  Jesus  seide  to  pis  legistre,  Go  pou  and  do  ri^t  so.  pis  man 
of  lawe  |?at  is  here  nemed  was  ne])ir  civilian  ne  canonistre,  but 
he  was  man  of  Goddis  lawe  ])at  wolde  lerne  \e  wey  to  hevene. 
And  Crist  supposi]?  to  J>is  wise  man  ]?at  ech  man  is  to  ojjir  a 
nei5bore  as  ny3  as  he  may,  si]?  ])ei  ben  bo])e  of  o  kynde ;  but 
of  nei3borishep  of  place  or  dwellinge  or  of  worldes  ffrendship 
shulden  men  not  recke  here ;  but  we  shulden  wite  |)at  alle  men 
]?at  God  ordeyne]?  to  blis  ben  ful  bre]?eren  bojje  of  fadir  and  of 
modir,  si]>  God  is  ])er  fadir,  and  his  Chirche  is  ])er  moder.  And 
so  techij)  Crist  in  J)is  parable,  how  ech  shulde  be  to  o]?ir  nei3- 
bore  in  good  wille,  bojje  for  we  came  alle  of  Adam  and  Eve, 
and  specialy  for  we  came  goostly  of  Crist  and  his  Chirche  and 
]?ei  ben  oure  nexte  and  most  fadir  and  modir.  pis  man  |>at 
cam  doun  fro  Jerusalem  to  Jericho  is  oure  firste  eldris,  Adam 
and  Eve,  for  jjei  camen  fro  si5t  of  pees  to  state  of  slydyng,  as 
jjc  moone.  pes  Jeeves  ])at  woundiden  him  ben  ])e  fendis  |>at 
temptiden  him,  but  |)ei  lefte  lyf  in  him,  as  God  ordeynede  him 
to  blisse;  but  \>q\  drowun  fro  ))is  man  goodis  of  virtu  and  of 

WYCLIF. 


kynde,  and  woundiden  him  bo|)e  in  bodi  and  soule,  and  leltiden 
him  to  live  just  lyf.  pis  preest  J)at  passide  first  bi  mankynde 
and  si^  myscheffe  j^at  it  was  innc,  weren  patriarkes,  boj^e  bifore 
})e  lawe,  and  in  tyme  ]?at  God  3af  law.  pe  dekene  |)at  passide 
bi  })is  weye  weren  prophetis  and  o}nr  seintis  )?at  weren  binejje 
\>es  first  seintis,  as  dekenes  ben  under  preestis;  and  boJ?e  ]>ei 
knewen  Jjat  ]>ei  my5ten  not  helpe  neijjer  o]>er  men  ne  hemsilf 
fro  |?e  synne  jjat  ]>ei  fellen  ynne  bi  tempting  of  \>e  fend.  But 
j>e  jjridde  Samaritan,  })at  was  Jesus,  helpide  mankynde,  for  he 
was  an  alien  as  anentis  his  godhede,  and  he  was  keper  of  man 
bi  bojje  two  kyndis  |?at  he  hadde,  and  he  my5te  not  do  synne, 
sij?  he  was  bo|>e  God  and  man,  and  hadde  not  personale  beynge 
of  mankynde  as  oj^er  men  hadden,  si]?  he  hadde  a  ful  beynge 
bifore  tyme  j^at  he  was  man.  He  helde  in  oile  to  make  woundis 
softe,  and  to  dispose  man  to  be  hool ;  for  he  putte  man  in  hope 
to  come  to  hevene  bi  fei]?  of  Crist ;  and  he  putte  in  wyn  Jjerwi]?, 
whan  he  spake  sharpe  wordis  for  to  prik  men  fro  synne.  He 
put  mankynde  upon  his  hors,  whan  he  made  his  own  manhede 
to  be  oure  broj^er  and  to  bere  our  syne ;  al3if  he  ou^te  not  for 
his  synne ;  he  brou^te  mankynde  in  to  a  stable,  whan  he  helide 
men  in  ])is  Chirche ;  and  |?is  is  but  a  litil  stable  to  regard  of  al 
)?e  Chirche ;  and  he  curide  men  in  ]>is  stable  bi  sacramentis  and 
hevenly  3iftes.  And  on  o]?ir  dale,  after  tyme  ]?at  he  was  deed, 
whiche  was  ])e  tyme  of  grace,  and  ]>e  sunne  was  newe  sprongen, 
he  3af  two  pens  to  j^is  keper,  bol^e  of  his  godhede  and  of  his 
manhede,  to  fede  mankynde  til  ])Q  dale  of  dome.  And  so  j>e 
keper  of  ]?is  stable  is  alle  ]>es  men  ]?at  God  ha]?  chosen  to  fede 
his  Chirche  wi}?  his  lawe,  and  Cristis  godhede  wi]?  his  manhede 
ben  sufficient  herfore,  for  ])ei  ben  wij^outen  ende,  as  ]?es  serkelis 
of  two  pens;  and  what  ever  })at  prelatis  traveilen  unto  spede 
of  Cristis  Chirche,  Crist  wole  at  ^e  dale  of  dome  jelde  hem 
graciousely;  and  so  ech  trewe  prelat  })at  helpi])  Crist  to  hele 
his  Chirche,  is  trewe  nei^bore  to  \>e  Chirche  and  doi}?  in  part 
as  Crist  did. 


33 


SEEMOXS. 


D 


34 


wrcziF's 


pE    FOURTEN|?E    SOXDAI    GoSPEL   AFTIR    TeINITE. 

[SERMON     XIV.] 


The  healing  of 
the  lepers. 


Mystical  inter- 
pretation of 
this  miracle. 


Cu7n  iret  Jesus  in  Jerusalejn^  iransibat. — Luc.  xvii.  [ii.] 

Christ  wole  teche  bi  J)is  miracle  in  ])is  parable  ]?at  ri^t  bileve 
is  ground  of  mennes  salvacioun.  Wha7i  Jesus  went  to  Jerusalem 
he  went pur-^  Samarie  and  Galile,  and  whan  he  wente  into  a  castel, 
ten  meselis  comen  ayns  him,  and  Jei  stooden  aferre  and  crieden  on 
him  as  pei  my':^ten,  and  seiden,  Jesus,  comandcur ,  have  mercy  on  us. 
But  whan  Crist  si-i,  pes  leprous  meji  cryinge  pus,  and  stondinge 
togidere  ajer,  lest  )>ei  blemyschiden  oj^er  men,  he  bad  hem  go  and 
shewe  hem  to  preestis,  as  God  bad  in  ]?e  olde  lawe,  and  as  pei 
wenten,  pei  weren  heelid  oj  her  lepre.  And  oon  oj  hem,  whan  he 
jzj  pat  he  was  pus  heelid  bi  miracle,  turnede  ayn  to  Jesus  wip 
a  greet  vois  preisynge  God,  and  he  Jeld  doun  in  his  face  bifore 
Cristis  Jeet,  and  pankide  him;  and  pis  man  pat  pus  cant  ayn  was 
a  Samaritan.  And  Jesus  spake  and  seide  pus  of  ]>is  dede  jjat  was 
fallen,  Ne  ben  not  ten  maad  dene,  and  where  ben  oper  nyne  ?  ])ere 
is  noon founden  pat  cam  ayn,  and  pankip  God,  but  pis  alien.  And 
Crist  seide  unto  him,  Rys  and  go  whider  pou  wilt,  for  pi  bileve 
hap  made  pee  saaf. 

To  jje  \vitt  of  allegoric  \  bitokenej?  ])is  dede  of  Crist  how  he  was 
wendinge  to  hevene,  ])at  is  clepide  Jerusalem,  and  he  passide  by 
Samary  and  Galile,  or  he  Mxnt  to  teche,  ])at  he  wolde  save  bo]?e 
hejjene  men  and  Jewis.  For  it  is  knowen  of  Samarie  Jjat  \€\  weren 
not  of  Jewis  kynde  but  aliens  J)at  dweUiden  )>ere,  fro  \q  time  of 
conquest  of  j^at  lond.  And  ten  kynredis  of  Israelis  sones  weren 
ever  putt  out,  as  now  ben  Jewis,  and  herfore  |je  Jewis  loveden  not 
jjes  Samaritanes,  and  to  ]?e  repreef  of  Crist  \€\  clepide  him  a  Sama- 
ritan, \2X  he  grantide  in  a  manere,  and  denyede  jjat  he  was  ledd  by 
])e  fend.  Cristis  wendinge  in  to  ]?e  castel  bitokenej?  his  litil  Chirche, 
]?at  is  armed  wi]?  virtues  as  ])e  castel  is  kepte  fro  enemyes ;  ten 
leprous  men  ben  alle  |?e  synful  |?at  mekeli  axen  for3evenes  of 
}?er  synnes.     pei  stooden  first  fer  fro  Goddis  folk ;    and  si})  })ei 

^  allegorik,  B  ;  allegorie,  C. 


SERMONS. 


35 


wenten  to  Cristis  preestis,  and  bifore  ]?ei  comen  to  hem  God 
assoilide  hem  of  ]?er  synnes ;  for  God  seij)  in  ]?e  psalme  how 
man  in  purpos  to  leva  his  synne  seide  )>at  he  wolde  shryve  him 
to  God,  and  God  for3af  him  his  synne.  And  so  Crist  tau3te 
bi  |)is  dede  Jjat  assoihnge  of  men  is  not  but  ^if  God  assoile 
bifore,  as  God  himsilf  assoilide  j?es  leprous.  And  so  preestis 
assoilen  as  Goddis  vikeris,  according  to  Goddis  assoilinges,  and 
ellis  J>ei  assoilen  no  more  |)an  preestis  of  ]?e  olde  lawe  heelide 
men  of  ]?er  lepre,  and  |>at  my3t  j^ei  not  do.  pis  alien  J)at  cam 
a3en  to  ]?anke  God  of  his  hel]>e,  bitokene]>  trewe  Cristene  men 
\dX  dwellen  in  jjis  bileve ;  |)es  nyne  |)at  ben  many  moo  bitokenej? 
men  out  of  bileve,  ]jat  trowen  jjat  it  is  ynouj  ]?at  her  preest 
assoile  hem,  and  specialy  jje  hey  preest,  how  evere  he  erre  in  juge- 
ment,  and  how  J)ei  lyven  bifore  or  after,  ])es  men  |)at  ]>us  ben 
assoilid.  And  a3ens  |)is  eresie  shulde  trewe  preestis  crye  fast,  for 
bi  J)is  synne  is  synne  hid,  and  assoilyng  bou3t  and  sold,  as  who 
so  wolde  bye  an  oxe  or  a  cow,  and  myche  more  falsely.  We 
shulden  come  a3en  to  Crist,  and  confesse  bo]?e  his  kyndis,  and 
make  covenaunt  wi]?  him  to  leve  oure  synne  from  hennsfor]?,  and 
Jjenke  how  Crist  bad  ]?e  woman  go  and  wille  no  more  do  synne. 
For  ]?is  covenaunt,  kept  wi]?  sorw^e  of  synne  and  Goddis  grace 
is  ynow,  alle  3if  men  speken  no  more  wi|?  preestis ;  but  speche 
wi])  hem  is  nedeful  in  ]?at  ])at  |)ei  techen  men  J)is  treu|)e,  and 
mennys  ordenaunce  may  not  reverse  J)is  sentence ;  and  ])us  we 
graunten  J>at  ech  ]?ing  ]>at  Petre  bonde  or  assoilid  on  er]?e,  or  ony 
viker  of  Petre,  in  })at  ]>at  ]>q\  acorden  \\\\>  God,  is  bounden  or 
loosid  in  hevene,  and  ellis  not,  for  ellis  ]?ei  ben  fals.  And  so 
ordenaunce  of  men  in  byndinge  and  assoilynge  bryngi])  in 
many  errours  and  lettij?  trewe  prechinge.  But  Bede  seij>  ]?at  Jjes 
leprouse  men  bitokenen  heritikes  of  many  colours  ]?at  shulden 
stonde  aferr  fro  men,  and  turne  to  Crist  bi  ri5t  fei]?,  and  knowe 
])at  Crist  bi  his  word  my3te  have  mercy  on  hem ;  and  aftirward 
algatis  ])ei  shulden  be  aliens  fro  Pharisees  ^.  And  so  alle  synful 
men  shulden  crye  mekely  wi]?  ])es  leprous,  ]?at  Crist  ]?at  is  bo]?e 
God  and  man  shulde  have  mercy  on  ]?er  synne,  for  he  is  lord 
wi])Outen  eende,  and  Jjei  han  yvel  wra|)])id  him,  and  so  her  synne 

*  The  meaning  seems  to  be, '  And       these  lepers  would  still  be  coimted 
even  then,  after  having  been  healed,       aliens  by  the  Pharisees.' 

D   2 


Priestly  abso- 
lution not 
efficacious 
unless  the  sin 
has  been  al- 
ready absolved 
by  God. 


Sale  of  church 
pardons. 


Beda's  inter- 
pretation. 


ojS  WYC  LIE'S 

is  so  greet  )?at  but  if  Crist  of  his  power  and  of  his  grace  for^yve 
)>is  synne,  it  may  never  be  for^yven.  And  for  ])is  ]?ing  sei|j  |)e 
Chirche  in  \qx  preyeris  ]jat  oure  God  maki]>  moost  his  my^t 
knowen  in  sparynge  and  havynge  mercy ;  for  5if  Crist  dide  not 
so,  no  synful  man  my3te  be  saved.  But  we  shulde  undirstonde 
]?at  as  God  is  mercyful  so  he  is  ri3tful,  and  hati]?  men  \2X  breken 
covenaunt;  and  jjerfore  holde  we  covenaunt  to  God,  and  dis- 
seyve  we  not  oure  silf,  for  God  may  not  be  disseyved,  however 
preestis  bigile  us. 


PE    FIFTEN]>E   SONDAI    GOSPEL   AFTIR   TrINYTE. 


No  man  can 
serve  two 
masters. 


[SERMON     XV.] 

Nemo  potest  duohus  domi'nis  servire. — Matt.  vi.  [24.] 

pis  gospel  techij)  men  hou  \€\  shulden  be  bisye  for  bhsse  and 
leve  o]?er  worldely  bisynesse  Jjat  lettij>  men  fro  ]?is.  First  seij> 
Crist  |)is  principle  )>at  ech  man  shulde  trowe,  pat  no  man  may 
wel  serve  two  Julie  lordes,/br  opir  shal  he  hate  pe  toon  afid  love  be 
topir,  or  stisteynen  cause  ofpe  toon  and  dispise  pe  topir;  ]?us  algatis 
he  serve]?  amys. — If  he  serve  hem  togidere,  ]?e  cause  is  more 
pleyn;  and  if  he  serve  first  |>e  toon  and  si]?  ]>e  to]>ir,  oj^er  he 
serve})  amys  J?e  toon  or  Jie  to])ir.  In  alle  ])es  resouns  we  shul 
suppose  \2X  ])e  gospel  spekij>  of  siche  lordis  \2X  nou])ir  is  wel 
servaunt  to  ou])ir,  as  ben  God  and  })e  fend ;  for  if  }?er  ben  two 
lordis  and  \2X  oon  serve  wel  jjat  o}?ir,  a  man  may  serve  wel  to 
hem  bojje,  as  we  seen  al  dale;  but  \^  gospel  undirstondi])  of 
siche  cheefe  lordis  \2X  han  not  above  hem  ano]>ir  cheef  lord. 
And  so  is  ]?is  world  dyvydid  in  two  maner  of  lordshipis  \2X 
ben  Goddis  and  ])e  fendis,  for  al3if  ])e  fend  have  no  propre 
lordship  a,  ne]jeles  he  calengi]?  to  have  greet  lordshipe,  and  so 


*  Proper  fiefs  were  those  only 
which  were  held  on  condition  of 
military  semce,  in  which  case  there 
was  a  mutual  benefit.  Improper 
fiefs  were  those  held  upon  con- 
dition of  various  other  kinds  of 
service.     The  devil's  lordship  over 


man  is  not  '  proper,'  because  he  has 
no  right  to  demand  of  man  that  he 
should  fight  his  battles  for  him ;  nor 
is  his  forced  service  to  God  '  proper,' 
because  it  is  attended  by  no  benefit 
to  himself.  See  Hallam's  Middle 
Ages,  I.  181. 


SERMONS. 


^1 


maugre  his  he  serve})  to  God,  and  ))is  servise  is  unpropre,  as  is 
)>e  fendis  lordship,  si)?  he  serve))  not  God  to  his  owne  mede  but 
a3ens  his  wille  he  profitij?  to  Cristis  Chirche,  and  ])us  for  gene- 
ralite  of  lordship  of  Crist,  he  sei]?,  who  is  not  wi]>  him  is  a^ens 
him,  and  jjus  seij?  Crist  wel,  pat  we  may  not  serve  God  and  richesse 
of  pe  worlde,/or  pel  ben  contraries;  for  as  we  may  not  serve  jje 
fend  wij)  servise  of  God,  so  we  may  not  serve  ])e  world  )?at  is 
])e  fendis  servant.  But  in  al  ])is  speche  we  shal  speke  of  ri5t 
servise  and  of  unpropre  servise  jjat  ))e  fend  mystakij),  and  ]?an 
we  may  see  how  siche  heed  servise  may  not  acorde  to  God  and 
to  ))e  world.  For  5if  a  man  traveile  for  goodis  of  ])is  world, 
and  haj)  ri3t  entent  for  to  worshipe  God,  he  serve|>  not  \q  world, 
but  it  serve]?  him.  But  it  is  ful  hard  to  have  siche  ri^t  entent, 
for  sich  entent  mut  be  mesure  of  bisynesse,  and  noumbre  of 
traveile,  and  wei3t^  of  mannys  wille,  and  herfor  forbedi}?  Crist 
bisynesse  of  foode  and  hilyynge,  for  aboute  ))es  two  ]?ingis 
shulden  men  sonnest  be  bysye,  and  Crist  speki]?  of  bisynesse 
most  principal  in  man.  And  so  trewe  men  witen  wele  })at  ech 
man  shulde  cast  al  his  bisynesse  in  God,  as  seint  Petre  biddi]?, 
and  |)us  sei]>  Crist,  pat  we  shulde  not  be  bisye  to  owe  lyf  what  we 
shulden  ete,  ne  to  oure  bodi  what  we  shulde  be  clopid  wip ;  for  sip 
lyf  is  more  pan  mete  and  mannis  bodi  more  pan  chip,  as  God  -i^yvep 
man  pes  two,  so  wille  he  ordeyne  for  hem.  Biholde  'ri^e  pe  foulis  of 
pe  eire,  how  pei  sowen,  neipir  repen,  ne  gederen  not  in  to  bernes,  and 
y.t  God  fedip  hem,  and  sip  y  ben  more  woip  pan  pei,  God  wole 
take  more  heed  to  you.  For  as  5e  bisien  30U  not  of  |)e  bodi, 
so  shulden  3e  not  bisien  30U  of  hilyynge  |)erof  For  what  wolde 
it  profite  to  man  to  bisye  him  pus  about  his  bodi,  sip  he  may  not 
cast  perto  a  cubite,  over  ]?at  kynde  3yve|)  him.  And  jjus  si]j  God 
bi  kynde  of  man  ordeyne]?  for  mannis  bodi,  he  will  ordeyne  for 
])e  lesse,  how  mannis  bodi  shulde  be  hilid.  And  3if  \o\x  seie 
J?at  many  men  bi  J)is  shulde  sterve  for  defaute  of  mete,  wel  Y 
wote  bi  my  bileve  ]?at  no  man  shulde  faile  of  mete  unto  har- 
mynge  of  his  soule,  but  3if  his  synne  be  cause  ])erof,  and  so  \2X 
it  be  good  and  just  Jjat  he  faile  ])us  of  mete ;  and  ]7US  Y  rede 
|)at  God  bad  foulis  and  pore  folk  fede  his  prophete,  and  fedde    1  Kings  xvii. 


^  So  in  B ;  wi-^te  in  A,  weyit  in  C. 


38  WFCLIF'S 

him  as  best  was  to  profite  of  his  soule.  And  of  clopis  what 
ben  Y  bisye?  loke  ye  to  pe  lylyes  ofpefelde^  how  pei  growe  and  ben 
cled  and  pei  traveilen  not  pereaboute,  ne  spynnen  for  jjer  cloi]?,  and 
yt  Salomon  i?i  al  his  glorie  was  not  cled  as  oon  of  pes  is,  for  shap 
and  coloure  of  lely  flours  is  not  made  bi  mannis  crafte ;  and 
so,  yf  pe  hay  of  pe  feld  pat  now  is,  and  to~morewe  is  brent,  is  pus 
cled  bi  Goddis  wit,  myche  more  wolde  he  elope  vien,  jjat  he  telli}> 
more  by.  And  so  litilnes  of  bileeve  maki|)  men  jjus  to  be  bisy, 
for  J)ei  witen  not  what  manere  of  ]?ing  is  profitable  for  mannis 
soule,  and  so,  Be  we  not  bisye  what  we  shal  ete  or  drynke  or  wip 
whatpingis  oure  bodi  shal  be  atired,  Jfor  al  sich  pingis  seken  hepen 
menfaste,  and  so  seke  we  first  pe  kingdom  of  God  and  ri^twysnesse 
of  him,  and  all  siche  pingis  shal  be  cast  to  us.  A3ens  |>is  lore 
synnen  men  of  J^e  world,  ^he  preestis  and  clerkes  and  men  of 
religioun,  for  |>ei  bisien  hem  for  atire  and  for  foode  also,  J>at 
profitith  not  to  J)er  soule,  J^at  God  forfendi))  here;  and,  for 
breking  of  ))is  heste  brekij?  |?e  ten  comandmentis,  and  al  men 
of  |>is  world  ben  ful  ny5  to  breke  it,  J)erfore  Crist  and  hise 
aposdis,  and  Baptist,  and  oJ>er  prophetis  kepten  hem  ferr  fro 
))is  peril,  lest  J?ei  slydun  j)erinne.  And  Crist  wi|)  his  disciplis 
wolde  not  be  weddid  wij)  habitis  ne  manere  of  penaunt^  metis, 
lest  )?ei  weren  to  bisie  for  nou3t,  and  hou  evere  we  denyen  }>at 
we  ben  to  bisye  here,  nejjeles  Goddis  lawe,  jjat  is  Crist,  shal 
rykene  wiJ)  us  and  juge  us  at  ]>q  dale  of  dome,  wher  |>is  be  so]> 
|>at  we  seyen,  and  ])an  worship  of  )?is  worlde  and  curtais  manere 
j)at  men  axen  shal  not  excuse  us,  but  resoun  shal  be  our  juge. 


)^E   SIXTEEN)?    SONDAI   GOSPEL   AFTER   TrINITE. 


The  raising  of 
the  widow's 
son  at  Nairn. 


[SERMON     XVI.] 

Ibat  fesus  in  civitatem  quae  vocatur  Naym. — Lucae  vii.  [ii.] 

pis  gospel  tellijj  of  a  myracle  Jjat  Crist  dide  of  a  deed  bodi 
J)at  was  )?e  secounde  of  J)re  j)at  Crist  reiside  fro  dej>  to  lyf.  And 
so  telli]?  ]?e  gospel  ]>at  fesus  wente  in  to  a  cite  pat  is  clepid  Naym 

*  So  in  B ;  penaut,  A ;  poynant,  C ;  penaunce,  E. 


SERMONS. 


39 


wip  his  disciplis  and  oper  puple.    And  whajtne  he  cam  ny^  pe  ^afe 
of  pe  cttee,  cam  a  cors  pat  was  born  to  be  biried,  pat  was  a  childe 
of  a  widowe,  and  myche  puple  of  pe  citee  cam  wip  pis  widowe  and 
viade  soreive.     And  whan  Crist  sawe  pis  widowe,  he  hadde  mercy 
upon  hir,  and  bad  hir  wepe  not;  but  he  went  and  touchide  pe  beere 
pat  pei  baren  and  pes  men  pat  bar  en  pe  beere  stooden  s  title  to  see 
the  ende.     And  Crist  seide  to  pe  dede  bodi,  ^ounge  man,  Y  bidde 
pe  aryse ;  And  pe  '^ounge  ma?i  pat  was  deed  sate  up  and  bigan  to 
speke,  and  Crist  -i^af  him  to  his  modir.     At  pe  puple  hadde  drede, 
and  preisiden  Gody  and  saiden,  pat  a  greet  prophete  roos  amonge 
hem,  and  pat  God  hadde  visitid  his  puple,  for  this  miracle  ]jat  \€\ 
seien.     pe  gospel  tellij)  of  J>re  dede  bodies  \2X  Crist  reiside  fro 
de]>  to  lyf.     pe  firste  was  ])e  persones  doubter  J>at  he  reiside 
\vi])in  ))e  hous ;    jje   secounde  was   )?is  widowes   sone  Jjat   he 
quykede  in  |)e  5ate;  J)e  jjridde  was  \^  stynkyng  careyne  |?at 
he  quykide   in  j>e  grave.     And  jjis  bitokene]?  Jjree   synnes  ]?at 
God  for5eve]7  in  ]?is  worlde.     pe  firste  bitokene]?  ful  consense 
for  to  do  a^ens  God,  but  it  comej?  not  out  in  deede,  as  jje  maide 
lay  in  J)e   hous.     pe   secounde  bitokene]?  ]?e   secounde   synne, 
whan  a  man  to  wickide  wille  putte]>  to  a  wickide  dede,  but  he 
come})  not  to  custom  as  dide  Lazarus  \2X  was  biried  in  a  grave, 
and  ])is  is  }>e  5ong  man  \2X  we  speken  of  stonding  in  ])e  5ate. 
pe  Jjridde  synne  addi]?  to  ]?es  two  a  long  custom  to  ligge  in 
synne,  and  ])is   is  Lazar  \2X  foure   daies  lay  stinkinge  in  his 
grave,      pe    secounde  is    a  widowes   sone,   for  siche   synners 
wanten  God,  and  so  \€\,  failinge  of  spouse,  of  Jjc  Chirche  may 
wel  be  clepid-a  widowe,  but  ]>ei  han  sorwe  of  her  synne,  and 
o})ir  nei^boris   also.     Crist  biddi]?  })e  beere   stoonde  whan  he 
ceessi})  men  of  her  synne;  and  he  touchi]?  ])e  bodi,  whane  he 
3yve])  hem   contricion,  and  he   comandi]?  it  to    arise,  whanne 
he  comandi])  medeful  werkes,  and  ]?is  man  bigynne})  to  speke, 
whanne  he  })ankid  God  in  grace,  and  Crist  3yve])  him  to  his 
modir,  whanne   he   maki])  him  helpe  his  Chirche.      And  })us 
wente  Crist  into  Naym,  whanne  he  entride  newe  to  his  Chirche ; 
for  Naym  is  as  myche  to  say  as  flowynge  or  movynge,  for  })e 
Chirche  first  flowide  wi]?  synne,  and  si}?  was  moved  to  God  by 
hemes  of  })e  Holy  Goost,  whan  it  hadde  grace  to  come  to  him. 
Wi]?  Crist  wente   his   disciplis   and   a   greet  route  of  folk,  for 


Mystical  inter- 
pretation of 
the  miracle. 


40 


WFCLIF'S 


Attack  on  the 
hierarcliy. 


many  weren  helpers  of  God  to  bringe  his  Chirche  to  u'^X.  staat. 
pe  3ate  of  |?is  citee  is  entree  to  religioun  of  Cristis  Chirche,  in 
which  5ate  ben  many  ^onge  men,  blynde  and  deed  goostli,  for 
jjei  knowen  not  Cristis  religioun  how  it  passi|>  alle  oJ>ir.  And 
so  in  |>is  5ate  ben  two  maneres  of  dede  men.  To  summe  loki|> 
Crist,  and  quykej?  hem  in  grace,  and  3yve]>  hem  power  and 
wille  to  come  clene  to  his  order.  And  wite  ])at  al  o]jer  ordris 
ben  chargious  to  men  as  myche  as  ^e\  adden  to  Cristis  reli- 
gioun, ifor  noon  addicioun  is  wor]?  but  ^if  Goddis  lawe  grounde 
it.  Sum  men  ben  deed  in  J)is  ^ate  |)at  Crist  aquyke]?  not,  but 
lasten  in  her  olde  errours  to  her  de]?  dai ;  and  ben  |)es  jjat  taken 
a  lyf  ungroundid  in  Goddis  lawe,  and  ]?es  men  lasten  in  her 
errour  out  of  ]?e  bondis  of  Goddis  lawe,  and  ben  born  fro  j>e 
5ate  to  be  beried  in  helle.  But  ])ere  is  a  privy  quykenynge  |?at 
God  doi|>  nei3  J)e  dee)),  |?at  we  can  not  telle  of,  but  if  God  wil 
shewe  it  us,  and  j^erefore  folis  jugement  shulde  be  fled  in  ])is 
mater ;  and  ])us  ))es  men  )>at  baren  })is  beere  to  putt  |>is  deed 
man  in  erjje,  ben  -men  |)at  consenten  and  procuren  to  wickid- 
nesse.  And  so  upon  ])es  jjree  synnes  God  haj?  mercy  here,  but 
upon  ]>e  fer]je  synne  God  ceessi)>  never  to  punnishe,  for  ]>qi 
synnen  to  ]?e  dee]>,  and  so  a5ens  the  ^Hooly  Goost,  j^at  God  mut 
needis  punishe  wijjouten  ende,  for  ])is  synne  may  have  noon 
eende  in  helle.  In  ])is  mater  we  shulden  bewar  of  peril  of 
ypocrisie,  for  many  feynen  hem  in  statis,  and  done  reverse  in 
her  lyf,  and  ^it  jjei  seien  ]?ei  ben  perfiter  })an  weren  Jje  first 
clerkis  of  Crist.  And  ])us  enemyes  of  Cristis  religioun  chalengen 
to  be  of  his  ordre,  al3if  ]>ey  done  even  ]?e  contrarie  to  name  ]?at 
])ei  beren ;  as  ])e  Pope  shulde  be  moost  meke  man,  moost  ser- 
vysable  and  most  pore,  as  we  ben  tau^t  in  Seint  Petir  J)at  was 
Pope  next  after  Crist.  And  now  men  seyen  J>at  ]?e  Pope  mote 
nedis  reverse  ))is  ordenaunce,  and  have  more  power  for  to  do 
|>ingis  ])at  touchen  excellence,  and  ])us  bishopis  |)at  shulden  be 
clerkis  and  pore  men,  as  apostlis  weren,  ben  moost  lordis  of 
|)is  world,  and  reversen  apostlis  lyf  Sum  tyme  weren  mounkes 
lewede  men,  as  seintis  in  Jerusalem ;  and  jjanne  j^ei  kept  hem  silf 
fro  synne  as  seynt  Bernard  berij)  witnesse ;  but  now  monkes 
ben  turned  unto  lordis  of  ])is  worlde  moost  ydel  in  goddis 
travaile,  and  seyen  |)at  )?ei  ben  betre  monkes  J)an  weren  ]>e  first 


SERMONS. 

seintis.  And  so  freris,  ]>at  weren  brej^eren  in  Crist,  and  not 
chargeous  to  |)e  Chirche,  neijjir  in  noumbre  ne  in  clo|>ing,  ne 
in  mete  ne  in  housynge,  ben  even  turned  a3en  fro  ))e  first  lyf 
of  hem,  and  ^it  bi  })er  ypocrisie  )?ei  blynden  jie  Chirche  many 
3atis,  and  })us  names  of  offices  and  names  of  virtues  also  ben 
changid  bi  ypocrisie,  and  cursed  men  reulen  J?e  world. 


t^E   SEVENTENbE   SoNDAI   AFTIR    TrINITE. 

[SERMON     XVI  I.] 

Cum  infras  set  Jesus  domwn  cujusdam. — Luc.  xiv.  [i.] 

pis  gospel  techij?  men  how  |?ei  shal  not  by  Jjer  hi3  staat  hide 
jjere  synne,  and  disturble  ]?e  ordenaunce  ]?at  Crist  ha]>  made. 
pe  story  telli)>  hou  Jesus  entride  in  to  a  Pharisees  hous  on  a 
Satirday  to  ete  wip  him,  and  pei  aspieden  to  take  him  in  dejaute ; 
and  a  syke  man  in  dropesie  was  per  bifore  Crist.  And  Jesus  spake 
to  wyse  men  oj pe  tawe,  and  to  Pharisees,  where  it  were  leveful  to 
hele  inpe  Sabot;  and  pei  weren  stille,  lest  ]>at  resoun  wente  a3ens 
hem ;  but  Crist  toke  pis  syke  man,  and  heelide  him  panne  bifore 
hem,  afid  Crist  axide  hem  pis  demaunde,pat  '^ijper  oxe  or  per  asse 

felle  in  pe  diche,  wolde  pei  not  drawe  him  out  in  per  sabot  date; 
and  jjei  wisten  wel  ]?at  ]?ei  shulden  by  bileve  of  Jjere  owen  lawe, 
and  pei  my^te  not  answere  him  to  denye  \2X  he  axide.  And  upon 
]jis  arguyde  Crist  j?at  myche  more  it  were  leveful  to  helpe  in  ])e 
Sabot  a  man  put  in  more  peril,  si]>  ]?is  work  is  more  spirituel, 
and  man  is  beter  |>an  a  beest.  And,  for  \q  synne  of  Jjese  men 
stood  in  pryde  of  her  statis,  Crist  tolde  hem  a  parable,  techinge 
hem  how  pei  shulden  chese  pe  first  statis ;  J>at  God  lovede  moost, 
J>at  was  moost  meke  statis,  but  \€\  chosen  as  proude  men  |)e 
first  statis  to  )?e  world.     But  Crist  biddij)  in  his  parable.  Whan 

pou  ert  biden  to  pe  feste,  sitte  not  inpe  first  place,  lest  a  more  wor- 
shipful pan  pou  be  beden  to  pe  sa7?ie  feest,  and  pe  lord  of  pe  feste 
bidde  pee.,  '^ive  pis  man  stede,  and  put  pee  doun  out  of  pi  place,  and 

pan  shall  pou  bygynne  wip  shame  for  to  holde  pe  last  place.  Ajid 
herfore  whan  pou  art  beden  to  a  feste,  sitte  doun  in  pe  last  place, 


41 


1/ 


The  healing  of 
the  man  that 
had  the 
dropsy. 


42 


WY  CLIP'S 


so  pat  he  pat  hap  beden  pee  seie  to  pee  for  pi  mekenesse,  Frend  stye 
more  up;  pan7ie  shalt  pou  have  worship  and  joie  bifore  hem  pat 
sitten  at  pe  feste.  For  ech  man  pat  heiep  him  by  presumpcioun 
shal  be  mekid  bi  God,  and  he  pat  mekip  him  in  his  soule  shal  be 
heyed  bi  God.  pere  we  shal  undirstonde  |>at  Crist  speki]?  not 
here  of  worldely  feste,  ne  of  place,  for  J?anne  his  sentence  were 
nou^t ;  for  ]>an  strif  shulde  be  for  place,  and  oonli  oon  shulde 
•do  Cristis  bidding,  and  so  Crist  shulde  ordeyne  discencioun 
wi]?outen  fruyt  among  men ;  and  herfore  shulde  we  undirstonde 
])at  )?is  feste  is  |?e  laste  soper,  jjat  shal  be  in  heven  of  seintis 
aftir  ]?e  day  of  dome ;  and  \q  last  place  at  ]?is  feeste  shulde  be 
mannis  reputacioun,  bi  whiche  he  shulde  not  presume  to  be  in 
heven  bifore  o])irs,  but  reste  mekeli  in  |?is  jjat  he  shal  come  to 
hevene.  Eche  man  shal  hope  for  to  come  to  bhsse ;  and  if  he 
lyve  febly  and  make  J>is  hope  fals,  himsilf  is  cause  whi  his  hope 
is  suche.  Ffor  ]?is  fals  hope,  Jiat  sum  men  do  clepen  dispeir, 
shulde  have  ano})ir  qualite,  and  it  shulde  not  be  sich,  whan  we 
witen  ]jat  we  shulden  hope  for  to  come  to  hevene,  after  we 
maken  comparisoun  bytwene  us  and  o]>ers ;  and  many  men  for 
pryde  hopen  to  passe  oJ>ers,  and  suche  presumpcioun  of  hope 
is  sittynge  here  in  hey  place.  We  shulden  reste  in  jjis  hope 
|)at  we  shal  come  to  hevene,  and  leve  sich  veyne  comparisouns, 
lest  we  setten  us  here  to  hey,  and  |)is  is  \^  last  place  ))at  |)e 
gospel  speki]>  of  And  ])us  siche  false  presumpcioun  of  heynes 
of  state,  and  aftir  )>is  presumpcioun,  of  heyenesse  in  hevene, 
makij)  a  man  to  come  at  |>e  laste  to  j?e  loweste  place  in  |)e 
world,  jjat  is  to  seie,  to  depe  helle,  \2X  is  jje  myddil  of  J^e  world. 
And  so  speki|>  )>e  gospel  on  two  weies  of  jje  last  place.  The 
laste  place  here  stondi]?  in  meke  reputacioun,  but  ])e  last  place 
at  |)e  day  of  dome  stondi]>  in  dampnacioun.  And  so  knyttij> 
Crist  wel  \q  helynge  of  ))is  ydropesie,  for  as  ydropesie  is  an 
yvel  of  fals  gretenesse  of  mennys  lymes,  and  come])  of  unkyndli 
watir  bitwene  Jje  fleish  and  ])e  skyn ;  so  pride  of  worldly  goodis, 
\2X  ben  unstable  as  ])e  watir,  maki])  a  man  in  ydropesie,  and 
falsely  presume  of  himsilf;  as  many  men  in  greet  astaate  and 
in  ryches  of  ))is  worlde  j^enken  jjat  \€\  shulden  ])us  in  heven 
be  bifore  o|>ir  men.  For,  as  \€\  supposen  now,  |>ei  lyven  to 
God  aftir  |?er  staat,  and  so  ]?ei  profiten  more  in  J?is  world  jjan 


SERMONS. 

done  men  under  hem,  and  after  jjat  ]>ei  profiten  more,  ))ei  shal 
be  hei3er  in  hevene,  and  so  jiei  seien,  as  J>ei  shulden  hope  to 
come  to  hevene,  so  shulde  J>ei  hopen  here  to  be  heier  in 
hevene.  But  siche  proude  men,  and  presumptuous  of  her 
staat,  shulden  traveil  in  virtues  |)at  j^ei  begilen  not  hem  silf ; 
and  J>erfore  techij)  jje  ^vise  man,  jjat  ever  )?e  more  )?at  |jou  be 
here,  ever  j>e  more  meke  )>ou  shuldist  be,  in  al  manere  of 
mekenes.  And  so,  if  ])0u  be  greet  here,  ]?ou  shuldist  reste  in 
\>e  last  place,  and  suppose  mekeli  of  )?i  silf  wijjouten  siche 
comparisoun.  Ffor  who  is  he  )?at  may  seie  he  serve)?  God 
after  his  staat  ?  and  so  statis  here  and  statis  in  hevene,  late  or 
nevere  acorden  togidere,  for  fewe  men  here  or  noon  serven 
God  even  to  ]?er  state ;  and  so  statis  of  men  may  cause  |?er 
dampnyng  deep  in  helle,  and  for  uneven  service  here  in  statis, 
may  men  ben  ful  lowe  in  hevene. 

pe  lessoun  of  ]jis  gospel  is  litil  coud  in  ]7e  Chirche,  for  lordis 
stryven  wij?  hem  silfe,  and  religiouse  among  hem  silf,  about 
heyenes  of  ]?er  staat,  and  jje  rote  of  al  |)is  is  pryde.  And  J)ei 
shulden  wite  jjat  states  here  ben  harmful  unto  men,  but  ^if  men 
after  her  statis  serven  treuly  to  jjer  God ;  ffor  falsnesse  in  statis 
maki|)  men  to  be  low  or  dampned. 


43 


The  lesson  of 
this  gospel  is 
against  pride, 
both  in  the 
laity  and  the 
clergy. 


pE  EI3TEN)>E   SONDAI   AFTIR   TRINITE. 


[SERMON     XVIIL] 


Accesserunt  ad  Jesu7n  Pharisei  audienies. — Matt.  xxii.  [34.] 

pis  gospel  tellij)  how  Crist  distroiede  sectis,  techinge  us  how 
we  shulden  traveile  suying  Crist  in  j)is.  pe  storye  of  ])e  gospel 
sei)>  )>at  whan  pe  Phariseis  hadden  herd  pat  Crist  hadde  stejnned'^ 
Saduceis,  on  of  pe  Phariseis^  pat  was  a  doctour  of  lawe,  temptide 
Crist  on  pis  wise,  and  axide  him  pis  question,  Maister,  which  is 
a  greet  mandement  in  pe  lawe?    And  fesus  seide  to  him  pus,  pou 

1  The  reading  of  B  is  stonyed,  i.  e.  astonished ;  C,  stoned,  a  '  y '  being 
inserted  by  a  later  hand;  stemnyde,  E.  Both  Wycliffite  versions  have 
*  put  to  silence.' 


44 


WYC  LIE'S 


The  modern 
Pharisees  are 
supposed  by 
many  to  be 
limbs  of  the 
fiend. 


shall  love  pi  Lord  God  of  al  pi  herte^  in  al  pi  soule,  and  in  al  pi 
mynde;  pis  is  pe  firste  and  pe  moste  mandement  of  alle.  And  jjis 
mandement  is  ]?e  first  of  ]?re  of  J)e  first  table,  ffor  jjre  of  \^  first 
table  techen  to  love  God,  and  conteyne|>  \x^  partis  answeringe 
to  |?e  Trinite.  It  is  seid  comounly  ])at  in  tyme  of  Crist  weren 
J>re  sectis  of  religions,  Pharises,  Saduceis,  and  Esses,  but  of  ]>e 
two  first  makij)  J)is  gospel  mencioun.  pe  firste  was  moost 
my3ty,  and  Jjerfor  it  lastide  lengest ;  for  aboundance  of  goodis, 
and  long  rotyng  in  ]je  sect,  defenden  ]jes  sectis,  and  maken 
hard  to  distroie  hem.  But  Crist  distriede  J^es  sectis  and  savede 
l^e  persones ;  as  Poul  and  Nichodeme  weren  makid  bi  grace 
Cristen  men.  And  herfore  sei|)  |>is  gospel,  )?at  Crist  stemned  ^ 
Saduceis,  not  |>at  he  distriede  hem,  si]?  he  lovede  ])er  persones ; 
and  so  Crist  distriede  |?e  errours  of  Phariseis,  as  he  distriede  j?e 
errours  of  |)e  o])er  two.  Sum  men  Jjenken  licly  \2X  ])is  doctour 
J)at  here  temptide  Crist,  dredde  him  of  his  sect  J)at  Crist  shulde 
distroien  it,  or  ellis  enfeblen  it,  as  he  distriede  |>e  myddil  sect, 
and  |)is  is  more  hcly  J?an  |?at  |)is  doctour  dide  for  veyn  glorie 
or  to  be  holden^  wise  or  to  lerne  Goddis  lawe.  He  clepide 
Crist  reverently  maister,  ffor  it  is  manere  of  ypocritis  and  of 
sophists  to  fage  and  to  speke  plesantli  to  men,  but  for  yvel 
entent.  But  oure  Pharisees  to  dai  done  wel  wers,  ffor  ]>ei  putten 
abac  goddis  lawe  and  magnifien  jjer  ordres ;  and  ])us  \€\  fallen 
in  j>e  first  mandement,  and  so  in  al  oj^er.  And  many  men 
trowen  not  ne  supposen  jjat  \€\  ben  men  of  holi  Chirche,  but 
supposen  jjat  \€\  ben  lymes  of  |)e  fend.  But  he  love]?  God  of 
al  his  herte  ]?at  love]?  him  of  al  his  witt ;  and  he  lovej?  God  in  al 
his  lyf  ]?at  love]?  him  in  al  his  werkes ;  for  Cristen  men  lyven  in 
God,  and  ben  moved  to  al  her  werkes ;  for  Crist  is  forme  of 
god,  and  in  Crist  we  lyven,  as  Poul  sei]?.  And  herfore  we  shal 
not  take  ]?e  word  of  oure  God  in  veyn.  pe  })ridde  part  of  ]?is 
mandement,  answerynge  to  ]?e  Holy  Goost,  biddi]?  ]?ee  love  ]?i 
God  in  al  ]?i  mynde,  si]?  he  is  mynde  of  ]?e  Fadir,  and  of  ]?e 
Sone,  and  love  of  hem  two ;  for  undirstonding  in  a  man,  and 
acte  of  him,  }?at  is  his  lyf,  and  refleccioun  of  lyf,  ]?at  is  mynd 


^  B  here  reads  s.temnede,  in  agreement  with  A  ;    C  has  stoned  or  stilled. 
^  This  is  the  reading  of  B ;  A  has  biholden ;  be  holdun,  E. 


SJiRMONS. 


45 


and  wille  of  soule,  bitokene})  to  Cristene  men  her  God,  j?at  is  ]?e 
Trinite.  And  herfore  biddi]>  Goddis  lawe,  have  mynde  to  holde 
]>\n  hahdai.  And  jjan  we  loven  jiis  Trinite  perfitli  as  we  shulden, 
whan  we  loven  it  more  |)an  ony  o]?ir  ]?ing ;  and  as  many  men 
)?enken,  ^if  )?is  Pharisee  kepte  ]?is,  he  shulde  leve  |>is  straunge 
sect,  as  shulden  jjes  newe  religions. — p^  secounde  mandement,  j>at 
is  sevene,  biddip  pe  love  pi  fiei-^bore  as  pou  lovest  pisil/e,  and  |)at 
art  ]?ou  tau3t  by  kynde,  and  hi  pese  two  mandemetits  hongip  al  pe 
lawe  and  pe  prophctis.  Atid  ivhan  pe  Farisees  were  gedrid,  Crist 
axide  hem  a  questioun  of  jjing  )?at  ]?ei  shulden  bileve.  What  hem 
poHi,t  of  pe  kynde  of  Crista  and,  whos  sone  Crist  is;  and  pei  seiden, 
He  is  David  sone;  and  Crist  replied  ayns  pis,  how  David  ckpide 
him  his  lord,  si]>  Crist  is  David  sone,  and  porer  man  ]?an  David 
was.  pe  psalm  tellij)  how  David  seide  of  J)e  Fadir  and  j>e  Sone, 
P^  Lord,  ]>e  Fadir,  seide  to  my  Lord,  Sitte  up  on  my  ri-^t  side  as 
lo?2g  as  V putt  pi  eneinyes  in  helle  a  stool  undir  pi  feet.  And  sij? 
])is  dampnyng  shal  be  ever,  God  grantide  here  to  Crist  jiat  he 
shulde  ever  sitt  in  hevene  on  his  Fadir  ri3t  hond ;  Ffor  ■:i,if  David 
depip  him  Lord,  how  is  pore  Crist  David  sone?  And  pei  my-s^te 
not  here  answere  Crist,  ne  dursten  not  axe  him  more  fro  pat  dai. 
— And  here  convyctide  Crist  |)es  men  of  open  untreujje  in  hir 
bileve ;  and  so  mente  privily  jjat  ])es  sectis  shulden  be  distried, 
sijj  he  shal  reprove  ]je  worlde  of  |)e  synne  of  untreujje.  And  it 
seme]?  to  many  men  ]?at  alle  ]jes  sectis  synnen  ])us,  for  \t\  loven 
not  hir  God  as  |)e  gospel  bidde]?  here ;  for  3if  \t\  loveden  wel 
God,  \€\  shulden  kepe  ])is  word  of  him.  Generaly  ]>es  newe 
sectis  loven  more  jjer  owen  ordre  ])an  }?ei  done  jie  ordre  of 
Crist,  which  he  3af  his  owne  persone ;  and  ])an  Jjei  loven  her 
sect  more  ])an  \€\  loven  ]?e  sect  of  Crist,  pis  sect  of  Crist  by 
]?at  is  lasse  \2X  \€\  putten  in  |)es  newe  sectis ;  si]?  Jiei,  kepinge 
Cristis  secte,  bi  ]?at  maken  his  sect  more ;  and  it  is  oon  to  love 
a  ]?ing  and  to  willen  ]?at  ]?ing  good ;  but  J?ei  wolden  J?at  al  ]?is 
world  were  suget  unto  ]?er  sect.  And,  Lord  !  if  ]?at  men  wolden 
undirstonden,  what  it  is  to  love  a  }?ing ;  and  whanne  men  loven, 
loven  ]?er  god  over  al  o]?ir  J?ingis ;  ]?anne  heresie  of  }?es  newe 
sectis,  and  o]?ir  errours  in  ]>e  worlde  shulden  be  more  knowen 
unto  folk  ]?an  ]?ei  ben  now  for  ypocrisie.  pes  ypocritis  seien 
}?at  ]?er  sectis  and  al  }?e  deedis  }?at  ]?ei  done  is  groundid  upon 


The  new  sects 
love  their  own 
order  more 
than  the  order 
of  Christ. 


46 


WrCLIF'S 


The  miracu- 
lous cure  of 
the  paralytic. 


Mystical  inter- 
pretation. 


Crist,  and  is  Cristis  religioun ;  and  so  ]?ei  have  none  newe 
ordris,  but  new  customes,  jjat  ]?ei  may  leve ;  and  so  j?ei  shulden 
seie  bi  resoun  J>at  j?er  be  not  many  ordris  of  freris,  ne  accepcions 
of  persones  to  helpe  or  to  punishe  men ;  si])J>e  ech  man  of 
Cristis  religioun  is  of  alle  manere  ordre ;  and  so  lawe  of  apos- 
tataas  and  of  ojjir  reulys  ])at  ]>ei  have  founden,  shulden  ben 
contrarye  to  hemsilf,  as  freris  dedis  reversen  |)is  lawe. 


pE   NYNTEN^E   SONDAI    GOSPEL   AFTIR   TrINITE. 

[SERMON     XIX.] 

Ascendens  Jesus  in  naviculam. — Matt,  ix,  [i,] 

pis  gospel  telli]?  of  a  miracle  ]?at  Crist  dide  before  ])e  peple, 
and  jjerwij)  reprevyde  \t  scribis ;  and  how  he  doi]?  awei  synne. 
pe  story  telli]?  how  Jesus  steyy  in  to  a  boot,  and  cam  to  his  citee, 
and  it  is  seid  comounly  jjat  he  rowide  to  Galilee,  and  cam  in  to 
Nazarep,  J?at  was  citee  of  his  birpe,  and  pere  pey  brow^ten  him 
a  syke  man  by  palsie,  liynge  in  a  bedde.  And  Jesus  seynge  her 
bileve,  seide  unto  pis  syke  man,  Have  trust,  sone,  pi  synes  ben  now 
Joryven  pee.  And  sum  scribis  seiden  wipinne  hemsilf,  Jesus 
blasfemep  in  pis  word.  And  whan  Crist  saiv  hir  pow^tis  wipinne, 
he  seide.  Whereto  pei  pou-i^ten  pus  yvel  in  her  hertis  .^  And  bi  J?is 
word  he  tau3te  hem  jjat  he  was  God,  for  oonli  God  mai  ]?is  wise 
wite,  what  a  man  JienkiJ)  wi]>ynne.  Crist  axide  hem,  Where  is 
it  li'^ter,  to  seie,  pi  synnes  ben  for'^yven  pee,  or  ellis  to  seie,  rys  and 
go  .^  as  3if  Crist  wolde  mene  ]?is  resoun,  he  }>at  ha]>  power  to  do 
))at  oon,  ha]?  power  to  do  hem  bo])e.  And  Jesus  seide.  For  y 
shulde  wite  pat  Y  have  power  to  for'i,yve  synne,  he  seide  to  pe  man 
in  palasie,  Rys  and  take  pi  bedde  anoon  and  go  hool  in  to  pi  hous. 
And  he  aroos  and  wente  in  to  his  hous  on  jjat  manere  \2X  Crist 
bad  him,  and  pe  puple  seynge  pis  ping  dredden,  afid  glorifieden 
God  pat  -i^af  siche  power  to  men.  As  to  Jesus  and  his  disciplis, 
J)is  storye  of  Crist  may  betoken  \^  lyf  |?at  Crist  lyvede  here ;  so 
))at  ])e  takyng  of  his  boot  bitokenej?  his  manheed,  or  )?e  bodi  of 
his  modir ;   for  mannis  bodi  is  liche  a  boot.     In  ]jis  boot  Crist 


SERMONS. 


47 


wente  over  j^e  water  of  peynes  of  ]?is  worlde,  and  wente  not 
oonli  into  hevcne,  j>at  is  propre  citee  of  Crist,  but  into  NazareJ), 
in  which  Crist  dide  J)is  miracle.  But  boj^e  men  and  aungels 
ofFred  to  Crist  mankynde,  |)at  was  smyten  in  palesie ;  for  pro- 
pirte  of  }>is  yvel  palasie  is  a  sikenesse  groundid  in  synewis  of 
a  man,  ]>e  which  sinowis  ben  unstable  to  move  a  man  as  ]>q\ 
shulden ;  and  moistnes  of  j)es  senewis  ]>at  ben  wrappid  in  moist 
})ing  is  a  cause  of  |)is  yvel,  as  philosophris  seyen.  Shaking  in 
j?e  palesie  is  unstabilnesse  of  bileve ;  for  eche  article  of  |)e 
trou})e  shulde  have  a  synowe  for  to  lede  it,  and  al  fjes  articlis 
shulde  come  of  Crist,  ]?at  is  heed  of  holy  Chirche.  And,  for 
|)es  ]?at  offriden  ]>is  man  ben  o  persone  wij)  him,  )?erefore  biddi]) 
J)e  gospel  wel,  |)at  Cristis  sone  shulde  truste  in  him,  and  Crist 
for^eve)?  him  first  his  synne  of  untreuj^e  ])at  he  was  inne,  for 
untreujje  is  J>e  first  synne  jjat  come]?  unto  man,  and  it  fel  not 
to  jjis  lord  to  3yve  but  a  greet  jyfte,  sij?  ech  ^yfte  Jjat  man  5yveJ) 
shulde  answer  to  \q  5yver.  But  scribis  jjat  knowen  not  Cristis 
godhede  seien  jjat  Crist  blasfemed  in  |)is,  for  al  oonli  God  may 
for^yve  synnes;  but  Crist  techi]?  ])at  he  is  God  bi  \e  werkes 
J)at  he  doi]),  for  it  is  yliche  ^  li5t  to  do  miracUs  bi  himsilf,  and 
to  for^yve  synnes,  for  noon  but  God  may  do  ]?es  ]?ingis.  And 
herfore  Crist  helide  mankynde  of  his  goostly  palesie,  and  put 
bileve  in  o|>ir  men  |)at  Crist  hadde  power  to  do  |)us,  and  |)us 
wente  mankynde,  |?at  God  hadde  ordeyned  unto  blisse,  fro  error 
of  his  olde  synne  into  jje  hous  of  Cristis  Chirche. 

But  here  men  douten  of  ]je  letter,  wher  prelatis  may  for3yve 
synne,  and  it  seme]?  ]?at  |)ei  may,  for  preestis  may  assoile  of 
synne,  and  it  is  al  oon  to  assoile  men  of  synne  and  to  for^yve 
J)e  same  synne.  And  it  seme]?  J^at  preestis  mai  not  for3yve 
synnes  unto  men,  for  J)ere  is  noo  synne  here  but  5if  it  be  offence 
of  God ;  but  no  man  mai  for3eve  })is  but  3if  it  be  God  him  silfe. 
And  so  it  seme])  ])at  oure  prelatis  may  not  here  for3yve  synne. 
So})  it  is  ])at  men  mai  here  for3y  ve  trespas  done  to  hem,  and  remitte 
mannis  iniurie  as  much  as  in  hem  is,  but  not  remitte  uttirly 
synne  done  a5ens  God.  Here  it  is  nede  to  undirstonde  how 
preestis  assoilen  men  of  synne,  and  how  preestis  for3yven  synne, 


Limits  of  ^^ 

priestly 

absolution. 


^  ilicb,  B  ;  eliche,  C. 


48  WYCLIF'S 

for  bo]>e  ben  conseyved  wel  and  yvel :  preestis  may  assoile  of 
synne  if  J?ei  acorden  \vi]>  keies  of  Crist,  and  if  ]?ei  discorden  fro 
;  ]jes  keies,  J^ei  feynen  hem  falsely  to  assoile.  And  so  on  two 
;  maneres  men  may  be  assoilid  of  her  synnes;  and  first  pryn- 
'  cipaly  of  God  whan  Goddis  injurie  is  for30ven ;  and  ]?e  secounde 
I  is  assoiling  by  a  turne  |?at  preestis  han ;  and  if  J)is  assoilinge  be 
j  trewe,  \€\  kepen  \q  boundis  |)at  God  5af  hem,  and  |)is  assoilinge 
I  han  preestis  as  vikers  of  goddis  wille.  And  ]?ere  lien  many 
;  disseitis  in  suche  absolucioun,  for  if  ]?is  assoilinge  be  trewe,  it 
!  mut  acorde  wi|)  Cristis  assoilinge,  and  to  such  assoilinge  is 
j  needful  bojje  witt  and  power.  And  so  on  two  maneres  may 
'  a  man  remitte  or  deny  J)e  trespas  \2X  is  done  to  him,  and  so 
!  remitte  synne ;  first  remitte  wronge  of  God,  jjat  is  propred  unto 
God,  or  ellis  dismitte  wronge  of  his  bro|>er  in  \2X  ]?at  it  is  made 
:  a^ens  him.  And  so  remission  is  complete  ]jat  perteyne]?  oonly 
I  to  God,  or  ellis  remissioun  incomplete  ]?at  men  shulden  have 
I  generaly,  for  ellis  Crist  wolde  not  teche  men  to  preie  on  |>is 
maner,  For^yve  us.  Lord,  oure  dettes  of  synne,  as  we  for3yven 
oure  dettours.  ^\i  ony  man  wolde  telle  more  pleynly  |^is  sen- 
tence bi  Goddis  lawe,  Y  wole  mekeli  assente  Jjerto,  3if  pei 
grounden  Jjat  Jjei  seien  ;  and  3if  ony  man  prove  ])is  fals  or  a3ens 
Goddis  lawe  |)at  Y  have  seid  now  here,  Y  wole  revoken  it  mekeli, 
but  wele  Y  marke  ]?at  j^is  gospel  sei|?  \2.\.  God  3af  sich  power 
to  men,  but  j^is  gospel  seij>  not  |?at  God  -^^.ipis  power  to  men. 


PE   TWEXTlhE    SONDAY    GoSPEL   AFTIR    TrINITE. 


The  parable 
of  the  mar- 
riage of  the 
king's  son. 


[SERMON      XX.] 

Loquehatur  Jesus  cum  discipulis. — ?vIatt.  xxii.  [i.] 

pis  gospel  telli})  in  a  parable  what  men  shulde  trowe  of  ]?is 
Chirche  fro  hennes  to  )je  dai  of  dome,  as  it  is  touchid  sum- 
what  bifore. 

Jesus  spake  wip  hise  disciplis  in  parahlis  and  seide  pus.  pe 
reivme  of  hevene  is  niaad  liche  unto  a  man  pat  is  a  kyng,pat  made 
wedding  to  his  sone  ;  and  sente  his  servauntis  to  clepe  pes  men  pat 

WYCLIF. 


SERMONS. 


49 


iveren  heden  to  pe  dry  dale ;  and,  for  pei  wolden  not  come,  he  sente 
opir  servauntis  and  seide,  Seie  y  to  men  pat  beyi  beden,  Lo  Y  have 
made  redy  my  mete,  my  boles  and  my  volatils  ^  *  ben  kild,  and  al 
opir pingi's  be?i  redy;  come  y  /aste  to  pe  feste.     But  pei  dispisiden 
his  biddiiige,  and  sum  weiite  into  his  toun,  and  sum  into  his  chaf- 
farynge,  a?id  tokett  pis  kyjigis   servauntis,  and  punishideti   wip 
conteke"^  and  killiden  hem.     And  pe  kyng,  wha?i  he  say  pis,  ivas 
wroop,  and  setite  his  ostis,  a7id  loste  pes  mansleeris,  and  brejite  hir 
citee ;  and  seide  pan  to  his  servauntis,  Metis  of  pis  bridale  ben 
redy,  but  7ne?i  clepid  ivere  not  worthi ;  perfore  go  y  to  eendis  of 
iveies,  and  ijohomever  y  finde  clepe  ye  to  pe  mete.     And  pes  ser- 
vatmtis  iventen  out,  and  gedriden  men  al  pat  pei  fou7iden  bope  good 
and  y  vet,  and  pe  bridale  ivas  fulfillid  wip  7nen  sitti7ige  at  pe  mete ; 
al  3if  ])ei  v/eren  not  alle  ful  served,    ^e  Kyng  cam  in  to  se  his 
gistis,  and  saw  pere  oo7i  wipoute  bride  clopis,  and  seide  to  him, 
Frend,  how  e7itredist  pou  hider  wipoute7i  bride  clopis  ?  a7id  he  was 
doumbe.     And  pan  pe  lord  bade  hise  servauntis  to  bynde  hi7n  bope 
hondis  and  fete,  and  sende  hm  into  utter  derknesse,  pere  shal  be 
wepyng  a7id  g7iastige  of  teep.     For  many  ben  clepid  and  f ewe  ben 
chosen,     pe  kyndom  of  hevene  is  |)e  Chirche,  ]jat  takij)  name 
of  J)e  Heed,  as  Jie  gospel  speki)>  comounly;  and  so  J)is  rewme 
is  liche  a  kyng ;  ))at  is  J)e  Fadir  in  Trinite ;  and  )>is  kynge  made 
a  mariage  to  Crist  ]jat  is  his  sone,  and  to  ])is  Chirche  ]?at  is  his 
spouse,  and  to  damyseUs  jjerof.     For,  as  Salomon  seij),  foure 
degrees  ben  in  )>is  Chirche;   sum  ben  quenes,  sum  ben  lem- 
mannes,  and  sum  damyselis ;  but  oone  is  spouse  Jiat  conteynej? 
alle  ])es  ])ree,  and  ]?at  is   al  holi  Chirche.     And  Jjus  jjere  ben 
many  chirches,  and  a  newe  chirche  wi]?  Crist ;  3he  al  ]?e  chirche 
of  men  and  aungels  is  newid  bi  |?e  Incarnacioun. — pe  servantis 
of  |?is  spouse  bidden  men  to  ]?e  feste,  whan  Jjei  moven  men  to 
come  to  blisse  bi  ]?er  just  lyfe;   and  |>es  servantis  weren  pro- 
phetis  and  apostolis  of  Goddis  two  lawes;  but  ]?ei  weren  clepid 
specialy  v/han  Cristis  bir|>e  was  shewid  hem,  for  as  it  was  seid 
bifore,  |jan  alle  ])ingis  weren  made  redi ;  and  many  men  in  bo]?e 

_  ^  volatiles,  E.  ^  contect,  B ;   ccntec,  E ;    conteke,  C ;    this  is  unques- 

tionably the  right  reading ;  see  Glossary. 


SERMONS. 


That  is  poultry,  Fr.  volaille. 
£ 


Interpretation 
of  the  parable. 


50 


WrCLIF'S 


)>es  tymes  wolden  not  come  |>us  to  ])is  feste.  After  j^es  servantis 
he  sent  o])ir,  as  men  )?at  nexte  sueden  ])e  apostlis;  and  bolis 
and  volatils  weren  slayn,  and  mete  was  redy  to  ])is  feste.  pe 
boles  bitokenen  ]je  olde  fadris,  as  patriarkes  and  David,  for  ]>ei 
diden  bataillis  of  God,  and  turneden  his  enemyes  wijj  her 
homes,  and  ^it  J)ei  kepten  ful  bisili  J)e  grete  mandementis  of 
God.  pe  volatils  ]?at  serven  seyntis  at  )?e  secounde  cours 
of  J)is  feste  ben  seintis  of  jje  newe  lawe  ])at  \vi]j  J)es  mande- 
mentis kepten  Cristis  conseilis ;  and  3it  men  forsoken  to 
come  notwi]7Stondinge  sample  of  ]?es  seintis.  And  sum  wenten 
aftir  lordship  of  ]?is  worlde,  and  sum  after  chaffare  of  J)is 
worldely  richesse;  but  sum  slowen  Cristis  servauntis,  as  em- 
perours  of  Rome  and  preestis.  pe  king  of  hem  was  wroo]? 
herfore,  and  sente  his  oostis  out  to  Jerusalem  and  slow  |?es 
sleeris  of  Crist,  and  brent  ]?er  citee,  as  Josephus  telli]?.  And 
}>is  dede  done  in  Jerusalem  ])e  two  and  fourty  3eer  after  J)e  dee]) 
of  Crist  bitokene])  Jjc  vengeaunce  of  God  for  sleing  of  Cristis 
membris.  And  ])us  men  J)at  stoonden  bihynde,  bo]?e  in  ])e 
olde  lawe  and  in  ]>q  newe,  weren  unworjji  to  fille  ])e  nombre 
J)at  God  ordeynede  to  be  saved.  And  now  in  ]jes  laste  daies 
God  bade  hise  servantis  clepen  men  boJ>e  good  and  yvel  in  to 
])e  Chirche  jjat  weren  out  of  \>e  ri3t  weye,  and  wenten  bi  weyes 
of  errours  ])at  weren  hard  for  to  wende ;  and  so  as  Petir  in  his 
first  fishinge  toke  two  manere  of  fishes,  sum  dwelliden  in  jje 
nette,  and  sum  borsten  ]>&  nette  and  wenten  awey ;  so  here  in 
])is  Chirche  ben  sum  ordeyned  to  blisse  and  sum  to  peyne,  al 
if  ])ei  lyven  justly  for  a  tyme.  And  so  men  seien  comounly  jjat 
jjere  ben  here  two  manere  of  chirches,  holy  Chirche  or  Chirche 
of  God,  |?at  on  no  manere  may  be  dampned,  and  ]>e  chirche 
of  ])e  fend,  |)at  for  a  time  is  good,  and  lasti]>  not ;  and  })is  was 
nevere  holy  Chirche,  ne  part  jjerof. 

But  |>e  king  aftir  J)is  feste  came  in  at  ))e  dai  of  dome,  for  God 
shewi]?  him  |>anne  to  alle,  for  he  knowi]?  alle  mennes  lyf ;  and 
J)es  J>at  wolden  not  laste  in  grace  weren  not  clo]?id  in  bride 
cloJ>is;  and  alle  ])es  ben  o  man  J?at  hadde  noo  witt  to  answere 
God.  But,  for  ])is  man  wij?  parts  of  him  profitide  to  Cristis 
Chirche,  and  was  of  ]?e  same  kynde  wij>  Crist,  Crist  clepi)?  him 
frend,  as  he  dide  Judas;  but  alle  |>es  men  can  not  answere  how 


SERMONS. 


51 


|)ei  entren  in  to  |)e  Chirche,  for  it  was  told  hem  opynli  yaX  jjei 
ben  traitours  but  if  })ei  lasten,  and  ben  more  \vor)?i  to  be 
dampned  |)an  men  jjat  nevere  entriden  )>us.  And  so  al  siche 
men  token  peyne  bi  just  jugement  of  God,  ]>at  jjer  willis  shulden 
be  bounden  and  jjer  profitable  werkes,  and  shulden  be  cast  in  to 
helle,  where  men  shulden  wepe  and  gnaste  wi])  tee)) ;  wepynge 
shal  be  sensible  sorowe,  and  gnastynge  shal  be  wantinge  of 
blisse.  Wherfore  men  shal  moost  grutche,  si}>  ])ei  my5t  li3tly 
have  come  to  blisse,  and  aftir  |?is  j>ei  shal  have  noo  wille  nei|)er 
to  desire  ne  to  wirche  wel,  and  ]jus  many  men  ben  clepid,  but 
few  ben  chosen  to  blisse. 


pE   OON    AND    TWENTIEl'    SONDAI   GOSPEL   AFTIR    TrINITE. 

[SERMON     XXI.] 

Erat  quidam  regulus. — Joh.  iv.  [46.] 

pis  gospel  telli]?  how  a  kyng,  jjat  sum  men  seien  was  an 
hejjene  man,  bilevede  in  Crist,  and  disserved  to  have  a  myracle 
of  his  sone.  pe  story  sei]?,  how  in  Galilee  was  dwelling  a  litil 
kyng,  in  pe  citee  of  Capharnaum  pat  hadde  a  sone  ful  syke  of  pe 
fever  is.  And  whanne  he  herde  telle  pat  fesus  come  fro  fude  to 
Galilee,  he  came  and  mette  him  on  pe  wey,  and  preiede  him  come 
doun  and  hele  his  sone,  for  he  was  in  point  of  deep.  And  Crist 
seide  to  pis  kyng,  to  amende  his  bileve,  3^  bileven  not  in  fesus 
but  if  y  se  signes  and  woundris ;  as  J)is  man  bilevede  not  in  Jje 
godhede  of  Crist,  for  if  he  hadde,  he  shulde  have  trowide  \2X 
Crist  my^te  have  savyd  his  sone  3if  he  hadde  not  bodily  come 
to  J)is  syke  man  and  touchid  him ;  but  jjis  kyng  had  more  herte 
of  hel))e  of  his  sone  Jian  he  hadde  to  be  helid  of  untreujje  jjat 
he  was  inne,  and  jjerfore  he  tolde  not  herby  but  axide  eft  Crist 
to  hele  his  sone.  And  in  ])is  forme  of  wordis^  in  which  he 
shewide  his  untreujje.  Lord,  he  seide,  come  doun  hifore  pat  my 
sone  die.     But  Jesus,  as  wise  lord  and  merciful,  heelide  his  sone 

'  wormes,  B ;  wordis,  C  and  E. 
E  2 


The  healing 
of  the  noble- 
man's son. 


52 


WFCLIF'S 


The  inner 
sense  of  Scrip- 
ture. 


in  siche  manere  J)at  he  my3te  wite  jiat  he  was  bo)>e  God  and 
man ;  Go,  he  seide,  pi  sone  lyvep.  And  Jjerwi]?  Crist  tau^te  his 
soule  bo]je  of  his  manhede  and  godhede,  and  ellis  hadde  not 
]?is  king  trowid;  but  ))is  gospel  sei|)  ]?at  he  trowid,  and  al  his 
hous ;  and  upon  ]jis  treu])e  he  wente  homward  and  mette  his  men 
upon  pe  wey,  pat  tolden  him  pat  his  sone  shulde  lyve,  for  he  is 
cover  id  of  his  yv  el.  Afid  he  axide  whan  his  sone  ferde  beter,  and 
pei  seiden,pat  ystirdai pe  sevenpe  houre  pe  feveres  forsoke  pe  child. 
And  pe  fadir  knewe  bi  his  mynde  pat  it  was  pe  same  houre  pat 
Crist  seide,  pi  sone  lyvep,  and  herfore  bilevede  he  and  al  his  hous 
in  Jesus  Crist.  And  ]jerfore  Jesus  seide  so]),  jjat  he  and  men 
liche  to  him  trowen  not  but  if  ])ei  se  bo]>e  signes  and  woundris ; 
it  was  a  signe  of  ])e  sike  child  ))at  he  dide  werkes  of  an  hool 
man  a,  but  it  was  a  greet  woundir  ]?at  bi  virtue  of  \q  word  of 
Crist  a  man  so  ferre  shulde  ben  hool,  for  so  Crist  shewide  Jiat 
he  is  virtue  of  Godhede,  ]>at  is  everywhere ;  and  J)is  virtue  mut 
be  God,  ])at  dide  \ms  J)is  myracle. 

pis  stori  sei)j  us  ))is  secounde  witt  })at  God  3yve])  to  holy 
writt,  ])at  |?is  litil  kyng  bitokenej)  a  mannis  witt  bi  synne  slyden 
fro  God,  J)at  is  but  a  litil  king  in  regard  of  his  maker ;  and  his 
sone  was  syke  on  jie  feveris,  as  weren  \qs  hejjene  folke  and  J)er 
affecciouns  ])at  comen  of  ])er  soulis;  but  j?ei  hadden  a  kyndli 
wille  to  wite  )>e  treu])e  and  stonde  ]?ereinne.  pis  kyng  cam  fro 
Capharnaum,  ])at  is,  a  feld  of  fatnesse^;  for  man  fattid  and 
alardid^  wendi]?  awey  fro  God.  pis  mannis  witt,  whanne  he 
herde  \2X  Jesus  cam  to  he])en  men,  and  ])at  bitokenej?  Galilee, 
]>at  is,  transmigracioun^,  mette  wij?  Jesus  in  pleyn  weie,  and  lefte 
his  he])ene  possessioun,  and  preide  God  to  heele  his  folke  ])at 
weren  syke  bi  goostly  fevere.  But  Crist  sharpide  ))es  mennis 
bileve,  for  feij?  is  first  nedeful  to  men,  but  undirstonding  of  man 
preide  Crist  come  doun  bi  grace  bifore  mannis  affeccioun  die 

^   alargid  in  B   and  C  ;   but    A   probably  preserves   the   true   reading  ; 
largid,  E. 


^  The  meaning  seems  to  be,  *  It 
was  a  sign  that  the  sick  child  should 
be  healed  at  all ;  it  was  a  wonder 
that  he  should  be  healed  though  a 
great  distance  off.' 


^  Capharnaum,  i.e.  Kaphar-na- 
oum,  means  '  hamlet  of  Nahum.' 
(Bib.  Diet.) 

c  See  p.  30,  note. 


SERMONS. 


53 


aboute  erj>ely  goodis.  But,  for  men  trowiden  |>e  godhede  of 
Crist,  ])ei  weren  hool  of  |>is  fevere,  whan  jjei  forsoken  ))is  world 
and  putte  ]?er  hope  in  hevenly  goodis.  pes  servauntis  ben  low 
virtues  of  |?e  soule,  which,  worching  ioyfulli,  tellen  mannis  witt 
and  his  wille  jjat  J)is  sone  is  hool  of  fevere.  pis  fevere  bito- 
kene)?  shakyng  of  man  bi  unkyndli  distempoure  of  abundaunce 
of  worldely  goodis,  |)at  ben  unstable  as  jje  water;  and  herfore 
sei|>  Seint  Jame  J)at  he  ))at  douti|>  in  bileve  is  lyke  to  a  flood 
of  |>e  see  jjat  wij?  wynde  is  born  aboute. — pat  J>es  servauntis 
tolden  jjis  king  })at  in  |>e  seven])e  houre  fevere  forsoke  j^is  childe, 
bitokene]?  a  greet  witt,  as  Robert  of  Lincoln  shewi]).  First  it 
bitokene]?  |?at  ]?is  fevere  goij?  awey  fro  mannis  kynde  bi  seven 
5iftes  of  ]?e  Holy  Goost,  ]?at  ben  undirstonden  bi  j>es  houres. 
And  ]?is  clerk  dividi])  J^e  dai  in  two  halves  bi  sixe  houres,  so 
jjat  al  ])e  daie  bitokene]?  li^t  of  grace  ]?at  J?at  man  is  inne.  pe 
firste  sixe  houres  bitokenen  joy  J)at  man  ha]?  of  worldely  |?ing, 
and  |)is  is  bifore  spiritual  joy,  as  utter  man  is  bifore  spiritual. 
But  in  ])e  firste  houre  of  ])e  secounde  halve  leve]?  gostly  fever 
man,  for  who  so  evere  have  worldely  joie,  jif  he  have  grace  on 
sum  manere,  ^it  he  trembli]?  in  sum  fevere  aboute  goodis  of  jje 
world;  but  anoon  in  ])e  sevenj^e  hour,  ]?at  is  \q  firste  of  \q 
secounde  halfe,  whan  wille  of  worldely  ]?ingis  is  lefte,  and  spi- 
ritual ])ingis  begynen  to  be  loved,  ])an  Jjis  shakynge  passij?  fro 
man,  and  goostli  hel]?e  come)?  to  ]?e  spirit.  And  so  shadewis 
of  lijt  of  sunne  fro  \e  sevenj^e  houre  in  to  Jje  ni3t  ever  wexen 
more  and  more,  and  J)at  bitokenej?  goostli,  |?at  vanite  of  )?is 
world  seme)?  ay  more  to  mannis  spirit  til  he  come  to  )?e  ende 
of  )?is  lyf  to  lyf  )?at  ay  shal  laste.  And  so  ))is  man  trowi)?  in 
God,  bo)?  wi)?  undirstonding  and  wille,  wi)?  al  ]?e  mayne  of  his 
hous,  whan  al  his  wittis  and  alle  his  streng)?is  ben  obeshinge 
to  resoun,  whan  )?is  fever  is  )?us  passid.  Of  )?is  undirstondinge 
men  may  take  moral  witt  how  men  shal  lyve,  and  large  ]?e 
mater  as  hem  like)?. 


-M>^^3&|^<=^ 


James  i.  6. 


Direction  to 
preachers. 


54 


WVCLIF'S 


Vy.  two  and  twenti>e  Sondai  Gospel  aftir  Trinite. 


The  parable  of 

the  indebted 
servant. 


-^ 


Interpretation. 


[SERMON     XXII.] 

Simile  est  regnum  caelorum  homini. — ]\Iat.  xviii.   [23.] 

pis  gospel  telli]?  bi  a  parable  how  bi  ri3t  jugement  of  God 
men  shulden  be  merciful. — p^  kyngdom  of  hevene,  seij?  Crist,  is 
lyke  to  an  erpeli  kyng  pat  wolde  ryken  wip  hise  servauntis.  And 
whanne  he  hadde  higun  to  rekotm,  oon  was  offrid  unto  him  pat 
owid  him  ten  thousand  besantis,  and  whan  he  hadde  not  to  paye  of, 
pe  lord  had  he  shulde  be  soold,  his  wyf  and  his  children  and  al pat 
he  hadde,  and  pat  pat  he  ou^t  pe  lord  shidde  be  algatis  paid.  \iis 
servant  fell  doun  and  praiede  pe  lord  and  seide,  Have  pacience  in 
nu,  and  Y  shal  qiiyte  pee  al.  pe  lord  hadde  mercy  on  him,  and 
for'yif  him  al  his  dette.  pis  servant  went  out  and  found  oon  of  hise 
dettours,pat  ou^t  him  an  hundred  pens  ;  andtoke  him  and  stranglide 
him,  and  hade  him  paie  his  dette.  And  pis  servant  f elk  doun  and 
praiede  him  of  pacience,  and  he  shulde  bi  tyme  ylde  him  al  pat 
he  ou^te  him.  But  pis  man  wolde  not,  but  wente  out  and  putte  him 
in  prisoun,  til  he  hadde  paied pe  dette  pat  he  ow^te  him.  And  opir 
servauntis  of  pis  man,  whan  pei  seyen  pis  dede,  niournedenful  myche, 
and  tolden  al  pis  to  pe  lord.  And  pe  lord  clepid  him,  and  seide  unto 
him,  Wickide  servant,  al  pi  dette  Yfor-i^afpe,forpoupreiedistme; 
ne  bihoved pee  not  to  have  mercy  ofi  pi  servant,  as  Y  hadde  mercy 
on  pee  ?  And  pe  lord  was  wrop,  and  "^i^afhim  to  turmentours,  til  he 
hadde  paied  al  pe  dette  pat  he  ou-i^te  him.  On  pis  manere,  seip 
Crist,  shal  my  Fadir  of  hevene  do  to  you,  hut  '^ifyefor'^yve,  ech  on 
to  his  bropir,  of'^ourfree  herte  |)e  trespas  |>at  he  ha})  done  him. 

pe  kyngdom  of  hevene  is  holy  Chirche,  of  men,  |)at  now 
traveilen  here ;  and  J)is  Chirche  bi  his  heed  is  lyke  to  a  man 
kyng,  for  Crist,  heed  of  j)is  Chirche,  is  bo|)e  God  and  man.  pis 
kyng  wolde  ryken  wi]?  his  servantis,  for  Crist  ha]?  wille  wijjouten 
ende  to  rykene  wij?  men  at  jjre  tymes.  First,  Crist  rykene}?  wiji 
men  whan  he  techij)  hem  bi  resoun  how  myche  l^ei  han  hadde 
of  him,  and  hou  myche  ]>t\  owen  him ;  j>e  secounde  tyme  Crist 


SERMONS. 


55 


rykene)'  wi|)  men,  whan  in  j>c  houre  of  mannis  dee])  he  tellij) 
hem  at  what  point  |)es  men  shal  ever  justH  stonde ;  ]>e  jjridde 
rekenyng  is  general,  ]jat  shal  be  at  ]>e  daie  of  dome,  whan  ]>is 
jugement  generali  shal  be  opynli  done  in  dede.  As  anentis  ]?e 
first  rekenynge,  Crist  rekenej?  wi})  riche  men  of  |)is  worlde,  and 
shewi})  hem,  how  myche  j^ei  owen  him,  and  shewi))  bi  ri3t- 
wisnesse  of  his  lawe  how  |)ci  and  Jjeires  shulden  be  sold,  and 
so  make  asee}?  ^  bi  peyne  of  ]?ingis  \)a.t  |)ei  perfourmeden  not 
in  dede.  But  many  sich  men  for  a  tyme  have  conpimcioun  in 
herte,  and  preien  God  of  his  grace  to  have  pacience  in  hem, 
and  jjei  shal  in  J)is  lyf  serve  to  Crist  treuly.  And  so  Crist  for- 
5eve]?  hem  upon  ])is  condicioun.  But  Jjei  wenden  out,  and  suen 
not  Crist  jjer  lord  in  mercy,  but  oppressen  |>er  servauntis  }>at 
owen  })em  but  a  litil  dette,  and  putten  hem  in  prisoun,  and 
|?enken  not  on  Goddis  mercy ;  and  o]?ir  servantis  of  God  bo]?e 
in  l^is  lyf  and  in  ]>e  toj^ir  tellen  to  God  ]?is  felnes,  and  preien 
him  of  venjance.  No  doute  God  is  wrooJ>  at  ]?is,  and  at  two 
rekenyngis  wi]?  man,  he  resoune})  ]?is  cruel  man,  and  jugi]?  him 
justli  to  peyne. 

And  jjerefore  Crist  biddi]?,  bi  Luk,  al  men  to  be  mercyful,  for 
])er  Fadir  of  heven  Jjat  shal  juge  hem  is  mercyful.  But  we  shul 
undirstonde  bi  |)is,  ])at  J)is  mercy  |)at  Crist  axi]?  is  nojjing  a^en 
resoun,  and  so  bi  |?is  just  mercy  men  shulen  sum  tyme  for3yve, 
and  sum  tyme  shulden  J?ei  punishe,  but  ever  bi  resoun  of  mercy. 
pe  resoun  of  mercy  stondi])  in  J)is ;  |)at  men  myjten  do  cruely 
jjei  done  justly  for  Goddis  sake,  to  amendement  of  men ;  and 
men  may  mercyfully  reprove  men,  and  punishe  hem,  and  take 
of  hem  ])ere  just  dettis  for  beterynge  of  J)ese  dettours.  On  |)is 
manere  do]?  God  ]?at  is  ful  of  mercy,  and  sei]?  ]?at  he  reprove]) 
and  chastisi})  his  wantoun  children  ])at  he  love]) ;  and  ])us  Crist 
reprovede  Pharisees,  and  punishide  preestis  wi])  o|)ir  peple,  and 
punishi])  mercifulli  alle  dampned  men  in  helle,  for  it  stondi])  not 
wi])  his  ri^t  ])at  he  punishe  but  mercifulli.  God  5yve])  goodis  of 
kynde  bi  grace  to  ]>es  men  J)at  he  dampne]),  and  if  he  punishide 
hem  more,  ^it  he  medlij)  mercy.  But  here  men  shulden  be  ware 
J)at  al  ]>e  goodis  ])at  J)ei  han  ben  goodis  of  her  God,  and  ])ei 
nakide  servantis  of  God ;  and  J)us  shulden  })ei  warly  flee  to  take 


Luke  vi.  36. 


a  By  suffering  pain,  make  amends  for  neglected  duties. 


^6  WrCLIF'S 

]jere  owen  venjance,  but  venge  injurie  of  God,  and  entenden 
amendement.  pus  Crist,  mekist  of  all,  suffride  his  owne  injurie 
in  two^  temptaciouns  of  |?e  fend,  but  in  ])e  Jjridde  he  saide,  Go, 
Sa])an,  and  reprovede  him  sharpli  bi  autorite  of  God. — pus 
Moises,  myldest  man  of  alle,  killide  many  ])Ousand  of  his  folk, 
for  J)ei  worshipiden  a  calfe,  as  ]?ei  shulden  worshipe  God.  And 
])us  in  oure  werkes  of  mercy  liej>  myche  discrecioun,  for  ofte 
tymes  oure  mercy  axi]?  to  venge  and  to  punishe  men,  and  ellis 
justises  of  mannis  lawe  shulden  nevere  punishe  men  to  jje  dee]j, 
but  ofte  tymes  ]>ei  done  amys,  and  ]>&\  witen  not  whan  )3ei  done 
wele,  and  so  religioun  of  preestis  shulde  leve  sich  jugementis. 


PE   |)RE  AND   TWENTlI'E   SONDAI   GOSPEL. 


[SERMON     XXIII.] 


Paying  tribute 
to  Caesar. 


Aheuntes  Phariseei, — Matt.  xxii.  [15.] 

pE  storye  of  |>is  gospel  telli]?  how  Jje  Phariseeis  casten  to 
disseyve  Crist  bi  wordis  of  ypocrisie.  And  so  pe  Phariseeis 
wendinge  out,  fro  ]?e  weye  of  treujie,  viaden  a  conseil  hi  hem  silfe 
to  take  Jesus  in  speche,  and  first  \€\  spaken  fagynge  wordis,  as 
ypocritis  doen,  but  ^it  pei  senten  her  disciplis,  and  comen  not 
hemsilf,  lest  ])ei  weren  convictid  bi  wisdom  of  Crist.  ])ei  sente 
to  Crist  two  puplis,  Jewis  and  Erodians,  to  witnesse  ajen  him 
what  ever  he  hadde  seide,  or  a^en  |?e  Jewis,  or  a5en  ]>q 
emperoure.  Maister,  pei  seiden,  we  witen  wel  pat  pou  art  sad 
trewe,  and  pe  weie  pat  ledip  to  God  pou  techist  in  treupe,  (and  pou 
takist  noon  heede  0/  ??ia7i,  but  booldli  techist  pe  sope^  for  pou  reckest 
of  no  man  but  puttist  God  bifore.  And  aftir  Jjei  axiden  jjis 
questioun  of  Crist,  J)at  he  shulde  telle  J)at  him  )>0U5t,  and  not 
bi  ojjer  mennis  witt,  where  it  where  leveful  to  ^yve  tallage  to  pe 
emperour.  Hem  J)0U3te  Jjat  Crist  shulde  nedis  seie  5he  or  nay ; 
3if  he  seide  ^he,  he  spake  a3en  j^e  Jewis,  for  j^ei  calengiden  of 


'  So  in  B  and  C  ;  A  has  to. 


SERMONS. 


57 


|)er  fadirys  to  be  suget  to  no  man ;  and  ^if  he  seide  nay,  he 
were  a3ens  |>e  emperoure,  and  so  on  ech  side  hem  )?ou3te  )>at 
Criste  was  take.  But  Crist  shewide  first  \Q  purpos  of  j)es 
ypocritis.  Whan  Jesus  knewe  ]?e  wickidnesse  of  jjes  fals  men, 
he  clepide  hem  ypocritis,  and  axide  ivhereto  pei  temptideji  him. 
And  efte  Crist  toke  a  meene  weye,  ano|>ir  ])an  jjei  ]?ou3ten  on ; 
Shave  y  me,  seide  Crist,  pe  moneye  of  pe  taliage  ;  and pei  shew- 
iden  him  a  peny.  And  Crist  axide  over,  whos  ymage  is  pis, 
and  whos  writing  above?  And  pei  seiden,  it  was  pe  emperours. 
And  Crist  ^af  hem  }>is  answere,  general  and  sutil,  ^yve  ye 
to  pe  emperoure  pat  is  his,  and  to  God  pat  is  His.  Bi  which 
word  it  semej)  ]?at  Crist  approvede  Jjc  emperour  and  subiec- 
cion  to  him  in  \zX  |?at  he  maki])  Goddis  pees;  and  servise 
propre  to  God  shulde  be  kepte  to  Him ;  and  so  Cristis  wordis 
my5te  no  man  disprove. 

Here  men  may  touche  ]je  malice  of  ypocrisie,  for  Jjere  is  no 
wers  synne,  ne  more  general,  ne  more  venymous ;  for  it  is  more 
yvel  jjat  it  })us  contrarie]>  to  treuj^e,  sij?  an  ypocrite  feyne]?  him 
holy,  and  he  is  a  fals  fend.  And  herfore  reprovede  Crist  ypocrisy 
of  ordris,  for  he  wiste  wel  J)at  ]?ei  shulden  after  do  more  harm  in 
J)e  world.  Ffirst  sich  ypocritis  lyen  on  hemsilfe,  and  seien  j^ei 
done  for  holynesse  what  evere  \2X  ]?ei  done,  and  so  J^ei  venymen 
first  hem  silf,  and  afterward  o])er  men.  And  it  is  more  general 
]7an  many  o]>ir  synnes,  for  ech  state  of  men  is  blemyshid  wij)  ]?is 
synne,  but  first  and  moost,  religions  and  clerkes,  for  j^ere  is  no 
spedy  cause  whi  \€\  usen  siche  habitis  but  to  devyde  hem  in 
holynesse  fro  ]?e  common  peple,  si]?  as  medeful  werkes  my3ten 
J?ei  done  in  seculer  habitis,  and  more  privily,  as  Crist  biddi])  us 
be  holy.  And  herfore  Crist  biddij?  to  be  war  wij?  sour  dow  of 
Phariseis,  sij)  J)ere  is  no  resoun  to  ypocrisy  but  to  shewe  menys 
synne  ^,  and  to  disseyve  on  ech  side  bo]?  ])e  ypocritis  hem  silfe 
and  o]?ir  men  ])at  dwellen  wij?  hem.  And  so  her  religioun  serve]? 
to  crye  Jjat  ])ei  ben  holy,  and  to  make  dyvysioun  bitwixe  hem  and 
o])er  men.  And  si)?  liknes  is  cause  of  love  amonge  men,  sich  dyvy- 
sioun is  cause  of  envye  and  hate.  Goddis  lawe  and  kynde 
techi})  ]?at  ech  beest  lovej)  beest  like  to  him,  and  so  experience 
techi}>  \2X  oon  ordre  love|)  his  brojjir  more  ]>an  a  strange  man 

'  So  B  and  C  ;  A  reads  lyve. 


The  evils  of 
hypocrisy, 
especially  that 
of  the  'orders.' 


58 


WrCLIF'S 


Friars  ought 
not  to  beg, 
nor  have  great 
houses. 


a5en  J)e  reule  of  charite.  And  sich  gedring  of  lumpis  bi  sensible 
signes  ha]?  not  autorite  of  Crist  but  ra])er  repreving.  For  upon 
Good  Friday  Crist  ordeynede  him  to  be  clo])id  Juries  a^ens  sich 
weddinge  wi]?  clo|jis  of  colour  and  shap ;  and  as  Crist  sei]?  in 
reprof  of  siche  sectis,  Kynrede  of  hordom  sekij?  siche  signes ; 
alle  ]>Q  dedes  ]?at  J>ei  done  sownen  to  ypocrisie,  and  a3ens  no 
men  spake  Crist  sharplier. 

And  al^if  freris  seien  |)at  ]?ei  beggen  for  charite,  whan  J^ei  have 
prechid  for  siche  beggyng,  and  })at  Crist  beggid  so,  and  bad  hem 
begge  ])us,  ne))eles  al  J)is  speche  is  poudrid  \\\\  gabbinge,  and,  as 
ypocritis  done,  Jjei  seken  j)er  owen  avantage  and  not  Jje  worship 
of  Crist,  ne  to  profite  of  his  Chirche.  For  if  |?ei  diden,  jjei  wolden 
sue  Cristis  reule,  and  leve  chargyng  of  ]?e  puple  bo]?e  in  noumbre 
and  begging,  and  leve  her  heye  housis  }jat  Jjei  propren  unto  hem, 
si|)  Crist  hadde  no  propre  hous  to  reste  in  his  heed.  And  as 
Macometis  lawe  takij)  myche  of  Cristis  lawe,  and  meddlij?  o|)ir 
lawis,  and  jjere  come]?  in  venym,  so  doi]>  Anticrist  in  ])es  newe 
sectis ;  and  as  ]?ei  bringen  in  brej?eren  bi  falshede  of  lesyngis,  so 
ben  ])er  ordris  groundid  in  falshede  in  ech  side.  And  siche  men 
mote  needis  disturble  holy  Chirche ;  and  ]?us  seculer  clerkes  ben 
ful  of  ypocrisie,  bo]?  popis  and  bishopis  and  clerkes  under  hem. 
Crist  forfendide  to  putte  miraclis  ])at  he  had  done  to  })e  manhede 
of  him  for  errour  in  bileve ;  but  ]?e  fend  dredi}>  not  to  feyne 
absoluciouns  and  indulgencis  wi]?  o]5ir  ^iftis,  ])at  God  grantide 
nevere,  to  spuyle  men  of  her  money,  and  not  for  soule  hele; 
for  ])an  wolden  ])ei  ^yve  freely  ])es  5iftis,  as  Crist  ^af  himsilf  and 
bad  o]jirs  do.  And  ])us  lower  clerkes  traveilen  bi  water  and  bi 
londe  for  to  have  benefices  and  propre  possessions,  more  ]?an 
Jjei  done  for  helj^e  of  mannis  soulis;  and  how  ever  ]jei  speken, 
J>ei  lyven  al  in  ypocrisie  ;  and  ])us  whan  men  fi^ten,  pleden,  or 
chiden,  charite  is  not  ]?ere  ende,  but  pride  and  propre  havynge. 
And  ]>us  it  is  of  seculers  })at  ben  weddid  men ;  and  so  charite 
of  men  is  blyndid  bi  ypocrisie,  so  ]jat  no  synne  of  \>\s  world 
letti]>  now  more  charite;  and  so  ypocrisie  is  more  general 
synne,  and  more  pryvy  sin  to  begile  men,  and  werst  to  dis- 
troien  ]>c  comoun  peple,  and  al  }>is  figureden  Pharisees  a3ens 
Jesus  Crist. 


SERMONS. 


59 


pE   FOURE   AND    T\VENTI|?E    SONDAI   AFTIR    TRINITE. 

[SERMON     XXIV.] 

Loqiiente  fesu  ad  turbas,  ecce  princeps'^. — Matt.  ix.  [i8.] 

pis  gospel  tellij)  of  jje  firste  dede  bodi  |)at  Crist  reiside  to 
lyf,  and  how  Crist  helide  a  womman  as  he  wente  ))idir.  pe 
storie  telli)>  J)at,  as  Crist  spake  to  pe  folk,  a  prince  catne  to  him 
and  worshipide  him  wip  honour e,  and  seide  to  him,  Sire  my  doivi^ter 
is  now  deed,  hut  come  and piitte  pi  hond  on  Mr  ajtd  she  shal  lyve, 
bi  vertue  of  ]?e.  We  shal  undirstonde  ]?at  in  tyme  of  Crist  weren 
princes  of  preests,  as  princis  of  kny^tis,  as  Nichodeme  was  a 
prince,  and  bishopis  of  Jerusalem  weren  clepid  princes  of  preestis, 
and  J)is  man  here,  \>^t  was  keper  of  a  synagoge,  as  now  ben 
persones ;  and  Jses  men  hadden  comounly  wyves  and  children,  as 
preestis  han  wers  now,  for  ]?ei  han  out  of  wedloke.  And  Jesus 
roos  up,  and  suede  pis  prince,  and  his  disciplis,  for  he  was  redi  to 
do  good,  and  as  he  wente,  a  syke  womman  by  flix  of  blood  pat 
lastide  xii  wynter  came  bihynde  Jesus  and  seide  to  hir  silf  If  Y 
louche  pe  hemn  of  pe  cote  of  Jesus,  Y  shal  be  safe  for  holynes  of  him. 
And  fesus  turnede  agen,  and  lokide  on  hir,  and  say  her  bileve,  and 
s  aide  pus  to  hir,  Affie  pe,  doubter,  pi  bileve  hap  made  pee  saif  And 
pe  womman  was  saved  from  pe  same  hour,  pe  gospel  of  Mattheu 
tellij)  ferj)er,  hou  Crist  came  to  pe  hous  of  pis  prince  pat  pe  wenche 
lay  deed  inne  ;  and  whan  Crist  say  my  nys  trails,  and  folk  makinge 
nois,  he  badde  hem  go  penne,for  pe  we?iche  is  not  dede  but  slepip. 
A?id pei  scorneden  Crist,  for  ))ei  wenden  ))at  he  had  errid.  Ajid 
whan  pe  folk  was  cast  out,  Crist  wente  in  to  pe  hous,  and  toke  pe 
ho7id  of  pe  wenche,  and  saide,  Wenche,  rys  tip.  And  pe  wenche 
roos,  and  dide  werkes  of  lyf. 

It  is  seid  bifore^  how  ])is  firste  bodi  |>at  Crist  reiside  from  de|) 
to  life  bitokenej)  siche  men  jjat  ben  goostly  deed,  for  ful  concense 
to  synne ;  but  jjei  do  not  )?e  dede  wi]?out ;  and  j^at  is  bitokned 
jjat  |?e  wenche  was  in  J)e  hous  3it.  pis  prince  is  mannis  jjou^t, 
|>at  kyndly  haj)  sorewe  |)at  |>e  spirit  of  it  is  ])us  fillid  wij?  synne ; 

^  So  in  B  ;  A  has  principes. 
a  See  p.  39. 


The  healing 
of  the  woman 
with  an  issue 
of  blood,  and 
the  raising 
of  Jairus' 
daughter. 


Clerical 
celibacy. 


6o 


WVCLIF'S 


Possible  futility 
of  church- 
pardons  and 
dispensations. 


and  Jjus  it  preie}j  to  God  )>at  |)is  dou3ter  be  quykened.     And 
whan  Crist  entri))  to  Jjc  soule  of  J)is  maiden  and  move]?  wij?  his 
worchinge  hond  ]?e  spirit  of  it,  |?an  it  rise]?  to  lyf  and  worchij?  by 
grace.     And  here  men  noten,  how  a  ligginge  man,  }jat  shulde 
be  areisid  up,  shulde  bede  his  hond  and  ]?e  reiser  shulde  take  it, 
and  so  bi  streng]je  of  hem  bo})e  shulde  \e  man  rise.     Ech  man 
in  synne  li]?^  at  |)e  erjje,  and  God  helpi})  many  men  to  rise  up  to 
grace,  and  if  Jjei  wirchen  wi])  God  to  }?is  werke  of  lyfe,  God  wole 
make  hem  stonde,  and  comfort  hem  to  wirche.     pis  woman  ]?at 
was  heelid,"as  Crist  wente  to  J)is  hous,  of  })e  flix  of  blood  \>2X 
she  hadde  twelve  3eere,  is  every  persone  of  man  combrid  wi}> 
synne,  where  it  be  symple  persone  or  gedrid  of  many ;  and  }?es 
twelve  3ere  bitokenen  double  age  of  two  kyndis  of  man  bi  which 
he  dwelli})  in  synne.     But  man  may  spende  al  ]>at  he  ha]?  aboute 
oJ)ir  fisicians^  and  gete  him  absolucions,  5he  after  ])e  daie  of 
dome,  and  many  indulgensis,  wi])  lettris  of  fraternite,  Jjat  biho- 
ti)?^  him  to  come  to  hevene,  as  soone  as  he  is  deed,  and  5it  mai 
jje  flixe  of  blood  rennen  wi]?  al  }?is,  and  he  may  be  depper  in  synne 
wi}?  al  ]?es  dispensis.    And  herefore  mekenesse  of  Crist  is  a  special 
medicine,  ]?at  a  man  }?enke  hou  he  is  in  J?e  last  place  beden  of 
Crist  to  soupe  wi]?  him  in  hevene.     And  ]?us  ]?is  clo]?ing  of  Crist 
ben  seintis  ]?at  he  clo]?id,  and  |)e  last  of  })is  clo}?ing  is  }?e  last 
place  ]?at  men  shulden  repute  hem  inne  bi  mekenesse  of  herte, 
and  doing  awey  J?es  presumpciouns  comen  }?ei  ]?us  bihinden, 
and  Crist  bi  siche  mekenesse  3yveth  hem  grace  to  leve  synne, 
and  }?is  is  beter  }?an  medecynes  ]?at  fesicians  sellen.     And  siche 
men  ben  confortid  bi  wordis  of  Crist,  for  Crist   heli]?    noone 
bodily  but  ^if  he  hele  hem  of  synne,  and   }?us  ech  storye  of 
myraclis  of  Crist  mai  be  moralisid  to  a  good  witt,  ne  is  it  no 
perel  to  varie  in  siche  wittis,  so  )?at  men  varien   not   fro    ]?e 
treu]?e,  ne  fro  good  lore,  for  }>e  Holy  Goost,  autor  of  J)es  wordis, 
ordeyne]?  men  to  have  al  sich  wittis,  and  he  ordeyne}?  }?is  tixt 
to  move  hem  herto.     Hou  shulde  sich  sense  be  error  in  man  ? 
But  siche  wordis  axen  good  jugement,  for  many  heretikis  seyen 
]?at  }?ei  han  witt  of  God,  and  3it  it  mai  be  oon  of  |?e  fendis 
heresies. 

Here    men    douten    comonly    whan    men    synnen    dedely 

'  /«/,  B.        ^  So  in  B  ;  fecicii>ians,  A  :  /esicia/tes,  C.       ^  hefe/i,  B  ;  biheten,  C. 


SERMONS. 


6i 


\vij)inne  in  |)er  soule,  and  done  noon  yvel  dedes  wijjouten  in 
)jer  bodi  ])at  anoien  men.  And  men  moven  over  how  resoun 
mai  assente  to  ony  synne  of  man,  si}?  ech  synne  is  a3ens 
resoun;  and  ^it  sum  men  seien  j>at  it  is  alon  resoun  and 
mannis  spirit;  and  so  ^if  mannis  spirit  assente,  resoun  as- 
sentijj;  for  mannis  spirit  ha])  al  vertues  in  man  honginge  on 
him,  and  it  mut  nedelingis^  do  what  ony  of  Jjes  vertues  doi|). 
Here  we  shulen  conseyve  jjat  it  is  not  nedeful  here  to  wite 
which  is  dedely  synne,  and  wite  which  is  venial,  but  ech  synne 
shulde  a  man  flee,  lest  it  be  dedli  to  him.  But  clerkis  seyen 
comounly  j;at  man  ha|)  two  wittis,  oon  hongij?  on  his  bodi  and 
ha])  many  partis ;  anoJ)ir  is  aboven  his  bodi,  ])at  dwelli])  wi])  his 
spirit,  whan  J)e  spirit  and  ])e  bodi  ben  departed  atwynne,  and 
])is  vertue  in  a  man  is  sum  tyme  clepid  resoun.  And  so,  as  in 
j)e  first  synne  Eve  temptide  Adam,  and  Adam  synnede  not 
bifore  he  hadde  assentid,  so  in  ech  synne  in  an  hool  man  \q 
flesh  tempti})  })e  spirit,  and  it  synne])  not  bifore  it  have  assentid^ 
to  lustis  of  ])e  flesh.  And  so  power  of  ])e  spirit,  ])at  sum  men 
clepen  resoun,  assenti])  a3en  resoun  to  fleishli  likingis,  and  so 
])e  spirit  is  nedid  to  consente  })us,  but  it  is  not  constreyned,  sij) 
it  assenti})  freeli.  And  bi  ])is  may  we  se  hou  argumentis  gone 
awei  bi  equivocacion  of  wordis  })at  men  speken,  as  a  man  haj) 
many  wittis  boJ)e  fleishli  and  spiritualy,  and  so  many  maneres 
he  assenti})  to  a  ])inge.  But  sum  fooHs  ])er  ben  })at  seien  ])at 
a  man  ha})  no  vertue  of  soule,  but  3if  it  be  \>e  same  soule,  and 
|)is  errour  bringi})  in  o})ir,  and  })us  resoun  of  man  is  sum  tyme 
clepid  treu])e  })at  God  causi])  wi])Outen  ende,  3if  a  man  die,  and 
sum  tyme  vertue  of  man  })at  goi])  wi})  })e  soule  is  clepid  resoun 
of  man  to  ano})ir  witt.  Bi  })is  may  men  see  sumwhat,  how 
})ei  shulden  answere  to  })e  doutes  })at  ben  maad,  and  to  o])er 
also,  for  we  shulde  bfleve  ]>at  men  may  be  dampned  for  synne 
in  her  soule,  3if  })ei  worche  not  outward,  for  oryginal  sin  and 
actual^  also,  and  ])us  mai  men  be  saved  for  })0U3tis  in  })er  hertis, 
al  3if  ])ei  done  not  outward  meritory  werkes;  and  })us  mai  men 
done  harm  to  o])ers  bi  })0U3tis  of  herte,  and  profite  also  to  hem, 
3if  ])ei  ben  ferre  from  hem,  and  si})  spiritual  harmynge  or  profite 
is  myche  more  bodili  profite. 

*  nedeli;  B ;  nedely,  C.     -  So  in  B ;  A  has  as&enti\>.     ^  So  in  B  and  C;  occual,  A. 


Mortal  and 
venial  sin. 


62 


WFCLIF'S 


The  first 
miracle  of  the 
loaves  and 
fishes. 


pE    FYVE   AND   TWENTI}>   SONDAI   GOSPEL   AFTIR    TrINITE. 

[SERMON     XXV.] 

Cum  sublevasset  oculos  Jesus. — Joh.  vi.  [5.] 

pis  gospel  tellij>  a  myracle  how  Crist  fedde  \^  folk ;  and  |)is 
miracle  techij?  men  boj^e  good  feijj  and  vertues.  It  is  seid 
bifore  ^  how  Crist  fedde  |)e  folk  Jjus  twyes,  and  of  ]?e  secounde 
fedynge  it  is  seid  bifore,  and  of  })e  first  fedynge  shulde  we 
speke  now.  pe  gospel  sei]?  Jjus,  \zX  Jjis  miracle  was  don  whanne 
Jesus  hadde  cast  up  his  eyen  and  sei'^  pat  viyche  Jolk  was  comen  to 
him,  to  here  Goddis  word,  he  saide  to  Philip,  Whereof  pei  shulden 
higge  breed  for  to  fede  pis  folk,  for  he  wiste  J)at  \€\  hungriden. 
pzif  seide  Crist  to  Philip  for  to  temple  him,  for  he  wiste  ful  wel 
what  he  hadde  to  do.  A?id  Philip  seide  to  Crist,  pat  loves  of  two 
hundrid  pens  ne  sujficiden  tiot  to  he?Ji,  so  pat  ech  on  myi,te  take 
a  litil  what  of  breed.  But  anopir  disciple,  Afidrew,  Petris  bropir, 
seide,  per  was  a  child  pat  pere  hadde  fyve  barly  loves,  and  per  to 
two  fishis,  but  what  wolden  pes  be  amonge  so  myche  folke.  And 
Jesus  bade  his  apostlis  to  make  pe  men  sitte  doun  to  mete,  for  pere 
was  much  hay,  \2X  \€\  my3te  sitte  on,  and  pe  vien  weren  sette  as 
it  were  fyve  pousand.  And  Jesus  tooke  pan  pes  loves,  and  whan 
■he  hadde  panked  God,  he  delide  hem  to  pe  sittinge  men,  and  also 
of  pe  fishis  as  myche  as  pei  wolden.  And  whan  pei  weren  fillid, 
Crist  seide  to  his  disciplis,  gedre  y  pe  relifpat  lefte,  pat  it  perishe 
not.  And  pei  gedriden  and  fildeti  twelve  coffynes^  of  relif  of  fyve 
barly  loves,  pat  weren  lefte  of  pis  folke  pat  eten.  And  pes  men, 
whan  pei  hadden  seen  pe  sigfte  of  pis  myracle,  saiden  among  hem- 
silfe,  pat  pis  is  a  verrey  prophete,  pat  is  come  in  to  pis  world,  as 
prophetis  bifore  hadden  told.  We  shal  suppose  of  j?is  myracle 
\2X  it  is  dyverse  fro  jje  to]>ir ;  for  ellis  Mark  wolde  not  have  told 
J)es  myracHs  so  dyversly  and  in  diverse  places,  for  ]>at  oon  hadde 


*  See  Sermon  VII. 
^  In  this  word,  by  which  Wyclif 
(as  well  as  both  Wycliffite  versions 


in  loco)  simply  Englishes  the  Ko<pL- 
vovs  of  the  original,  we  seem  to  have 
the  source  of  the  word  '  cofifin.' 


SERMONS. 


63 


))en  be  fals,  and  it  hadde  be  superflue  to  j>us  have  told  ])is 
tale ;  and  herfor  we  shal  suppose  jjat  |jes  weren  two  myraclis 
j?at  weren  do  in  )jis  maners  as  |)e  gospel  telli}).  And  we  shal 
suppose  over  |?at  as  Crist  quykid  |>re  men  for  a  notable  cause, 
who  so  koud^  undirstonde  it,  so  he  made  |)es  two  festis,  for  a 
certeyn  resoun.  And  it  is  seid  comounly  ]?at  as  \q  noumbre 
of  two  is  )?e  first  jjat  come]?  from  oonhede  of  noumbris,  so  J)e 
two  feestis  bitokenen  ))at  men  for  Jjer  synne  ben  fallen  in  Jjis 
nede  to  be  fedde  ]?us.  For,  if  man  hadde  stonde  in  ])e  staat  of 
innocence,  he  shulde  have  had  no  nede  to  be  fedde  ])us,  for 
man  shulde  have  feelid  no  peyne  bifore  jjat  he  hadde  synned, 
and  so  he  shulde  not  have  hungrid  for  defaute  of  mete.  But, 
for  he  wente  first  bi  synne  from  oonhede  of  God,  Jjerfore  he 
felde  ])us  twyes  in  peyne  for  his  synne.  And  God  telli))  suche 
treujjes  on  diverse  maneres,  now  for  o  cause,  and  now  for  an- 
oj)ir ;  and  ]?us  bi  J)is  resoun  curatis  of  puplis,  5if  ])ei  ben  hooli 
in  bodi,  ben  pore  feble  men.  pei  ben  pore  men,  5if  J)ei  kepen 
her  ordre,  for  ])ei  shulden  sue  Crist  in  poverte,  nerrer  |>an  o])ir 
comounes,  and  ])ei  ben  feble,  for  ])ei  have  nede  of  sustenaunce 
]?at  ]?ei  shulde  not  have  hadde  in  state  of  innocence;  and  ])ei 
mai  not,  as  Crist,  have  mete  where  ]>q\  wolden;  and  J)us  for 
poverte  and  febilnes  ])ei  taken  almes  of  comounes.  pes  fyve 
loves  ben  fyve  bokes  of  Moises,  j^at  ben  bo])e  streite  and  sharpe, 
as  seint  Petir  seij?.  pes  two  fishis  ben  two  bokes,  of  Wisdom 
and  of  prophetis,  J^at  ben  sonel"  to  ])es  loves.  And  ))is  o  child, 
])at  ha])  al  ])e  mete,  is  J)e  child  born  to  us,  ])at  Ysay  speki])  of. 
pis  child  maki])  his  puple  sitte  don  in  mekenesse,  J)enkinge  ])at 
])ei  ben  hey  whos  floure  falli]),  but  J)e  goostly  food  is  proposid 
of  Crist  for  to  be  tokned  bi  bodily  foode.  And  fyve  ])Ousend  of 
men  fedde  wi])  ])is  mete  weren  al  ])0  in  which  Goddis  grace  was 
greene ;  for  al  J)es  moten  meken  hem,  and  be  fed  wi])  Goddis 
word ;  for  ellis  may  no  man  come  to  hevene  blis.  And  ])us 
men  ])at  ben  fallen  doun  bi  pryde  of  synne,  shal  bi  mekenesse 
of  ])e  centre  be  brou3t  unto  hevene.  For  as  lownesse  of  ])e 
centre  of  J)e  world  and  ])e  erj)e,  is  ])e  most  lownesse  J>at  God 
may  make,  so  mekenes  of  Crist  is  ])e  mooste  ))at  mai  be,  and 


Jtoivde,  B. 


sQuviJ,  B  ;  sowle,  C. 


An  allusion  to 
the  institution 
of  '  Poor 
Priests.' 


Acts  XV.  10. 


Isaiah  ix.  6. 


64  WrCLIF'S    SERMONS. 

in  jjis  mekenesse  mut  a  man  grounde  his  toure,  ^if  it  shal  teyne 
to  hevene,  for  ]>e  toure  of  ]>e  gospel  )?at  man  shulde  wille  to 
rere  is  undirstonde  comounly  heynesse  of  vertues,  of  which 
vertues  mekenes  is  ground,  and  charite  ]>e  heyeste  parte,  }>at 
teyne)?  unto  hevene.  After  J)is  mete  weren  gedrid  twelve  cof- 
fynes,  ffor  holy  doctours  after  jjes  maters  weren  more  sutil  in 
witt  of  holy  writt  ]?an  aftirward  ben  doctours  in  witt  of  Goddis 
lawe.  For  sij^,  men  stonden  in  sophymes  and  crafte  of  worldely 
wynnynge,  and  lore  of  foure  doctours  is  myche  leid  asleepe, 
na])eles  jjis  relif  shulde  fede  folk  now,  for  nei]jer  j^is  hool  mete 
ne  relif  J)erof  may  rote  or  perishe,  si]>  it  is  treujje  of  God.  And 
so  al  Jjes  twelve  coffynes  ben  alle  ]>e  mo^  sentencis  ])at  first 
weren  gedrid  of  witt  of  holy  writt,  but  jje  sevene  lepis  ])at  weren 
gedrid  after  weren  fewere  goode  sentences  ]jat  weren  take  of 
Goddis  lawe.  And  ])is  myracle  of  multipliynge  of  Goddis  lawe 
bi  so  fewe  prechours  among  so  fele  folk  was  more  myracle 
jjan  bodih  woundris,  and  jjerfore  holy  men  turneden  to  God, 
glorifien  him,  and  holden  hym  ]>er  kyng. 

^  moo  in  B. 


v.YCLIF, 


HERE    BIGYNNEl^ 


ADVENT    BIFORE    CRISTEMASSE. 


pE    FIRSTS    SONDAI    GOSPEL    IN    ADVENT, 


65 


[SERMON      XXVI.] 

Cum  appropinquasset  Jesus  Jerosolumis. — Matt.  xxi.  [i.] 

pis  Gospel  telli}?  of  the  secounde  advent  of  Crist  and  it  is 
noo  drede  it  techij?  us  vertues,  si]?  alle  ]je  dedes  of  Crist  tellen 
men  how  \€\  shulden  do.  pe  story  tellij?  how  Jesus  cam  to  his 
passioun  unto  Jerusalevi,  to  teche  ]?at  he  ordeynede  himsilf  for 
to  suffre,  for  he  my^te  have  fledde  ]?is  passioun  of  him,  ^if  he 
wolde  himsilf  not  have  suffrid  jjus.  And  so  men  seyen  co- 
mounly  \2X  J)ere  ben  ]?re  adventis  biside  \%  comoun  advent  J)at 
Crist  come]?  to  mannis  soule.  In  ]?e  firste  advent  Crist  cam  to 
be  man,  and  }?is  advent  aboden  seintis  of  ]?e  olde  lawe,  and  ]?is 
was  no  morynge  but  lassyng  of  God,  ^he  more  lassyng  }?an  to 
aungelis,  as  ]?e  psalme  sei]?,  for  God  was  made  erj?e  whan  he 
was  maad  man.  pe  secounde  advent  is  cominge  to  Cristis 
passioun;  and  of  })is  maki]?  ]?e  gospel  mynde  to  daye.  pe 
Jjridde  advent  shal  be  whan  Crist  shal  come  to  jugement  at  )?e 
dale  of  dome,  to  juge  bo}?e  good  and  yvel.  And  in  al  J?es  }?re 
adventis  Crist  visitide  ever  his  sugetis  to  amende  hem  and  not 
to  spuyle  hem ;  and  wolde  God  ])at  preelatis  ^  wolde  ]?enke  on  J?is 
now;  })anne  shulde  ]?ei  not  come  in  Anticristis  name  more  to 
spuyle  ]?er  sugetis  ]?an  to  amende  hem.  pe  first  advent  of 
Crist  we  bileven  as  passid,  and  ]?e  ])ridde  advent  we  abiden,  ]?at 
is  to  come;  but  to  ]?e  secounde  advent  we  shulden  maken  us 
redy  to  suffre  in  oure  body  for  ]?e  name  of  Crist. 

Crist  cam  to  Bepfage  a,  \2X  is  a  litil  toun  in  ]?e  foot,  of  Olyvete, 

^  prelatis,  B. 

*  Bethphage  is  said  to  mean  house       Wyclif  was  apparently  thinking  of 
of  unripe  Jigs    (Smith's  Bib.  Diet.).       the  Greek  (pdyoj. 

SERMONS.  F 


The  entry  of 
Christ  into 
Jerusalem. 


Four  different 
Advents. 


Ps.  vili.  5. 


t6 


WYCLI  F'S 


a  myle  fro  Jerusalem,  and  J)is  toun  was  50vun  to  preestis  for 

mete   of  her   mou]>is,  for  Be]?fage  is   hous    of  mou]?,  or  ellis 

hous  of  etynge — and  bi  ]?is  tau^te  Crist  how  he  lyvede  pore 

lyf  and  nedy  for  love  of  man,  si]?  he  dwelte  in  siche  J^ropis  ^ », 

and  he  tolde  hou  preestis  eten  hym  by  envie.     '^anne  he  sente 

two   disciplis   to  Jerusalem,  ]>at   was   wallid,   and  perfore   Crist 

clepip  it  a  castel  pat  was  ayn  holy   Chirche  ^.     Crist  bad  his 

disciplis  to  brijige  him  an  asse  and  pe  fole  of  pis  asse  pat  pei 

shtdden  fyyiden  al  redy,  and  bad  pat  pei  shulden  lose  hem  and 

brynge  hem  to  Crist;    and  yf  ony  seide  ou^t  to  hem,  pei  shulden 

seie,  pe  Lord  hap  nede  of  hem,  and  he  shulde  leve  hem  anoon. 

And  pis  was  fild,  as  Crist  seide  bi  prophete  longe  bifore.  Telle 

Y  to  Syon  pe  doubter  of  Jerusalem,  Lo,  pi  kyng  comep  to  pee^ 

homely,  sittynge  upon  asse  and  upon  pe  asse  fole ;   which   asse 

was    a    drawyng    beest.      And  his   disciplis   wenten   and  diden 

as  Jesus  comandide  hem.     For  alle  jjes  ]>ingis  moten  nedis  be 

ri5t   as    Crist    hadde    ordeyned   hem,    and   bi   ]jis    my5ten    J^e 

disciplis  knowe  \2X  J)is  Lord  was  al  witty.     And  his  disciplis 

puttiden  her  clopis  upon  pes  two  beestis,  first  upon  \e  fole,  sij> 

upon  jje  asse,  to  teche  us  |)at  hejjene  men,  ]?at  weren  wanton 

as  foolis  ^,  shulden  resseyve  Crist  and  his  lawes,  and  after  Jewis 

as  assis,  for  ]>e\  shal  bere  to  Jje  ende  of  )>e  world  ]?e  wi^te  of 

jje   olde  lawe,  as  folt*^  assis  beren  chargis  what  so  ever  be 

leid  on  hem.     And  his  disciplis  maden  Crist  to  sitte  upon  pes 

bope  beestis.     But  Jjre  manere  of  folk  cam  out  of  Jerusalem  and 

dide   worship   to   Crist,   for    comounes    lovede    him   ri^t  wele. 

Myche  peple  pat  was  riche  spradden  her  clopis  in  pe  weye,  and 

porer  schreden  branchis  of  trees  and  spradde7i  hem  in  pe  weye, 

and  opir,  bo])e  5ong  and  olde,  comynge  bifore  and  bihynde  songen 

])is  song  in  worship  of  Crist ;  David  Sone,  we  preien,  make  us 

safe  ^ :   J)is  we  seien  to  David  Sone,  Blessid  be  he  pat  is  come 

pus  to  us  in  Goddis  name  ! 

Sum  men  seien  )>at  ])es  disciplis  ]?at  weren  sent  to  Jerusalem 

ben  herty  preestis  and  worldely  lordis  |?at  shulde  be  bo]?e  Cristis 

^  t>orpes,  C.  2  'pijJs  clause  is  rightly  not  written  as  a  quotation 

in  C.  3  f^iis,  B.  ^  So  in  B  and  C;  A  has/o/«. 

a  'propis.     I^rop  is  given  in  Bos-  ''  Folt  =  foaled. 

Worth's  Dictionary  as  an  alternative  «"  '  Save,  we  pray,'  is  the  correct 

form  of  j^orp,  village.  translation  of  Hosanna. 


SERMONS. 


67 


disciplis,  and  brynge  to  Crist  jns  asse  and  hir  fole  to  ryde 
to  hevenly  Jerusalem.  And  as  Jerusalem  was  wallid  a^ens 
Crist  and  his  apostlis,  so  jjes  religious  to  daie  ben  wallid 
a5ens  Cristen  men.  But  ])is  wal  is  mennis  fyndinge,  hepid 
wij)Outen  charite,  for  it  is  no  charite  to  leve  jje  ordre  ]?at  Crist 
^af,  and  to  take  })es  stynkinge  ordres,  and  telle  more  prys 
bi  |>is  resoun; — ])is  synful  patroun  bade  do  |)us,  |)erefore  we 
shulden  do  ]?us;  j^an  bi  ]?is, — Crist  bad  alle  men  do  J)us,  }>er- 
fore  ])ei  shulden  do  Jjus.  He  ])at  synne]?  in  j)is  fei]?  synnej)  ajen 
bileve ;  a^en  ])e  mandementis  of  ]?e  first  table,  and  so  a3en  alle 
Goddis  mandementis.  And  ])us  shulden  Cristen  men  bringe 
to  Crist  bo))  ])is  asse  and  hir  fole  |)at  ben  bonden  in  Jerusalem 
bi  sich  fals  religiouse ;  and  so  ]>\s  asse  and  hir  fole  ben  comen 
to  |>es  pryvat  ordris,  but  not  to  alle  Cristene  men,  al  if  J)ei 
ben  betere  and  have  more  nede.  3^^  I'es  5oldes^'^  founden  of  men 
helpen  al  j)er  brej^eren  in  nede  boJ>e  of  temporal  goodis  and 
laten  hem  dwelle  in  Cristis  ordre,  but  ])es  sectis  of  newe  ordris 
helpen  not  ]?us  ])er  brejjeren,  for,  be  |)ei  olde,  be  jjei  jonge,  be 
])Q\  nevere  at  siche  meshese  \  ])ei  wolen  not  helpe  hem  wij? 
goodis  for  to  lyven  in  Cristis  ordre,  but  ra|)er  emprisoun  hem 
or  punishe  hem  a5ens  Goddis  lawe.  But  bi  J)e  reule  of  charite 
jjei  shulden  selle  ])er  hi5e  housis  and  alle  \>q  meblis  |)at  ]3ei  have, 
and  helpe  \ex  brejjeren  in  nede,  and  lyven  al  aftir  Cristis  lawe. 
pus  Crist  5af  bo])e  bodi  and  soule  for  relevynge  of  his  enemyes, 
but  how  lasten  siche  religious,  or  in  mercy  or  in  charite,  |)at 
wolen  not  5yve  j^er  ydel  goodis  for  ]?e  helping  of  })er  bre|)eren  ? 
And  ]?us  hem  wantij?  hiest  love  and  ech  degre  of  charite,  for 
j;ei  loven  more  ))er  ydel  muk,  jjan  Jjei  done  |)er  bre}>eren  in  God. 
Feyned  lettris  of  fraternite  ^*  wolen  j?ei  jyve  to  symple  men,  but 

^  myschef,  B  ;  mischefe,  C. 
»  Besides    the    old   Anglo-Saxon       has   noted   this   practice   of  giving 


Attack  upon 
the  Friars. 


Guilds  (on  which  see  Pearson's  Early 
English  History,  i.  271)  there  were 
the  merchant  guilds,  and  the  art 
guilds.  The  last  class  is  probably 
referred  to  in  the  text.  A  curious 
account  of  the  organization  of  the 
guild  of  painters  at  Florence  in 
13^9,  by  Jacopo  di  Casentino,  will 
be  found  in  Crowe's  Hist,  of  Painting 
in  Italy,  ii.  2. 

''  Chaucer,  whom  nothing  escaped, 


'  letters  of  fraternity,'  which  however 
had  been  practised  by  the  monks  for 
centuries  before  the  friars  were  heard 
of.  In  the  Sompnour's  Tale,  Thomas, 
the  farmer,  asks  the  questing  friar 
whether  he  is  not  his  '  brother.' 

'  Ye,  certes,  quod  the  frere,  trust- 

eth  wel ; 
I  took  our  dame  the  letter,  under 

our  seal.* 
Among   the   Dominicans,  and  pro- 


F2 


68 


WYCLIF'S 


to  lordis  and  to  men  \2X  j)ei  seyn  \2X  jiei  loven  more,  wolen  \€\ 
not  profre  siche  lettris,  lest  her  falsheed  be  perseyved.  For  siche 
lettris  of  chartris  profiten  not  to  men,  but  oj^er  to  make  men  have 
rijt,  or  ellis  to  defende  her  ri3t.  Siche  lettris  maken  no  rijt; 
^he  bi  mannis  lawe ;  and  )?is  ri5t  is  not  enpechid  bifore  |>e  dai  of 
dome ;  and  5if  men  shewen  ^  |)an  ])es  lettris  o]?ir  to  God  or  his 
lawe  jjei  profite  no})ing  to  hem  ne  defenden  hem  a^ens  God,  and 
so  J)es  lettris  ben  superfine,  as  ben  |)es  ordris  ]?at  maken  hem. 

|:^E   SECONDE   SONDAI    GOSPEL   IN   ADVENT. 


The  signs 
before  the 
second 
Advent. 


[SERMON     XXVII.] 

Eruni  signa  in  sole. — Luc.  xxi.  [25.] 

pis  gospel  telli|>  derkely  a  prophecie  of  Crist;  how  it  shal 
be  in  j?is  Chirche  bifore  ])e  dai  of  dome.  Crist  sei]?,  ]>er  shal 
be  signes  in  pe  sunne  and  moone  and  in  pe  sterres  of  hevene,  and 
in  pe  erpe  pressure  of  folk  ^  by  movynge  of  heven.  For  J)es  ])re 
partis  of  hevene,  sunne  and  moone  and  sterris,  shal  move  to- 
gidere  bo|>e  see  and  watris ;  for  |?ei  ben  more  redy  to  be  moved 
by  hevene  j?an  o|)ir  er]je  or  eir,  for  ]?ei  ben  bitwene  jjes  two, 
nei|)ir  to  hevy  ne  to  ]>inne;  but  large  in  quantite  and  disposid 
to  take  lijt  of  ]?es  ]>re  bodies  of  hevene  and  to  he  confusid  and 
to  make  noise.  And  si]?  of  })is  see  and  watir  rysen  wyndis  and 
blowen  on  londis,  it  is  no  wounder  5if  oure  eire  be  chaungid 
in  qualitees;  and  si]?  chaunginge  of  oure  eire  makij>  chaung- 
inge  in  mennis  bodies,  it  is  no  wounder  ^if  mennis  bodies  be 
changid  bi  j>is  eire;  and  so  maneres,  ]?at  suen  ]?e  chaunging 
of  mannis  complexioun,  shal  be  changid  in  oure  er|?e  \2X  men 
dwelle  inne ;  and  so,  men  shal  wexe  drye,  hope  be  siche  erpely  eir, 
and  bi  drede  of  oper  signes  pat  shal  come  among  men.  And  Jjanne 
men  shal  fi3te  in  er|),  o  cuntree-  wi]j  anojjir,  for  such  changing 
in  eir  shal  make  changinge  in  mennis  lyfe,  and  ]?us  dede  bodies 


bably  among  the  Franciscans  also, 
these  letters  admitted  to  the  brother- 
hood of  the  third  order,  and  imparted 
to  the  persons  admitted  the  bene- 
fit of  all  the  masses,  fasts,  prayers, 
and  other  good  works  done  or  to  be 


done  throughout  the  order.  For  the 
'  formula  admissionis,'  see  Ducange 
(Paris,  1843),  article  '  Fraternitas,' 

'^  The  reader  will  be  reminded 
here  of  a  passage  in  the  Paradiae 
Lost,  Book  iii.  485, 


SERMONS. 


69 


cast  in  }>e  water  or  erj^e  chaungen  jje  eir,  and  alle  oure  places 
|?at  we  dwellen  inne,  ojjerwise  jjan  it  shulde  have  be  in  |>e  state 
of  innocens;  for  }>anne  our  places  undir  Jje  mone  shulde  have 
be  wi])Outen  siche  medlinge ;  ffor  hevene  worchi|>  kyndcly,  dy- 
versely  in  dyvers  maters.  And  after  al  ['is  shal  men  see  Crist 
oure  Lord  come  from  hevene,  and  his  angelis  with  him,  to 
deme  men  jjat  dwellen  here;  y^r/^  vertues  of  hevene,  }>at  ben 
li3ts,  shal  be  chaungid  here,  and  al  }?e  governaile  of  hevene 
shal  be  varied  Jjus  to  men.  And  panne  men  shal  see  Crist 
comyng  dotin  m  a  clotide  wip  greet  power  and  maieste,  to  men 
|?at  can  rede  ]>es  signes;  and  Crist  conforti]j  his  children,  and 
biddij)  hem  putte  drede  ?i\yey,ffor  comynge  of  siche  signes  bito- 
kene]j  ]>at  J)er  blisse  is  nei3e ;  and  ]?erfore  shulden  \€\  rere  per 
heedis,  and  be  gladde  of  ]>es  signes,  and  nou3t  honge  j^ere 
heedis  doun  as  men  hevyed  wij)  ])e  erjje.  For  what  man  wolde 
not  be  gladde  whan  he  shulde  go  out  of  prison,  and  be  brou3t 
to  ))e  blisse  of  hevene  and  passe  awey  fro  siche  peyne.  And  Crist 
seide  to  his  disciplis  pis  similitude  in  kynde.  See  y  pe  gardyn 
of  fige  trees  and  al  oper  trees  of  fruyte  ;  whan  pei  bryfigen  forp 
fruyte  of  hem,  ye  witen  wel  pat  somer  is  nyy.  (And  somer  is 
in  sum  contrees  time  to  gedre  fruyte  of  ]>e  er)?e.)  And  so  whan 
y  seen  pes  signes  be  made,  wite  ye  pat youre  bigginge  is  nyy.  For 
biginge  is  clepid  here  fruyte  ]>at  come]?  of  J)is  bigginge,  and 
Crist  sei]>  sopely  pat  pe  kynrede  of  his  children  shal  not  passe  out 
of  pis  world  bi fore  pat  alle  pes  pingis  be  done.  Hevene  and  erpe 
shal  passe  in  chaunginge,  but  Cristis  wordis  shal  not  passe  pus. 
Wel  we  witen  ]?e  sunne  stood  and  sum  tyme  it  wente  a^en,  but 
|)us  mai  not  sentence  be  chaungid  of  jje  wordis  of  oure  Lord ; 
but  jjere  is  more  stabilhede  in  wordis  J)at  ben  seid  of  Crist  j^an 
is  in  hevene  or  er]?e,  si]>  Crist  is  above  ]?es  two,  and  comynge 
in  })es  tweyne  is  not  nedeful  but  for  j)at  Crist  haj)  ordeyned  it. 

pes  wordis  of  Crist  may  be  undirstonden  goostli,  so  jiat  |)e 
Sonne  be  Crist,  God  and  man,  and  ]?e  mone  be  holy  Chirche, 
and  j)e  sterres  in  hevene  be  seintis  in  ]?e  worlde.  Signes  ben 
made  in  hem,  for  \€\  moven  er|>ely  men,  and  chaungen  as  J>e 
see  temporal  goodis,  and  for  siche  chaunginge  chaungen  men 
in  wille,  and  membris  of  j>e  fend  ben  drye  fro  grace  and  ben 
adredde  for  Crist,  and  sentence  of  his  chirche.     Ffor  vertues  of 


Mystical  inter- 
pretation. 


70 


WrCLlF'S 


Matt.  xxii.  12. 


hevene  shal  move  Cristene  men  to  vencushe  Jjc  fendes  lymes, 
and  to  feren  hem,  al  if  \t\  for  a  tyme  maken  greet  soune,  and 
stynkyn  wi]?  synne,  and  frojjyn  wij?  lecherie.  And  ]?e  more  fishes 
swelewen  ]?e  lasse;  and  cours  of  ])is  moone  move|>  worldely 
men,  and  wyndis  of  pryde  wawen  )?es  floodis,  so  J)at  it  is 
perilous  to  shippis  for  to  wandre,  al  ^if  j>ei  ben  born  up  wi]? 
|?e  crosse  of  Crist.  But  wele  Y  wote  \2X  men  j>at  ben  chosen 
of  God  may  flottre  in  \^  see,  but  jjei  may  not  perishe ;  for  al 
jjing  mut  nede  come  ]?at  God  himsilf  ha]?  ordeyned.  And  ])us 
sad  bileve  of  ])is  ]?ridde  Advent  shulde  stire  men  fro  synne 
and  drawe  hem  to  vertues.  Ffor  5if  ]?ei  shulden  to  morewe 
answere  to  a  juge,  and  wynne  greet  rentis  or  eUis  lese  hem, 
Jjei  wolde  ful  bisih  shape  for  ]?er  answere,  and  myche  more  5if 
\€\  shulden  wynne  or  lese  j^er  lyfe — Lord !  si]?  we  ben  certeyn 
of  })e  day  of  dome  })at  it  shal  come  to  us,  and  we  wite  not  how 
soone,  and  ]7ere  we  shal  have  jugement  of  hevenly  lyfe,  or  ellis 
of  dee])  of  helle  ])at  evermore  shal  laste,  how  bisie  shulde  we  be 
to  make  us  redy  for  ])is !  Certis  defaute  of  bileve  is  cause  of 
oure  sleu])e;  and  ]?us  shulden  we  fasten  in  us  articlis  of  J)e 
trou]je,  for  ]?ei  wolen  be  louse  in  us  as  nailes  in  a  tree,  and 
])erfore  it  is  nedeful  to  knocke  and  make  hem  faste.  For  it  is 
noo  drede  ]>at  no  man  doi]?  synne  but  ^if  he  faile  in  bileve 
upon  sum  manere.  Sum  men  wanten  bileve,  and  nevere  hadden 
bileve,  as  Paynemes  and  o]?er  men  ])at  nevere  weren  turned  to 
Crist.  Sum  failen  in  bileve,  for  ])er  bileve  slepi]?,  and  ojier 
jiingis  wake])  })at  \€\  trowen  more ;  and  ])us  faili])  ech  man  \2X 
is  overcomen  wi])  synne ;  for  lust  waki]?  in  hem  to  whiche  ])e 
synne  move])  hem,  and  peyne  and  drede  of  his  synne  is  leide 
asleepe ;  and  ])us  failen  in  troujje  ])e  more  part  of  men.  We 
shulde  J)enke  freishely  on  ])e  day  of  dome,  and  how  no  ])ing 
may  ])an  lette  Cristis  jugement ;  ffor  treu])e  and  resoun  shal  fulli 
go  for])  ])anne,  and  herfore  sei})  \q  gospel  ])at  men  ])an  nakid 
fro  charite  shal  be  ])anne  dombe,  and  not  shal  answere  to  Crist. 
And  for  ])is  cause  prophetis  of  Goddis  lawe  clepen  J)e  dale  of 
dome  ])e  dale  of  J)e  Lord,  for  in  ])at  daie  not^  shal  go  ajens  him, 
but  J)ei  clepen  dales  bifore  dales  of  men,  for  \q,  fend  and  his 
membris  have  now  |)er  purpos,  al  ^if  \<i\  shal  |)an  bie  it  ful  dere. 

^  nowt,  B  and  C. 


SERMONS. 


V 


PE   ))RIDDE    SONDAY    GOSPEL   IN    ADVENT. 


[SERMON     XXVI  I  I.] 

Cum  audmset  Joatmes  in  vinculis. — Matt.  xi.  [2.] 

pis  gospel  telli])  a  storye  of  Joon  Baptiste  |)at  touchij^  al  j)ree 
adventis  of  Crist,  but  specialy  J>e  J>ridde,  to  whom  serven  two 
bifore.  Baptist  was  in  prison  wij?  Heroude  Antipas,  for  he 
reprovede  his  advoutre  wij>  his  broJ?er  wyf.  Kndijoon  bounden 
in  prison  herde  of  Crisiis  werkes,  and  he  made  moche  joie  and 
preiside  myche  Crist,  as  o]>er  gospellis  tellen,  and  specialy 
Jones  gospel.  Sum  men  in  ]?e  countre  helden  Joon  more  J)an 
Crist,  and  Jones  disciplis  weren  in  ]?is  errour;  but  5it  jjei 
trowiden  ))at  ]?e  greet  prophete  bihi^t  in  |)e  lawe,  |>at  ]?ei  cle- 
piden  Messias,  was  more  j^an  Joon  Baptist.  And  her/ore  sente 
Baptiste  two  of  his  disciplis,  for  to  speke  wij?  Crist  and  purge 
hem  of  |)is  errour.  And  Jon  bade  hem  axe  jjus  Crist  on  his 
bihalve,  Ert pou  he  pat  is  to  come,  and  to  save  mankynde,  jjat 
))e  law  speki]?  of.?  or  we  abide  anoper  ?  We  shal  suppose  Jjat 
Baptist  was  stable  in  his  trouj^e,  and  coveitide  ]?at  Jje  fei]>  of 
Crist  and  love  of  Crist  growide,  and  bifore  J)at  he  were  deed, 
J)at  he  trowide  shulde  come  soone.  For  trewe  men  coveiten 
more  J)e  honoure  of  God  J>an  jjer  owen  honour,  for  ellis  \€\ 
weren  unreasonable.  And  J>us  cast  Joon  ]?is  weye  to  worship 
of  Crist,  and  to  J>is  entent  of  Joon  Crist  spake  and  wrou3te  in 
dede.  Go  y  and  telle  ayn  to  foon  what  ye  have  herd  and  sen, 
Blynde  seen,  crokide  gone,  meselis  ben  heled,  deefe  heeren,  dede 
rysen,  pore  men  ben  preisid  of  God^,  atid  blessid  be  he  pat  shal 
not  be  sclau7idrid  in  me. 

And  on  two  maneres  men  ben  sclaundrid  in  Crist.  Sum 
men  bi  worchinge  putten  errours  in  him,  and  |?is  manere  of 
sclaundrynge  is  algatis  yvel,  si]>  \€\  fallen  in  heresie  )>at  ]?us 
trowen  of  Crist,  pes  men  ben  sufferyngly  sclaundrid  in  Crist 
|)at  fallen  fro  bileve   J?at   |?ei   shulden  have   of  Crist.     On  \q 

^  This  is  a  different  mistranslation  versions,  which  is,  '  pore  men  ben 
from   that   found  in    the  Wycliffite       taken  to  prechynge  of  the  gospel.' 


John  the  Bap- 
tist sending' 
messengers 
to  Christ. 


72 


WYC  LI  F'S 


jjridde  maner  we  seyen  ))at  men  ben  sclaundrid  whan  \€\  ben 
defamyd  of  ony  kyn  ]?ing  jjat  J^ei  have  hem  amys  aboute  ony 
siche  ))ing ;  and  J)us  many  holy  men  weren  sclaundrid  of  Crist. 
And  so,  of  Jjes  sevene  myraclis,  ]?e  laste  is  |)e  moste ;  and  alle  jjes 
sevene  miraclis  techen  how  we  shulden  love  Crist ;  for  we  ]>at 
weren  first  blynde  bi  defaute  of  fei]?,  sen  aftir  in  oure  soule  what 
we  shulden  trowe ;  and  so  first  crokid  in  medeful  werkes,  wandren 
after  in  holynesse  of  lyf ;  and  so  first  leprous  by  heresyes  of  fei)>, 
ben  after  clensid  of  alle  J?es  heresyes;  deef  men  fro  Goddis 
word,  heeren  his  lawe ;  and  dede  men  in  soule  bi  custome  of 
synne,  rysen  to  spiritual  lyf  of  ]?er  soule ;  men  jjat  weren  pore 
bifore  for  ])er  holy  werkes,  ben  seid  good  lyvers  of  him  ^  \2X  may 
not  erre.  And  it  seme]?  \2X  Jones  disciplis  saien  summe  of  J>es 
miraclis,  or  ellis  hem  alle,  in  fei]?  \2X  Crist  3af  hem. 

And  whan  pei  weren  wente  fro  Crist,  he  preiside  Joon  Bap- 
tist, techinge  jjat  men  shulden  not  preise  a  man  in  his  presence 
ne  in  presence  of  his,  lest  he  were  a  faioure  ^.  Crist  preiside 
Baptiste,  axinge  of  him  ]>re  J?ingis,  so  \2X  J^e  peple  were  nedid 
to  graunte  ]?at  Joon  was  holy.  Whan  y  seien  Baptist  in  desert, 
what  wente  y  to  see  ?  sawe  y  a  reede  wawinge  wip  pe  wynde  ? 
nay,  suche  men  ben  unstable  for  lovynge  of  worldely  mukke, 
for  Joon  was  stable  in  Jje  love  of  God,  and  so  was  he  groundid 
in  Jje  stone  of  ri3t-wisnesse.  Or  what  wente  y  out  to  see  whan 
ye  wente  to  see  Joon?  wher  y  wenten  to  see  a  man  cled  in 
softe  clopis  ?  nay,  lo,  men  pat  hen  cled  pus  drawefi  hem  to  kyngis 
hous,  and  ben  tenderly  fedde  wi]?  metis  \2X  plesen  J)e  fleishe. 
For  Joon  Baptiste  was  contrarie  to  such  men  in  bo|)e  ]>es, 
si]?  he  dwelte  in  desert,  and  was  fedde  wi]?outen  foode  ]jat 
was  maad  bi  mannis  crafte,  and  so  ]?e  world  and  his  fleish 
overcame  he  perfitli,  and  it  is  no  drede  to  us  \&  fende  hadde 
})an  noon  holde  in  him.  But  what  went  y  out  to  see  ?  certis  to 
see  a  prophete  ;  '^he  Y  seie  to  you,  Joon  was  more  pan  a  prophete, 
for  Joon  hadde  office  of  God  to  se  Crist,  and  waishe  him,  and 
to  shewe  hym  at  eye,  J)at  is  more  )>an  prophetis  office.  And 
he  is  of  whom  it  is  writun,  jjat  )>e  Fadir  speki})  to  ]?e   Sone, 


*  So  in  B ;  h^m,  C ;  A  has  hem. 
»  See  Glossary. 


SERMONS. 


73 


Lo  V  send  7nyn  aftgel,  |>at  is  myn  owen  messenger,  to  fore  pi 
face  pat  shal  make  redy  pi  iveie  tofore  pee  ;   for  Joon  Baptiste 
movede  men  to  trowe  in  Crist  many  gatis. 

Here  men  may  touche  many  synnes  ])at  rengnen^  amonge 
men,  and  specialy  synne  of  clerkes  ]?at  lyven  in  lustis  of  foode 
and  in  lustis  of  atire  contrarie  to  Joon  Baptiste.  And  j)us,  as 
]je  gospel  sei]>,  }>ei  putten  on  Joon  ]>at  he  hadde  a  fend,  and  was 
ladde  in  desert  bi  ]?is  spirit  j^at  susteynede  him,  and  he  lyvede  not 
mannis  lyfe,  ne  ^af  ensaumple  to  sue  him ;  and  in  Crist  |>ei  ben 
sclaundrid,  and  seiden  he  lyvede  a  lustful  lyf  and  was  frend  to 
synful  men,  and  Jjus  shulden  not  men  lyve.  And  Jjus  J)ese  newe 
religiouse  fallen  in  heresie  of  Jewes,  for  nei]?er  jjei  make  Baptist 
ne  Jesus  Crist  jjer  patroun,  but  ))ei  chesen  hem  a  newe  patroun 
and  newe  religioun;  \€\  seien  J^at  Baptist  was  to  harde,  and 
Cristis  lyf  was  to  large,  but  \€\  have  founden  a  good  mene 
and  vertues  to  lyven  inne.  And  ]3us  bojje  clerkes  seculers  and 
])ese  newe  religiouse  forsaken  J>es  two  weies  and  taken  weie 
of  ])e  fend;  for  ]?ere  is  noon  o]?er  weie  but  Cristis  weie  and 
J)e  fendis,  si]?  no  man  may  lyve  in  vertues  but  ^if  J>at  he  sue 
Crist,  and  no  man  may  lyve  in  synne  but  3if  jjat  he  sue  in  Jjat 
]7e  fend.  Bo))e  j^es  endes  ben  to  blame,  but  more  ]jes  newe 
religiouse;  ffor  ]jes  ypocritis  leven  Crist  and  Joon  Baptist  his 
prophete,  and  chesen  hem  a  newe  wey  })at  mut  ofte  tymes  be 
cloutid  and  be  dispensid  wi]?  bi  Anticrist,  as  |>e  fend  techi]? 
hem.  pe  seculers  ben  lasse  ypocritis,  but  \€\  lyven  al  amys, 
si]?  \€\  dwellen  wi]?  kyngis  and  lordis  for  to  geten  hem  bene- 
fices; and  in  ]>e  mene  tyme  \€\  lyven  in  lustis,  and  leven  Jjc 
state  ]?at  \€\  shulden  kepe ;  and  ]?us  blynde  men  leden  ])e  blynd, 
and  bojje  fallen  in  J>e  lake.  For  ]?ere  nys  noon  o}?er  wey  but 
ou])er  wende  upward  aftir  Crist  or  ellis  to  wende  doun  aftir 
J)e  fend  into  ]?e  deppest  lake  of  alle  ^.  3^^*  I'^s  ])at  semen 
in  ]}e  heyer  state  suen  Petir  in  his  errour,  and  seien,  Sire,  God 
forbede  \2X  j)OU  lyve  ])us  in  ])i  membris,  for  witt  and  worship 
]?at  ))0u  shouldist  have.  And  certis  al  siche  ben  Sa]?anas,  for 
\€\  wolen  reverse  Crist,  or  addinge  to  Cristis  lawe,  or  ellis 
wi]7drawinge  ]?at  he  bad. 


The  friars 
follow  neither 
John  the  Bap- 
tist nor  Christ. 


^  regnett,  B ;  regne,  C. 
'  B  agrees  with  A ;  C  reads  hel,  which  must  surely  be  right. 


74 


WFCLIF'S 


John  the  Bap- 
tist bearing 
testimony  to 
Christ. 


2  Kings  ii.  ii ; 
Mai.  iv.  5. 


pE  FOUR>E  SUNDAI  IN  ADVENT. 

[SERMON     XXIX.] 

Miserunt  Judei  ah  Jerosolumis. — Joh.  i.  [19.] 
pis  gospel  tellij?  of  godhede  and  manhede  of  Crist,  and  of 
mekenesse  of  Baptiste,  how  myche  \2X  he  lovede   Crist,     p*? 
Jewes  senten  fro  Jerusalem  preestis  and  dekenes  unto  Joon,  for  to 
wite  what  he  was,  and  how  he  groundide  his  newe  lyf.     pese 
Jewes   semeden  hi^e  preestis  of  Jje  temple  and  Phariseis,  and 
pes  pat  weren  sent  to  Joon  weren  of  Pharisees,  for  J)ei  weren  lasse 
of  state  and  semeden  of  m.ore  religioun.     But  Joon  confesside 
unto  hem  and  denyede  not  treu]?e,  and  so  he  confessid  first  pat  he 
was  not  Crist,  for  it  was  most  perilous  to  be  holden  Crist,  and 
])erfore  he  putte  first  \t  moost  peril  from  him.     And  |)us  lowe 
preestis    undir    hi3e  preestis  of  ]?e  temple,    and   dekenes   \2X 
bojje  kouden^  J)e  olde  testament,  and  weren  more  lyk  Jon  in 
manere  of  religioun,  and  betere  shulden  enquere  of  his  newe 
ordre,  lest  \^  toon  erride  and  supplantide  J^at  o]?er,  weren  sent 
to  Joon  to  axe  of  his  state,     pere  was  behijt  a  greet  prophete 
in  |)e  olde  lawe  |)at  \€\  clepiden  Crist,  and  ])is  my^te  Joon  have 
be  holden,  5if  he  wolde  be  proude.     And  here  be  we  tau3t  to 
boste  not  of  jjis  ]?at  we  ben  membris  of  holi  Chirche,  and  so 
selle  our   suffragies,  for  it  is  hid  from  us  where  we   shal  be 
savyd,  and  3if  we  shal  not  be  savyd,  we  ben  not  membris  ])us, 
ne  oure  preier  for  ])is  is  not  wor])  ^  to  us  silfe.     And  to  gabbe 
})us  in  ])is  point  is  a  greete  synne,  and  to  take  mennis  goodis 
bi  sich  a  fals  chaifare,  for  a  worldely  man  wole  not  selle  but 
\2X  he  wote  is  his,  and  God  ha)?  ordeyned  |)is  privy  J>inge  to  be 
unknowe   of  us.     For  we    shulde    not  ]?us  boste  ne   disseyve 
oure  nei3bores,  and  ])us  to  putte  of  Goddis  ordenaunce  were 
a  greet  synne. — p^z"  axiden  Joon  pe  secounde  tyme,  where  he  were 
Hely,  and  he  seide  he  was  not  pis  Hely  in  persone.     pe  Jewes 
hadden  in  J>e  olde  lawe  ]?at  Helye  was  ravyshid,  and  lyvej?  3it  in 
a  place,  and  shal  come  a3en  bifore  \q  daye  of  dome,  and  fi3te 
wij?    Antecrist,   and  ))us   |jei    supposiden   )jat   Baptist   was   he, 
special!  for    solitary  lyf  and  penaunce   in  etyng.     And  to  j^is 
entent  denyede  Joon  |>at  he  was  Hely,  but  Crist  seide  \2X  Joon 
'  So  in  B  and  C ;  A  reads  koudeti  bo\>e.  ^  ivor\>i,  B  and  C. 


SERMONS. 


IS 


was  Hely  in  figure,  for  rijt  as  Hely  figuride  the  firste  advent 
of  Crist,  so  Joon  figuride  ]?e  )>ridde  advent  of  him.  And  as 
sum  men  seien,  ])ei  bo]?e  figuren  j^e  day  of  dome ;  and  ]?us  |?ere 
nys  no  falshede  in  Crist  ne  in  Baptist. — "^ei  axiden  j?e  thridde 
tyme  where  Joo?t  were  pe  prophete,  and  he  sei'de,  Nay,  to  |)er 
undirstondinge,  for  name  of  prophete  bi  himsilf  bitokenej?  )>e 
more  famous  prophete.  Crist  sei]>  |jat  Joon  is  a  comoun  pro- 
phete, and  bojje  ]?es  weren  so]>e.  And  affter  J)es  )>ree  purgingis, 
pei  axiden  of  Joon  who  he  was ,  pat  pei  my^ten  answer  e  to  men  pat 
hadde  sent  hem.  And  Jon  seide  mekely  upon  Ysay  pe  prophete,  pat 
he  was  a  vol's  oj  cryer  i7i  desert,  to  bidde  men  make  redy  pe  weye  of 
oure  Lord.  For  ri5t  as  a  vois  shewij)  ]je  word  of  mannis  ]j05t, 
so  Jon  shewide  J?e  word  of  ]?e  Fadir ;  and  clerkes  knowen  wele 
]jat  a  vois  or  soun  is  substanciali  ]?at  jjing  \2X  soune]? ;  and  al3if 
Joon  my5te  have  seide  j^at  he  was  criynge,  ne|)eles  he  chees  to 
speke  more  mekeU ;  for  among  alle  ]jingis  vois  is  a  freel  ]?ing. 

And  ]>e  messengeris  axiden  Joon,  whereto  he  haptiside  and  brou^t 
in  a  newe  ordre,  sip  he  was  noon  of  pes  pree.  But  Jon  answeride 
hem  pat  he  haptiside  in  water,  and  on  myddis  of  hem  stood  pat 
pei  knewen  not ;  and  ]>at  is  J>e  greet  prophete  ]?at  |?ei  soujten 
after,  for  he  is  bojje  God  and  man  to  save  mankynde.  In  ]?at 
]?at  he  is  God  he  is  every  where  myddil,  as  he  is  ])e  myddil 
persone  in  ))e  holy  Trinite;  and  in  Jjat  j)at  he  is  man,  and 
heed  of  holy  Chirche,  he  is  myddil  of  alle  men  gedrid  in 
his  name.  In  vertu  of  })is  man  cam  Joon  jjus,  and  haptiside 
in  water  to  make  redy  bifore  Crist,  as  a  rude  werke  goi]?  bifore 
a  sutil.  To  ]?is  prophete  servede  Joon,  and  dide  him  al  worship 
in  ]?at  ]?at  he  was  God.  And,  for  he  was  ]?is  man,  he  is  to  come 
after  Joon,  al  if  he  be  Joonis  pryour.  Ffor  he  was  not  made 
bifore  Joon  in  tyme,  nei)jer  bi  his  manhede  nei])er  bi  his  god- 
hede,  for  Joon  was  man  bifore  jjat  Crist  was  man;  and  as 
nentis  godhede,  Crist  was  not  made.  And  \€\  traveilen  in  veyn 
))at  calculen  \2X  Crist  was  conseyved  bifore  |>e  soule  of  Joon 
was  knittid  to  his  bodi,  for  Joon  speki]>  of  for])erhede  of  man- 
hede of  Crist  bifore  Joon  in  grace,  and  also  in  worJ>ynes; 
and  herfore  sei]?  Joon,  |)at  he  is  not  worp  to  louse  ^  pe  puong  ^  of 
Cristis  shoo.     And  |)is  men  undirstonden  J)us,  j)at  Baptist  is  not 

^  loose,  B.  ^  \>ong,  B. 


WFCLIF'  S 


Hypocrisy  of 
the  Friars. 


worJ)i  to  declare  Cristis  manhede ;  but,  as  me  ]>inkij),  it  is  beter 
and  more  suynge  ]?is  gospel  to  seie,  ]jat  Joon  graunti]>  him  not 
wor])i  to  loose  ]>e  ordre  of  Crist,  bi  which  Crist  hadde  ordeyned 
to  be  patroun  of  Cristene  men.  For  J)is  ordre  is  a  J)Uonge  to 
bynde  mennis  willes  togidere ;  and  ]?us  me  ])inki]?  ])at  freris 
chiden  in  veyn.  Prechours^  seyn  |>at  Crist  hadde  hi5e  shone 
as  J>ei  have ;  ffor  ellis  wolde  not  Baptist  mene  Jjat  Crist  hadde 
|>uongis  of  siche  schone.  Menours  ^  seyn  Jjat  Crist  wente  bar- 
fote,  or  ellis  was  shood  as  ]?ei  ben,  for  ellis  Magdalene  shulde 
not  have  founde  to  ]?us  have  washid  Cristis  feet.  But  levynge 
])is  chidynge,  we  supposen  of  oure  Jesus  ]>at  he  tok  ful  litil  hede 
of  such  manere  of  wendinge,  but  he  chargide  myche  |>e  wille 
of  his  religioun  and  affeccioun  of  his  disciplis  to  be  bounden 
fro  worldely  goodis.  And  ]?us  freris,  as  Pharisees,  clensen  ]?e 
gnatte  and  swolewen  \>q  camel;  for  ]?ei  dar,  above  Baptist, 
founde  hem  newe  ordres,  of  reulis  )>at  Crist  chargide  not,  but 
^if  it  were  to  dampne  hem;  and  coveitise  of  worldely  goodis 
chargen  |?es  ordres  not,  ^if  ]>q\  be  gete  ^  wi])  fals  menes,  which 
treu]?e  of  Crist  ha|>  dampnyd.  Bid  pis  was  done  in  Bepanye  be- 
"■i^ofidepe  water  of  Jordan,  in  ])e  lond  of  two  kynredis*^";  and  so  men 
seyen  J>at  \tx  ben  two  Be]?anies  in  j^at  lond,  oon  biside  Jerusalem 
where  Lazarus  was  reisid  to  lyf,  and  anoJ>er  bi3onde  )?e  water 
where  Joon  hadde  mater  to  baptise  men.  For  Be|?anie  ^  sowne|>  j^es 
|?re;  it  is  hous  of  obedience  and  also  hous  of  penaunce,  and  hous 
of  Goddis  3ifte.  AUe  |>es  names  accorden  to  Joon ;  but  ]?ei  ben 
contrarie  to  alle  |?es  newe  ordris  ])at  ben  presumed  ajens  Crist. 

^  geten,  B,  C. 


»  Fratres  praedicantes,  or  Domi- 
nicans. 

''  Fratres  minores,  or  Franciscans. 

c  '  pe  lond  of  two  kynredis.'  For 
a  long  time  I  was  unable  to  satisfy 
myself  as  to  the  exact  meaning  of 
this  phrase.  There  is  nothing  in  the 
Commentaries  of  S.  Austin,  S.  Je- 
rome, and  the  Venerable  Bede,  nor 
in  the  Homilies  of  Pope  Gregory, 
which  throws  the  smallest  light  up- 
on it.  Upon  turning  however  to  the 
Commentary  of  Nicholas  de  Lyra, 
written  in  the  early  part  of  the  four- 
teenth century,  I  found  some  words 
which,  I  think,  solve  the  difficulty. 


Distinguishing  this  Bethany  (Beth- 
abara  in  the  authorized  version)  from 
the  one  near  Jerusalem,  De  Lyra  de- 
scribes it  as  lying  beyond  the  Jordan, 
'  scilicet  in  sorte  duarum  tribuum  et 
dimidiae  ;'  i.  e.  Reuben  and  Gad,  and 
the  half-tribe  of  Manasseh.  Wyclif 
probably  meant  to  say  the  same  thing, 
but  inadvertently  omitted  mention  of 
the  half-tribe,  of  which  indeed  very 
slight  notice  is  taken  in  the  account 
(Numb,  xxxii.)  of  the  negotiation 
between  Moses  and  the  '  lynages  ' 
(Wycl.  Ver.)  of  Reuben  and  Gad. 

^    Bethany    signifies    '  house    of 
dates.'    (Smith's  Diet.  Bible.) 


SERMONS. 


11 


pE   SONDAI    WlJjINNE  OCTAVE   OF   TWELF)>E   DAI. 

[SERMON     XXX.] 

Vidii  Johannes  Jesum  venientem  ad  se. — JoH.  i.  [29.] 

pis  gospel  telli|>  a  witnesse,  how  Baptist  witnesside  of  Crist, 
bo)>  of  his  godhede  and  eke  of  his  manhede.  pe  storye  seij? 
|jus,  J>af  Joon  say  Jesus  comynge  to  him  and  saide  ])US  of  oure 
Lord,  Lo,pe  loomb  of  God ;  lo  him  pat  takip  awey  the  synnes  of  pis 
world,  for  he  is  bo]>e  God  and  man.  Crist  is  clepid  Goddis 
lombe,  for  many  resouns  of  ]?e  lawe.  In  J)e  olde  lawe  weren 
{>ei  wont  to  offre  a  lombe  wi]jouten  wem,  ])e  whiche  shulde  be 
of  o  jere,  for  ]?e  synne  of  ]je  puple.  pus  Crist,  ])at  was  wi]?- 
outen  wem,  and  of  o  jeer  in  mannis  elde  was  offrid  in  \q  cros 
for  ]?e  synne  of  al  jjis  worlde,  and  where  siche  lambren  ]jat 
weren  offrid  felden  sum  tyme  to  \q  preestis,  ]?is  lombe  J>at 
made  ende  of  o]?er  felde^  fulli  to  Goddis  bond.  And  ojjer 
lambren  in  a  maner  fordide  j^e  synne  of  o  cuntre,  but  |)is 
lombe  proprely  fordide  ]je  synne  of  alle  jjis  worlde.  And  |)us 
he  was  ende  and  figure  of  lambren  of  jje  olde  lawe,  and  ]>us 
shewi]?  Baptist  by  his  double  spekynge  \e  manhede  of  Crist 
and  his  godhede;  for  oonly  God  my3te  J?us  fordo  synne,  si]) 
alle  o]?er  lambren  hadden  wemmes,  |>at  ])ei  myjten  not  hem  silfe 
fordo.  And  so,  al  if  preestis  have  power  to  relese  synne  as 
Cristis  vikeris,  ne])eles  ])ei  have  |>is  power  in  as  myche  as  ])ei 
acorden  wi]?  Crist;  so  |)at  jif  ]>ex  keies  and  Cristis  wille  be 
discording  atwynne,  |>ei  feynen  hem  falsely  to  assoile,  and  |)an 
J)ei  neijjer  loosen  ne  bynden;  so  ])at  in  ech  siche  worchynge 
J)e  godhede  of  Crist  mut  first  wirche. 

And  herfore  sei]?  Baptist  of  Crist ;  ]>is  is  he  pat  V  seide  of, 
After  me  is  to  comen  a  man,  pe  whiche  is  made  bifore  me,  for 
he  was  anoon  my  priour.  For  rijt  as  Crist  was  a  man,  ]je  first 
tyme  J>at  he  was  conseyved,  so  God  made  him  |)an  priour  of 
al  his  religioun;    and  he  was  abbot,  as  Poul  sei|>,  of  |?e  best 


The  second 
testimony  of 
John  the  Bap- 
tist to  Christ. 


Eph.  i.  22; 
Col.  i.  x8. 


78 


WYCLI  F'S 


Col.  iii.  II. 


The  clergy 
should  speak 


ordre  ]>at  may  be.  And  first  Y  knewe  hym  not ;  I  wiste  in 
soule  \2X  he  was  born,  but  Y  koude  not  wi])  bodily  eye  knowe 
him  fro  anoJ?er  man.  And  ])is  fallij?  comounly ;  but,  for  to 
shewe  hym  in  Israel^  per ef ore  Y  baptise  pus  in  water.  And  Joon 
bare  witnesse,  and  seide  pat  he  sey  a  spirit  come  doun  as  a  culver 
from  hevene  and  lefte  o]?er  and  dwelte  on  him.  But  God,  pat 
sente  me  to  waishe  wip  water ^  he  taw^t  me  and  seide  pus,  On 
whom  pou  seest  pe  spirit  come  down  and  dwellinge  upon  him, 
pat  is  he  pat  baptisep  7nen  in  pe  Holy  Goost.  And  Y  sey  and 
bere  witnesse  pat  pis  is  Goddis  kyndely  sone. 

We  shal  wite  ))at  ]?is  dowfe  was  a  verre  foule  as  o)?er  ben ; 

and  so  it  was  not  ]?e  ])ridde  persone  in  Trinite  taken  in  oonhede 

of  ]?is   persone,  as   Goddis   Sone  toke   his   manhede;    but  for 

mekenesse  of  ])e  dowfe,  and  moo  good  propirtees  |?at  she  ha]), 

she  bitokene])  J>e  |>ridde  persone ;    and  ])is  persone  is   seid  of 

hir,  for  Joon  seij),  The  Spirit  cam  doun  and  dwelte  long  upon 

Crist; — and  ])is   Spirit  was  J>is  dowfe.     And   so  it  seme]?  ]7at 

\\s  dowfe  was   God;    and   so,  al  if  )je  two   persones  may  be 

moved  in  creatures,  ne])eles  j?e  Trinite  may  not  be  moved  in 

his  kynde.     But  it  seme])  ];at  we  may  graunte  })at  })is  dowfe 

was    ]>Q    Holy    Goost,    as    we    granten    ])at    J)is    persone    was 

comynge   doun  in  })is   dowfe.     And  })us,  as   God   sei})  in  his 

lawe  ])at  sevene  oxen  ben  sevene  5eer,  and  })at  J)e  sacrid  breed 

is  verrely  Goddis  bodi,  so  it  seme])  ])at  he  sei]),  ])at  ])is  dowfe  is 

|)e  Holy  Goost.     But  clerkes  witen  ])at  \tr  ben  two   manere 

of  seyngis,  })at  ben  personel  seynge,  and  habitudinel  seynge. 

pis  dowfe  my3te  not  be  God  in  his  kynde,  but  bi  sum  habitude 

it  signefie])  God,  and  ])us  bi  autorite  of  God  it  is  God.     And 

if  J)Ou  sey  J)at  ech  J)inge  bi  ])is  shulde  be  God,  as  ech  Goddis 

creature  signefie])  his  maker,  as  smoke  kyndely  signefie])  fi^r, 

and  ]?us   seme])  Poul  to   speke,  whan  he   sei])  ])at   Crist  shal 

be  al  ])ingis  in  al  J)ingis  to  men  })at  undirstonden  him ;  for  after 

])e  day  of  dome  al  ])is  worlde  shal  be  a  boke,  and  in  ech  part 

])erof  shal  be  God  writun,  as  God  shal  be  in  his  kynde  in  ech 

part  of  })e  world ;  and  ])us  si]>  God  is  bitokened  first  and  moost 

in  ech  J)inge,  whi  may  men  not  graunten  |)at  God  is  ech  ])inge .'' 

— in  J)is  men  mut  undirstonde  dyversite  in  wordis,  and  to  what 

entent  ])es  wordis  ben  undirstonden.     And  ])us  bi  autorite  of  J)e 


SERMONS. 


79 


lawe  of  God  men  shulden  speke  her  wordis  as  Goddis  lawe 
speki|),  and  strange  not  in  speche  from  undirstondinge  of  )>e 
puple,  and  algatis  beware  ]>at  ))e  puple  undirstonde  wel,  and 
so  use  comoun  speche  in  )?er  owne  persone ;  and  ^if  \t\ 
speken  in  Cristis  persone  wordis  of  his  lawe,  loke  Jjat  j)ei 
deckire  hem,  for  drede  of  privy  errours. 

And  scorne  we  |)e  argumentis  })at  foolis  maken  here,  j^at  bi 
jje  same  skile  shulde  we  speken  ]?us,  for  God  spekij?  jjus  in 
wordis  of  his  lawe.  Sich  apes  Hckenes^  passen  beestis  foly, 
for  ]?ei  wolden  brynge  bi  ])is  |>at  ech  man  were  God.  And  so 
5yve  we  God  leve  to  speke  as  him  like]?,  al  if  we  speken  not 
ay  so  bi  ]je  same  autorite;  jjes  wordis  ))at  God  speki]?  shulde 
we  algatis  graunt,  and  declare  hem  to  trewe  undirstondinge. 
And  rekke  we  not  of  argumentis  j)at  sophistis  maken,  J^at  we 
ben  redargued,  grantynge  |?at  we  denyen,  for  we  granten  jje 
sentence  and  not  oonli  ]7e  wordis,  for  \e  wordis  passen  awey 
anoon  whan  we  have  spoken  hem.  And  as  Aristotle  sei])^, 
contradicioun  is  not  oonly  in  wordis  but  bo])e  in  wordis  and 
sentence  of  wordis.  And  bi  |?is  we  seien  ]>at  Crist  in  speche 
is  not  contrarie  to  him  silfe,  ne  o  part  of  his  lawe  contrarie  to 
ano])ir.  And  ])us  ^if  we  graunten  )?at  Crist  is  al  J)ingis,  it  sue]) 
not  hereof  jjat  Crist  is  an  asse,  ne  )?at  Crist  is  ech  |?ing,  or 
what  \>2X  we  wolen  nempnen.  For  God  sei}?  ]>e  tone  and  he 
seij?  nou5t  |?e  to]>ir.  But  we  graunten  |)at  Crist  is  bo|)e  lombe 
and  sheepe,  for  Goddis  lawe  graunti]?  bo|?e  |)es  two  of  him; 
and  so  Crist  is  a  Houn  and  a  worm ;  and  })us  of  many  |>ingis 
jjat  holy  writt  telli]?.  And  it  is  ynow  to  seie  for  dyversite,  ]>at 
God  ha])  special  sentence  of  on  and  not  so  of  ano])er.  And 
]>us  ]>Q  comyn  undirstondinge  shulden  we  algatis  holden,  but 
5if  Goddis  wordis  tau5ten  us  his  propre  sense.  And  siche 
stryfe  in  wordis  is  of  noo  profite,  ne  prove]>  not  ]?at  Goddis 
word  is  ony  wey  fals.  In  ])is  mater  we  have  ynow  stryfen  in 
Latyn^  wi]?  adversaries  of  Goddis  lawe,  Jjat  seyen  ])at  it  is 
falsest  of  alle  lawes  in  })is  world  ])at  ever  God  suffride. 

*  apis  licnessisy  B  and  C. 

*  Analyt.  Prior,  ii.  15. 

^  Wyclif  probably  refers  here  to  the  treatise  De  Veritate  Scripturae. 


in  a  tongue 
understood  by 
the  people. 


Sophistical 
arguments. 


8o 


WFCLI  F'S 


The  baptism 
of  Christ. 


pE  Gospel  on  octave  of  Twelf>e  dai,  and  it  falli> 

SUMTYME   on    SUNDAI. 

[SERMON     XXXI.] 

Ventt  Jesus  Galilea, — Matt.  iii.  [13.] 

pis  gospel  telli]?  how  Crist  tau3te  Baptist  bo|)e  bi  word  and 
myracle  how  he  shulde  be  meke.  pe  storye  telli]>  \2X  Jesus 
cam  fro  Galilee  to  Jordan  to  Joon  Baptist,  to  be  haptisid  of  him. 
And  ]?is  was  greet  mekenesse,  |?at  ]je  Lord  wolde  come  so  fer 
to  his  servaunt,  and  to  take  of  him  baptym,  a7td  Johan  forfen- 
dide  hi?n,  for  woundringe  of  ])e  dede,  and  seide  J?at  Y  shal  be 
baptisid  of  J?ee,  and  pou  contest  to  me  :  to  be  ])US  baptisid.  But 
Jesus  answeride  to  Joon,  and  seide  to  him  wiseli,  Suffre  now  pis, 
for  it  fallip  to  us  to  fulfille  al  ri^t.  It  is  opyn  ri3t  Jjat  \&  lasse 
be  suget  to  |>e  more,  and  it  is  more  privy  ri^t  \2X  \q  evene 
obeishe  to  \q  evene ;  but  most  privy  ri^t  of  alle  stondij)  in  ]>is, 
J>at  |je  hijeste  of  alle  obeishe  to  his  servaunt,  as  Crist  priour  of 
us  alle  obeishide  to  Baptist;  and  so  was  it  sittinge  Crist  to 
teche  ]?is  mekenesse.  And  here  schulen  we  wite,  as  men  in 
comyn  speche  seien  sum  wordis  rehersid  hem  of  ojjer,  and  sum 
wordis  \€\  seien  in  her  owne  persone,  (and  ]?is  may  be  varied 
after  ))re  maneris;  sum  ]jing  men  seien,  witinge  J>at  it  is  so]?, 
affermynge  J)e  sentence  wi|?outen  ony  condicioun,  as  trewe  men 
seien  Jjat  God  is  in  hevene;  sum  ])ing  men  seien,  proposinge 
to  fulfille  it,  but  undirstonden,  if  God  wole  ^yve  hem  grace,  as 
men  seyen  )?at  )?ei  shulen  holde  Goddis  comandementis,  and 
])us  techij?  James,  jjat  whan  we  speken  of  oure  dedes  \2X  we 
shulden  do,  we  shulden  undirstonde, '  if  \2X  God  wole ; '  but  ^it 
on  ]je  j?ridde  maner  we  supposen  \2X  it  shulde  be  ])us,  and 
neijjer  we  witen  it  ne  trowen  it ;)  and  wi]?  ]?is  we  undirstonden 
a  condicioun,  'if  God  wole;'  and  |>us  spake  Baptist  whan  he 
forfendide  Crist  to  be  baptisid  of  him,  and  herwij?  he  heeld 
obedience.  But  over  jjis  we  shulde  wite,  |)at  jjere  is  greet 
diversite  bitwixe  servise  of  a  }?ing  and  obedience  jjerof,  for  God 
obeishide   to   mannis   vois,   and   servede  not   to  him;    but  in 

WYCLIF. 


SERMONS. 


8 


mannis  persone  ]>ei  renncn  bojje  togidere,  for  jje  more  obeishi]) 
to  ))e  lesse,  and  eke  serve]?  to  him,  for  ])e  more  is  qy\>,  and  |)e 
lesse  is  spirit,  and  so  he  is  bo))e  more  and  lesse  to  his  servaunt. 
And  |)us  Crist  fulfillide  al  manere  of  ri3twisnesse,  for  ri^twis- 
nesse  is  comounly  callid  al  manere  of  vertue,  and  so  ri3twisnesse 
is  al  manere  of  mekenesse. 

And  ])us  John  suffride  Crist  to  tak  ])is  servise  of  him,  and  5it 
he  seide  soij?  in  wordis  j^at  he  spake,  for  Johun  was  baptisid  of 
Crist  as  he  shulde,  si]?  he  was  baptisid  of  the  Holy  Goost ;  and 
werkes  of  ]>q  Trinite  ben  undepartid  wi])Outenfor]j.  And  wij?  ])is 
cam  Crist  to  be  baptisid  in  water  of  John,  as  he  shulde  for  many 
enchesouns.  First  to  teche  ]>is  moost  degree  of  mekenesse.  Si]?, 
for  to  halowe  ]>e  water  of  baptym,  for  vertue  of  touchinge  of  Crist 
streechide  ful  fer.  pe  J^ridde  cause  is  to  ^yve  us  ensaumple  to 
take  mekely  baptem,  si]?  Crist  was  baptisid  J?us.  And  her/ore 
John  leet  Crist  to  be  baptisid  ofhim^  for  Joon  was  tau5t  in  his  soule 
}?at  it  was  Goddis  wille.  And  here  taki]?  men  wel  }?at  if  a  man 
avowe  a  Jjinge,  and  he  wite  after  J?at  it  were  betere  to  leve  it, 
]?anne  he  shal  leve  it,  and  have  sorewe  of  his  foly  biheste,  but 
him  nedi}?  not  to  go  to  Rome  to  perfourme  ])is  medeful  dede. 
And  here  manye  ben  disseyved  in  power  of  J?er  sovereynes ;  J?ei 
wenen  ]?at  hem  nedi]?  to  have  leve  of  hem  to  do  as  }?ei  shulden 
do ;  ]?is  lore  shulden  men  taken  of  ]?er  prelatis  above,  and  not 
traveilen  in  veyn,  ne  dispende  more  ]?an  ]?ei  shulden.  Andwhait 
Jesus  was  Jus  baptisid,  he  wente  anoon  out  oj pe  water ^  to  teche  us 
]?at  in  siche  meenes  we  shulden  not  dwelle  more  ])an  nede  is^,  and 
to  confermen  al  ]?is  ]jing,  hevenes  iveren  opened,  to  Crist,  and  he  j-zj 
pe  spirit  of  God  corny nge  down  as  a  dowve  and  co77iynge  upon  Crist. 
And  J?is  ]?ing  ]?at  he  si3  wi]?  his  eye  was  a  dowfe,  and  |)is  ]?ing  ]?at 
he  si])  wi]?  his  soule  was  God ;  and  ]?us  ]?e  spirit  of  God  cam  doun 
in  a  dowve,  and  per e  was  a  vois  comynge  doun  from  hevene,  and 
seide  in  }je  persone  of  j?e  Fadir,  ])is  is  my  Sone,  5he,/^/i^kyndely 
love,  in  whiche  Y pleside  to  my  silfe,  and  ]?erfore,  heere  y  him. 

And  so  bi  autorite  of  }?e  Fadir  of  hevene  and  eke  bi  autorite 
of  ]?e  Holy  Goost,  and  also  bi  autorite  of  Goddis  kyndeli 
Sone,  was  ]?e  manhede  of  Crist  here  shewid  wi]?  his  dedes.  Bi 
autorite  of  Crist    shulden   Cristene   men   trowe,   ]?at    he    is   \q 

^  This  clause  is  rightly  written  in  B  ;  in  A  and  C  it  appears  as  a  quotation. 
SERMONS.  G 


For  dispensa- 
tion from 
foolish  vows 
a  visit  to  Rome 
is  not  neces- 
sary. 


82 


WFCLI  F'S 


The  order 
that  Christ 
founded. 


best  man,  J)e  wiseste,  and  |?e  beste  willid,  ]jat  mai  be  in  |>e 
world ;  si]>  he  is  bo|)e  God  and  man.  And  herof  wole  it  sue 
Jjat  Cristis  owne  ordre  is  beter  ])an  ony  newe  ordre  founde 
of  synful  men,  for  ellis  hadde  Crist  failid  in  power,  in  witt,  or 
in  wille;  and,  for  |)is  is  a5ens  bileve,  ])erfore  |?ei  feilen  in  fei)> 
|)at  trowen  ]?at  ]?es  newe  religious  passen  Cristis  religioun.  And 
herfore  he  ordeynede  his  ordre  to  stonde  in  vertues  of  mannis 
soule  and  not  in  sensible  signes.  And  as  ]?e  holy  Trinite 
approvede  Crist  here,  so  it  appro vej?  ]?e  ordre  ]?at  he  made, 
and  putte  it  in  J^es  ])ree  |?ingis,  in  obedience  to  God,  in  poverte, 
and  chastite  wel  undirstonden.  Men  may  undirstonden  amys 
]?is  obedience  to  Crist,  and  trowe  ]?at  it  stondi]?  in  doinge  of 
ech  J>inge  ])at  \\  privat  priour  biddi]>  J^ee  do ;  and  certis  ]?anne 
jjou  puttest  him  to  be  unsynful  above  Crist,  or  ellis  |>at  ]?ou 
shuldist  do  his  wille  a3ens  Crist.  Certis  Crist  ha]?  no  power  to 
lyve  as  J)is  prelat  doi]?,  but  if  Crist  hadde  fredom  to  falle  in 
synne,  and  |5us  |)is  pryour  were  more  free  ]jan  Crist.  And  her- 
fore shulde  we  trowe  ])at  ech  obedience  to  man  is  as  myche 
wor]j  as  it  techij)  obedience  to  God;  and  if  it  faile  herfro  bi 
unobedience,  men  shulden  leve  ])is  as  venym  contrarie  to  obe- 
dience ;  for  ech  verry  obedience  is  obedience  to  God,  and  men 
shulden  more  obeishe  to  God  jjan  to  ony  creature.  And  so 
unobedience  brou5t  yn  bi  ]jes  newe  ordres  fouli]>  many  heepis 
of  men  bi  foly  of  her  prelatis.  So]?eli  in  Jjcs  newe  ordres  men 
shulden  obeishe  to  ech  |)ing  |)at  techi]?  more  obedience  to  God 
}>an  done  siche  prelatis.  And  it  is  not  bileve  ]>at  jjei  techen 
betere  obedience  to  God  ])an  doi]?  ony  ojjer  lawe  or  ]?ingis  J>at 
speken  to  J)es  ordris.  And  })is  movede  Poul  and  o|)er  Apostlis 
to  holden  hem  to  Cristis  ordre,  si]?  J)e  abbot  is  betere,  ]?e  reule, 
and  \q  kny^tis;  and  algatis  it  is  more  free  to  holde  Goddis 
comandementis.  For  ])is  feyned  obedience  letti]?  ofte  to  serve 
Crist,  and  herfore  men  shulden  lerne  obedience,  to  a^enstonde. 
Whan  ony  creature  of  God  biddi]?  ]?ee  do  contrarie  to  ]>at  ])at 
jji  prelat  ]?iddi]?  }?ee  do  bi  expresse  signes,  and  God  bi  his 
creature  biddi]?  ]?ee  do  \e  contrarie,  ]?anne  ])0U  shuldist  a^enstonde 
\\  prelate  in  \\s,  and  obeishe  to  God  in  what  signe  J?at  he  usi]?. 
On  J)is  maner  Petre  and  ojier  apostlis  seiden  }?at  men  moten 
more  obeishe  to  God  |)an  to  man,  and  Goddis  lawe  sei]?  }?at 


SERMONS. 


83 


God  obeishide  to  mannis  vols;  for  to  ech  |>ing  men  shulden 
obeishe  in  ]jat  jjat  it  sowne]?  obedience  to  God.  And  if  j?is 
bileve  were  kept  wel,  j?is  newe  obedience  shulde  gone  aweie. 


pE   FIRSTE   SONDAI   GOSPEL   AFTER   OCTAVE  OF  TWELF^E  DAY. 

[SERMON     XXXII.  ] 

Cum  f actus  esse t  Jesus. — Luc.  ii.  [42.] 

pis  gospel  telli|:>  a  lore  of  Crist  whan  he  was  twelfe  3eer  olde, 
and  J)is  lore  is  ful  of  myraclis  as  oj^er  dedis  ben  ]?at  he  dide. 
pe  story  tellij?  |?at,  zvhaii  Jesus  was  maad  of  twelfe  yer  olde  he 
wente  wip  Joseph  and  Mary e  unto  Jerusalem,  as  pei  hadden  custum 
at  Paskefor  to  make  pis  pilgrimage.  And  whan  pe  dates  weren 
endid,  of  makinge  of  ]?is  pilgrimage,  his  fadir  and  his  modir 
wenten  hoom,  and  Crist  lefte  aloone  in  pe  citee.  And  his  fadir 
and  his  modir  wisten  not  pat  Jesus  was  left  bihy?ide,  for  children 
hadden  in  free  custom  to  chese  whe]?er  |)at  jjei  wolden  wende 
wi]?  fadir  or  wi]?  modir ;  and  ]jus  Joseph  wende  jjat  Crist  hadde 
come  wi})  his  modir,  and  oure  Lady  supposide  ]?at  Crist  hadde 
come  wijj  Joseph.  And  among  Jewis  was  J>is  religioun  kept, 
]>at  men  shulden  go  bi  hemsilf,  and  wymen  bi  hemsilf ;  for  j^ei 
kepten  hem  fro  lecherie  in  siche  pilgrimage;  but  now  pil- 
grimage is  mene  for  to  do  lecherie.  And  al  ]?is  ordeyned  oure 
maister  for  to  teche  his  Chirche  to  enfourme  J>e  prelatis  after 
general  doinge^^,  for  errour  in  hem  is  more,  and  more  harmful 
to  \e  Chirche.  And  whan  ]?ei  weren  met  togidir,  and  wantiden 
J)e  child  ]q.?m?,,  pei  wefideji  pat  he  hade^  ben  infelowship  wip  sum 
kyn  of  his  freendis ,  and  pei  wenten  ayn  to  seke  him  amonge  hem, 
a7id  00  dai  pei  weiiten  ayn  and  fo?td  hijn  not  in  ])e  wey.  pe 
)jridde  dale  \€\  sou3ten  in  ]?e  citee,  and  \€\  fond  him  not,  and 
after  pe  pridde  day  pei  fond  him  in  pe  temple,  sittynge  amonge 
doctours,  heeryjige  and  axi7ige  hem.  No  drede  Jjat  ne  Crist  kepte 
good  order    in  his    doinge,   ffirst   heerynge    and    after 


^  doyngis,  C. 

^  The  meaning  seems  to  be,  '  in 
order  to  teach  his  Church  so  to 
fashion  lire  mode  of  life  of  her  pre- 


hadde,  B  ;  had,  C. 

lates   as    that   it   may 
general  example.' 


axnige 


serve   for   a 


Jesus  ques- 
tioning with 
the  Doctors. 


Dangers  of  the 
modern  custom 
of  piigriniages. 


G  2 


«4 


WrCLIF'S 


ChHsf  s  obe- 
dience prefer- 
able to  tliat 
imposed  by 
monastic  rule. 


Matt.  ix.  x6. 


wordis  of  J)e  lawe.  And  alle  pat  her  den  him  hadden  wounder 
upon  his  wisdom  and  his  answer  is  ^  and  seynge  ])e  50u])e  of  J>e 
childe/(fz'  hadden  woufider  of  his  dedis.  And  his  moder  seide  to 
him,  Sone,  whi  didist pou  pus  to  us?  lo,  pi  fadir  and  Y  hope 
sorwynge  have  sow^t pee.  And  Crist  seide  unto  hem,  Wherto  have 
y  sou'^t  me  ?  ne  wisten  y  not  pat  Y  moste  be  in  pe  fiedis  of  my 
Fadir  ?  And  here  shulde  prelatis  lerne  first  to  worshipe  ])er 
God,  and  to  serve  his  Chirche,  bifore  J)at  \€\  bisieden  hem 
aboute  worldely  werkes.  For^  ech  man  shulde  serve  God 
bifore  \2X  he  servede  o])er  |?ing,  for  his  first  entent  shulde  be 
to  worship  God  whatever  he  dide;  and  J)is  mut  nede  be  in 
Crist,  for  he  did  al  ))ingis  as  he  shulde.  But  pei  undirstooden 
not  pe  word  panne  pat  Crist  spake  here  to  hem.  And  Crist  wente 
doun  wij?  hem  fro  Jerusalem  to  Nazarep,  attd  he  was  suget  unto 
hem,  in  ])ingis  ]?at  |)ei  baden  him  do.  And  his  moder  kepte  alle 
pes  ivordis,  berynge  hem  in  her  herte.  And  Jesus  projitide  in 
wisdom,  in  age,  and  in  grace  bope  to  God  and  to  man. 

We  shal  wite  ]?at  oure  Jesus,  si]?  he  was  ])is  manhede,  and  suget 
to  oJ>er  men,  and  growide^  in  wexinge  and  elde,  he  profitide  in 
kunnynge  which  ]?at  cam  of  his  wittis ;  but  he  had  cunnynge  of 
godhede  and  blesside  cunnynge  of  man,  bi  which  he  was  in  al 
his  tyme  yliche  wiys  and  knewe  al  ]?ing.  Here  may  holy  Chirche 
knowe  bo])  ]?e  religioun  of  Crist  and  partis  of  })is  religioun,  as 
obedience  and  mekenesse.  For  Crist  was  suget  to  his  lesse,  and 
servede  hem  ful  mekely,  for  Goddis  lawe  taujte  him  ])at  \e\ 
weren  in  spirit  more  ])an  Crist  was  bodily.  And  Goddis  reule 
shulde  suffice  to  men,  al  if  \e\  cloutiden  not  newe  reulis.  For 
Crist  taujte  perfitli  a  ful  reule  for  al  Cristene  men,  and  it  is  a 
foul  pryde  to  cloute  our  errours  to  his  wisdom,  for  olde  cloi]? 
cloutid  to  newe  maki}?  more  hole,  as  Crist  sei}?.  And  we  ben 
certeyne  of  oure  bileve,  })at  Crist  ha}?  mesurid  his  ordre  in  li5t- 
nesse  and  in  fredom  more  ])an  o\>tx  men  kunnen  shape.  How 
shulden  blynde  foolis  after  amende  \is  reule  Jjat  Crist  ha]?  ^ovun .? 
And  so  God  enforme})  men  of  J)es  pryvat  ordres  ]?at  ])re  ])ingis 
of  her  ordres  ben  ydil  and  noyous;  first  })er  clouting  of  J^er 
reule,  and  si])  ]?er  obedience,  and  after  Jjer  obligacioun  to  };er 


*  So  B  and  C ;  A  has  '  And,  for/  which  gives  no  sense. 
grouyd,  C  ;  A  has  groiai\>. 


2  SoB; 


SERMONS. 


85 


habitis  and  o)>er  uses.     First,  Cristis  reule  were  fulli  suffisant  to 

alle  men,  and  more  free  and  more  li3t,  and  of  more  autorite. 

How  my^te  ]?e  fend  for  shame  combre  men  wi]>  sich  cloutinge  ? 

And  5if  a  man  shulde  wende  aweie,  it  were  noo  nede  to  charge 

him  wi]j  }nngis  ])at  weren  unprofitable  5if  he  hadde  ynow5  bisyde. 

And  so  as  God  forfendi]>  men  to  adde  to  his  lawe,  or  for  to 

drawe  |>erefro,  for  it  is  made  in  ful  mesure,  ri^t  so  we  shulden 

holde  his  reule  bi  whiche  he  techi]>  al  Cristene  men,  nei]?er  adde 

to  ne  drawe  jjerfro,  lest  we  peiren  Goddis  ordenaunce.     And 

litil  errour  in  ]>is  bileve  growi]?  to  more  in  longe  tyme,  and  |)is 

fendis  blasfemye  in  God  disturbli])  J)e  Chirche  more  and  more. 

As  anentis  obedience,  it  is  knowen  ]>at  Cristis  obedience  kept 

clene  were  sufficient  to  alle  men  here  on  lyf,  and  oJ)er  obedience 

}7at  is  cloutid  doij)  harm  manye  weies.     For  it  supposi])  jjat  |>is 

prelate  erri])  not  in  his  commandementis,  but  ever  more  biddij? 

his  sugettis  ]?e  same  ]?inge  |)at  God  biddijj ;  and  |)us  ech  prelat 

shulde  be  yliche-wyse  and  evene  wi]?  God;  and  whan  ]?ei  ben 

made  prelatis  bi  synful  menes  as  ofte  falli]?,  God  shulde  algatis 

jyve  hem  witt,  and  conferme  hem  in  grace ;  for  if  Jjei  my^ten 

after  do  synne,  ]?ei  my3ten  be  proud  in  J?er  prelacie  and  reule  ]?er 

sugettis  amys  a3en  \q  comandementis  of  God.     And  ]?an  were 

it  profitable  to  wante  siche  blynde  leders,  si]?  affiance  in  God 

and  proving  of  his  governaile  my3te  not  faile  to  men  but  3if  Jjei 

shal  faile  first. — Lord !  whi  ordeynede  not  God  siche  ordris  in 

})e  olde  lawe  ne  in  state  of  innocense ;  but  distryede  newe  ))at 

weren  mad?  wher  God  be  not  as  wise  as  he  was  in  \q  olde 

lawe,  and  ordeni]?^  now  for  his  spouse  as  tendirly  as  he  dide 

jjanne  ?     And  |)us  alle  nev/e  ordres  ben  ful  of  heresie.     And  as 

anentis  J)es  newe  habitis,  certeinly  J^ei  ben  of  ))e  fend,  but  jif 

jjere  be  sum  nedeful  cause  byndynge  men  J)us  to  hem,  for  ellis 

jjei  weren   superfine,  and  not  of  God  but  of  \q  fend,  sij>  \e\ 

tarrien^a  mennis  wittis    and  her  kepynge  fro  Goddis  werkes. 

But  it  is  knowen  ]?inge  to  men  jjat  j^es  habitis  profiten  not  to 

'  This  is  the  reading  of  C  ;  A  and  B  have  ordeynede,  clearly  the  wrong 
tense.  ^  tau-^ten,  C. 

^  Some  words  seem  to  have  dropt  to  attach    more  importance   to  the 

out  here,  (^though    the    MSS.    con-  friar's    habit    than    to    counsels   or 

suited    all    concur    in    the    reading  commandments   of   God,    is  to    do 

given  in  the  text,)  which  would  have  the  devil's  work, 
completed  the  sense,  which  is,  that 


86 


5  O 


WFC  LIF'S 


werkes  of  vertues,  but  hiden  Jjes  ypocritis,  si]?  jjei  may  wi})  siche 
habitis  be  quyke  fendis  in  J)is  world.  And  5if  \q\  profite  bi 
ony  caas,  ]>ei  done  harm  ofter,  as  doi]>  synne,  and  crien  to  men 
ypocrisie  of  siche  ordris  Jjat  usen  hem.  And  3if  ]jes  signes  ben 
fals,  J)ei  maken  men  fals  ])at  usen  hem;  and  so  algatis,  si|) 
vertues  my^te  be  kepte  wi|)OUten  sich  signes  more  pryvyly  and 
sikirly,  J)ei  ben  brou3t  in  bi  }>e  fende,  and  specialy,  to  charge 
hem  more  ]?an  conseihs  or  mandementis  of  God.  Ech  man 
mut  hav  sum  custom,  but  loke  he  wedde  him  not  J)erwi]7,  ne 
bisye  him  not  ]>at  it  be  kepte  of  many  men,  for  ]?ei  ben  dyverse 
and  axen  dyverse  costoms  aftir  J)at  God  move]?  hym. 


fE    SECOUNDE   SONDAY   GOSPEL   AFTIR   OCTAVE  OF   TwELFJjE  DaY. 


[SERMON     XXXI  I  I.] 


The  marriage 
at  Cana  in 
Gcililee. 


Nuptiae factae  sunt  in  Ghana  Galilee. — Joh.  ii.  [i.] 

pis  gospel  telli])  of  ])e  first  myracle  \2X  Crist  dide  in  presence 
of  his  disciplis.  And  J)us  telli])  ])e  story,  pat  weddingis  weren 
made  in  a  litil  divellinge  place  i7t  pe  contre  of  Galile,  aiid  Jesus  ' 
moder  was  pere,  wip  Jesus  and  his  disciplis.  For  as  men  seyen 
comounly,  Joon  Evangelist  was  weddid  here^,  and  Crist  was  his 
cosyn,  and  Cristis  modir  was  his  aunte ;  and  herfore  ]?ei  weren 
homelyer  in  ])is  weddinge  of  Joon.  Studie  we  not  to  what 
woman  ])is  Joon  was  weddid,  ne  axe  we  not  autorite  to  prove 
|>at  Joon  was  weddid  now ;  ffor  })at  J)e  gospel  sei])  here  is  ynow 
to  Cristen  fei]?.  And  whan  wynfailide,  at  pis  feste,  Jesus  modir 
seide  to  him^  \)ei  have  noo  wyn.  And  herby  J)is  Lady  ment  on 
curtays  manere  as  she  durst,  ]>at  Jesus  shulde  helpe  ])is  feste  of 


**  This  myth,  for  it  is  nothing 
more,  appears  in  its  complete  form 
in  De  Lyra  (Biblia  Sacra,  Lugduni, 
1589).  '  Dicitur  communiter  quod 
istae  nuptiae  fuerunt  Johannis  Evan- 
gelistae  a  quibus  eum  Christus  vo- 
cavit  ante  consummationem  matri- 
monii per  copulam  carnis.'  There 
is  no  trace  of  it  in  the  works  of  St. 
Austin  or  St.  Jerome,  nor,  according 


to  Cave  {Antiq.  Apostolicae,  p.  118), 
in  any  of  '  the  Fathers  and  best 
writers  of  the  Church.'  Bede  (Prol. 
in  Joh.  Evang.)  says,  '  Hie  est  Jo- 
annes Evangelista  ....  qui  virgo  a 
Deo  electus  est ;  quem  de  nuptiis, 
volentem  nubere,  vocavit  Deus.'  But 
he  does  not  identify  these  '  nuptiae ' 
with  the  marriage  at  Cana. 


SERMONS. 


«7 


\v)'n  bi  his  myracle.  ^m\.  Jesus  answer ede,  strangely,  What  is  pat 
to  me  a?id  to  J?ee,  womaji  ?  as  if  he  seide,  Y  have  not  by  my 
manhede  of  jjee  for  to  do  siche  myraclis,  but  }?erto  nedij)  my 
godhede ;  but  afterward  shal  tyme  come  whan  Y  shal  offre 
my  bodi  })at  Y  hadde  of  ])ee,  for  savynge  of  mankynde.  And 
herfore  noti]?  Austyu'^  how  Jesus  Crist  clepij?  specialy  in  jjes  two 
places  his  moder,  woman,  and  here  he  figuride  his  speche  in 
his  passioun.  And  to  ])is  entent  seij?  Crist, /<2/  his  hour  is  not  yt 
comen,  in  which  he  shulde  bi  suifringe  putte  his  bodi  in  werke. 
But  his  modir,  supposinge  ay  good  of  hir  sone,  seide  to  pe 
inyiiystris  to  do  what  ever  he  seide.  And  per e  were  at  pe  feste 
sixe  water  pottis  sett,  and  ech  of  hem  held  a  galoun  or  more. — pe 
Jewis  hadden  a  custoum  to  washe  hem  ofte,  for  touching  or 
seynge  of  )?inge  clene  ynow,  as  Seint  Mark  mene]?  in  his  gospel. 
Jesus  bade  pe  servauntis  fille  pe  pottis  with  watir,  and  pei  filliden 
hem  alle  up  to  pe  moupe.  And  Jesus  seide  pan,  Helde  out  now,  and 
herepe  persoun  : — an  architriclyn  was  he,  ]?at  was  clepid  to  blesse 
jje  feeste,  and  principal^  in  ])e  hous  ])at  was  of  }n-e  stages,  as 
5if  it  were  now  a  persone  of  a  churche.  Ajid  pei  bare?i  to  pis 
persoun  pe  wyn  pat  Jesus  hadde  made.  And  whan  he  hadde  tastid 
per  of ,  and  wiste  not  how  it  came,  but  pe  servauntis  wisten  wel  pat 
droiven  pe  water,  he  clepide  pe  spouse  of  pe  hous,  and  seide  to  him 
pus,  '^es  men  patfesten  oper  putten  first  good  wyn,  whan  J>er  tast  is 
freishe,  for  to  juge  Jje  goodnesse,  and  after  whan  pei  ben  drunken 
and  per  taist  failip,  panne  he  put  tip  wers  wyn,  but  ])0U  doist  even 
])e  contrarie,  for,  pou  hast  kept  good  wyn  unto  pis  tyme.  \iis  was 
pe  bigynnynge  of  signes  pat  Jesus  dide  in  Galile,  and  sheivide  his 
glorie,  bi  doinge  of  |?is  myracle,  and  his  disciplis  trowiden  in  hijn. 

pis  wedding  bitokene]?  love  ]?at  God  hadde  to  his  Chirche, 
how  he  wolde  bicome  man,  and  be  newe  weddid  to  it.  And 
herfor  was    Crist  not  bigamus,  ne  brake   not  his  matrimonye, 

^  So  B ;  A  and  C  have  principaly. 


^  The  interpretation  throughout 
this  sermon  is  generally  founded  on 
S.  Austin's  eighth  Tractate  In  Jo- 
hannis  Evmigelium.  Compare  the  fol- 
lowing passage  :  '  Miraculum  autem 
quod  facturus  erat,  secundum  divini- 
tatem  facturus  erat,  non  secundum 
infirmitatem ;  secundum  quod  Deus 
erat,   non   secundum   quod    inhnnus 


natus   erat Miraculum    ergo 

exigebat  mater,  at  ille  tanquam  non 
agnoscit  viscera  humana,  operaturus 
facta  divina,  tanquam  dicens,  Quod 
de  me  facit  miraculum,  non  tu  ge- 
nuisti ;  divinitatem  meam  non  tu 
genuisti :  sed  quia  genuisti  infirmi- 
tatem meam,  tunc  te  cognoscam,  cum  ; 
ipsa  infirmitas  pendebit  in  cruce.'        ' 


Mark  vii.  4. 


Interpretation. 


88 


WrCLIF'S 


si]?  ))e  same  Chirche  his  wyf  lasti|>  ever  more,  but  wij?  newe 
wenchis  is  Crist  now  weddid,  and  on  newe  maner  he  kepte 
his  firste  matrimonye;  as,  if  a  spouse  of  a  wife  were  newe 
cled,  herfore  were  not  dyvors  made  bytwene  hem.  A  newe 
weddinge  \\\]>  membris  of  ]?is  grete  womman  maki])  not  divors, 
ne  bryngij)  in  no  bigamye ;  as,  if  a  wyf  growide  and  hadde  many 
partis  J)at  she  hadde  not  bifore,  sche  were  not  jjerfore  lefte. 
And  j)us  Ghana,  ])at  is  gelousnes\  and  Galilee,  ])at  is  a  turnynge 
whele,  bitokenen  ]>q  love  of  Grist  ])at  he  hadde  to  conforte  his 
spouse  in  |)is  weie,  and  brynge  her  after  to  blisse  in  }je  chaum- 
bre  of  hevene. — pe  turnynge  of  ]>is  water  into  good  wyn  techi]> 
hou  Grist  made  his  lawe  more  savery,  as  ])e  wyne  was  beter  ]?an 
J>e  water  bifore.  And  rijt  as  o  substaunce  is  first  water  and  sij> 
wyne,  rijt  so  o  lawe  is  first  colde  and  sij)  hote ;  and  herfore 
seij)  Grist  jjat  he  came  not  to  fordo  jje  lawe  but  to  fulfille  J^e 
lawe,  and  make  it  more  savery.  And  drede  we  not  Jjes  philo- 
sophris  to  graunte  hem  aptly  |)at  J)e  same  substaunce  is  first 
watir  and  si]?  wyne,  ne  drede  we  not  dyvynes  ])at  axen  in  }?is 
cas,  what  was  maad  newe  of  Grist  in  ]?is  myracle ;  si]?  qualite, 
as  coloure  or  savoure  of  wyne,  may  not  be  by  it  silf.  As 
Austyn  sei]?  ^,  we  shal  wite  }?at  myracle  of  Grist  was  wrou^t  here, 
so  ]?at  ri3t  as  water,  ]?at  first  was  in  }?e  er]?e,  is  drawen  in  to  }?e 
vyne  tree,  and  si]?  in  to  }?e  grapis,  and  by  tyme  defyed^  til  ]?at 
it  be  wyne,  so  Grist  did  ]?is  chaunginge  in  a  Htil  tyme;  but 
more  myracle  was  of  beteringe  of  his  lawe,  and  J?e  moste  of 
alle,  of  swifte  turnynge  to  it.  pes  sixe  water  pottis  J?at  helden 
}?is  colde  water  ben  men  of  ]?e  olde  lawe  })at  kepten  Goddis 
lawe.  But  |?ei  weren  sixe,  for  fro  5eer  to  5eer  }?ei  kepten  ]?is 
lawe  ]?at  was  hard  as  stones,  and  made  hem  colde  on  o]?er 
manere  J?an  ]?e  newe  lawe;  for  it  maki]?  men  li5t,  and  heti]? 
hem,  and  confortij?  hem,  as  wyn  doi]?  mannis  bodi.  As  philo- 
sophris  seyn,  J?es  mesures  of  ]?es  vessilis  ben  ]?e  olde  cerymonyes 
J?at  weren  beden  of  God,  and  sum  founden  of  Jewis,  and  al  ]?es 
weren  fillid  of  Grist.     But,  to  ano]?er  witt,  ]?is  archytryclyn  was 

'  gelousnesse,  B  and  C.  ^  defied,  B,  C. 

a  '  Sicut  enim  quod  miseiunt  mini-  dem    opere    Domini.      Illud    autem 

stri  in  hydrias,  in  vimun  conversum  non  miramur,  quia   omni  anno  fit ; 

est  opere  Domini,  sic  et  quod  nubes  assiduitate     amisit      admiralionem.' 

fundunt,  in  vinum  convertitur  ejus-  S.  Aug.  loc.  cit. 


SERMONS. 

\>Q,  manheed  of  Crist,  for  he  made  j)is  myracle  bi  his  godhede. 
He  was  ]>e  first  |)at  tastide  ])is  wyn  and  5af  it  )?es  propreetes, 
ho\ie  in  him  and  o)>ers;  and  doinge  of  ])is  myracle  passide 
mannis  feestyng,  for  God  putti]?  him  silfe  to  be  bo]?e  mete  and 
drynke  to  men  ]?at  he  fedi|>,  and  he  is  )je  best.  For  worldely 
festyng  is  first  savery  to  man,  and  si)>  it  is  bittir  as  wermode^ 
to  hym ;  but  goostly  foode  a^enward  first  is  unsavery,  and  s\\>  it 
is  swete,  whan  men  defien^  it,  for  Goddis  lawe  savourij)  wele 
whan  it  is  defonlid,  as  spicerye  jyvej?  smell  whan  it  is  powned, 
but  dritte,  5if  stired  more,  is  more  unsavery,  and  ])us  |?e  ^yvyng 
of  ]>e  lawe  of  God  was  ground  and  bigynnyng  of  Cristen 
mennis  religioun.  And  ])us  ))e  disciplis  of  Crist,  alle  J)at  he  ha]) 
ordeyned  for  to  come  to  hevene  bi  ri3t  bileve,  trowen  in  him 
bi  vertue  of  j)is  wyne ;  and  ]>us  is  Crist  glorified  in  hevene 
and  in  er))e  bi  streng|)e  of  his  lawe  ])at  he  ]?us  5af. 

f  RIDDE   SONDAI   GOSPEL   AFTER   OCTAVE  OF   TWELF>   DAI. 


89 


[SERMON     XXXIV.] 

Cum  descendisset  Jesus  de  monte, — Matt.  viii.  [i.] 

pis  gospel  telli])  of  two  myraclis  \2X  Crist  dide,  and  conteyne]) 
myche  witt  aboute  ])es  two  myraclis.  pe  story  telli])  ho\N  Jesus 
cam  doun  of  pe  hille,  whan  he  hadde  '^ovun  his  lawe  to  his  disci- 
pits,  and  a  myche  peple  suede  him,  for  devocioun  ]>at  \e\  hadden 
in  his  lawe,  and  eke  in  his  wordis.  And lo,J?ere  cain  a  mesel  fnant 
and  loutide  him  and  seide,  Lord,  yf  pou  wolt,  pou  maisi  hele  me. 
And  Crist  seide  he  wold,  and  hade  him  be  hole.  It  is  comounly 
supposid  \2X  \\%  leprous  man  trowide  \2X  Crist  was  boJ>e  God 
and  man,  and  so  Crist  my3te  hele  him,  but  of  his  owne  wor- 
})inesse  affiede  he  not  ])is;  and  herfore  he  seide  \2X,  ^\i  Crist 
wolde,  he  my^te  hele  him  of  his  lepre,  and  ])an  was  Crist  God. 
And  God  wolde  \2X  proude  men  and  leprous  heretikes  wolden 
wel  confesse  ])e  fei]),  and  })an  shulden  ])ei  be  hool.  And  Crist 
stretchid  out  his  hond,  and  touchide  him,  and  seide,  Y  wole  ?nake 

^  wormood,  B;  ivormode,  C. 

*  The  following  passage,  from  the  the  text : — '  Forsojje  eerli,  whanne 
first  Wycliffite  version  ( i  Sam.  xxv.  Naabal  hadde  defied  \>e  wyn,  his  wyf 
37),  throws  light  on  the  meaning  of      shewide  to  him  I'cs  wordis.' 


The  healing  of 
the  leper. 


90 


WFCLI  F'S 


Mystical 
interpretation 
of  the  miracle. 


Healing-  of  the 

centurion's 

servant. 


pee  hook,  and  able  ]?ee  Jjerto ;  and  ])us  doij?  God  to  whom  he 
5yve]>  grace.  And  anoon  was  densid  pe  lepre  of  pis  mmi.  And 
jjis  hasty  helynge  bitokenej?  ]?is  myracle ;  and  Jjat  Crist  touchide 
J>is  leprouse  techij)  us  now  |?at  ])e  manhede  of  Crist  was  instru- 
ment to  his  godhede,  for  to  do  myraclis  ]?at  he  wolde  weren 
do^,  and  ]?at  touchinge  of  leprouse  men  was  leveful  to  men  jjat 
])us  wolden  helpe  hem.  But  Crist  m.y5t  not  be  blemyshid  by 
touchinge  of  |)is  leprouse;  and  so  tau^te  Crist  his  everlasting 
good  wille,  and  tau3te  us  to  performe  ])e  good  wille  that  we 
have.  And  after  Crist  bade  him,  See  pat  pou  telle  no  man,  but 
go  and  shewe  him  to  pe  preest,  and  offre  pat  yfte  pat  Moises  bad 
in  witnesse  of  siche  helpe. 

And  so  men  seien,  on  ])ree  maneris  may  J)is  word  be  undir- 
stonden.  First  ]jat  Jjis  man  shulde  telle  no  man  herof  bifore  \2X 
he  had  offrid  jjat  Crist  bad  him  do.  pe  secounde  cause  and 
betere  is,  j^at  Crist  bad  })is,  to  teche  us  to  flee  boost,  and  Jjanke 
of  siche  men  to  whiche  we  done  good  bi  maner  of  mercy; 
and  ])us  we  shulden  not  telle  ]>is,  bi  entent  of  mannis  J^ank. 
pe  J)ridde  weye  sei|),  Jjat  Crist  bad  ]?is  negatife,  to  flee  sclaundre 
of  Goddis  lawe  and  man,  and  flee  bostinge  of  himsilfe,  and 
conseyvynge  of  yvel  of  God.  And,  for  ])e  olde  lawe  was  ])an 
ceesid,  Crist  bad  fille  J)is  lawe  as  autor  jjerof.  And  J)us  whan 
a  man  shewi]>  by  his  holy  lyf,  actif  lyf,  jjat  is  two  dowfe  bryddis, 
or  contemplative  lyf,  \2X  is  a  paire  of  turturs,  bi  siche  signes  he 
shewij)  \2X  his  synne  is  for30vun,  and  \2X  unto  preestis  jjat  wel 
undirstonden  ))is.  And  J)us  synful  men  shulden  conseile  with 
preestis,  and  take  of  hem  medecine  to  fle  more  synne. 

pe  secounde  myracle  techi]?  how  Crist  helide  an  hej^ene 
man,  for  love  of  centurion  ]?at  kepte  Capharnaum,  ])at  was 
heed  toun  of  ]?e  contre  of  Galile.  p/>y  centurio  tolde  Crist 
pat  his  child  lay  in  his  hous  syke  on  the  palesie,  and  was  yvel 
turmeniid.  But  Luke  telli}?  how  J)is  kny^t  dide  al  |>is  by  olde 
men  of  \q.  Jewis  Jjat  myche  preisiden  |)is  kny3t,  and  seiden 
Jjat  he  was  frend  to  hem,  and  bilde  hem  a  synagoge.  And 
Crist  cam  wij)  hem  ny3e  to  j?is  kny3tis  hous,  and  ]?is  kny3t 
seide  ]jus  unto  Jesus  Crist,  Lord,  Y  am  not  worpi  pat  pou 
entre  under  my  roof  but  seie  oonly  wip  word,  and  7ny  servant 

*  wer  done,  C. 


SERMONS. 


9^ 


shal  be  hool.  For  V  a??i  a  man  pull  in  pis  place  bi  power  of 
pe  cmperour,  havynge  tinder  me  k?iy"i,lis,  for  to  do  myn  oflice, 
and  V  seide  lo  07t,  Go,  and  he  goip,  and  Y  seide  lo  anoper,  Come, 
and  he  comep,  and  Y  seide  lo  my  servaunl,  Do  pis,  and  he  doip 
il.  And  bi  )?is  wolde  J>is  kny5t  mene  |)at  Crist  hadde  no  nede 
to  entre  in  to  his  hous  to  hele  J)is  seke  man,  si])  Crist  is  God 
Almy^ty,  under  no  power.  Jesus  herynge pes  zvordis  woundride 
in  hise  wittis :  al  if  he  wist  and  ordeyned  bifore  |)at  |)is  kny3t 
shulde  |)us  trowe^  and  herfore  seide  Crist  lo  pe  folk  pal  siieden 
him,  Sopely  Y  seid  lo  you,  Y  fond  no  I  so  myche  feip  in  al  pe 
folk  of  Israel,  neijjer  preestis  ne  comouns.  Crist  mente  not  of 
hise  apostlis  ne  of  his  modir  ne  of  his  mayne,  for  J)ei  weren 
take  from  Israel,  as  Crist  was  here  a  strange  lord.  And  herfore 
biheti])  Crist  his  Chirche  J>at  shal  be  of  he|>ene  men,  Jjat  many 
of  pe  esle  and  wesl  shal  come  arid  resle  wip  palriarkes  in  pe 
kyngdom  of  hevene,  where  children  of  j^is  rewme  shal  be  putt 
out,  and  cast  into  helle;  pere  shal  be  wepynge,  Jjat  is,  sensible 
sorewe,  and  gnastinge  of  leep,  ])at  is  more,  for  it  is  peyne  of 
harm  of  blisse,  J^at  passi])  al  sensible  peyn.  And  fesus  seide 
efte  to  pis  kny^l,  Go,  and  pi  servaunl  shal  be  hool ;  for  as  pou 
Irowist,  bi  my  grace,  be  it  done  unto  pee.  And  pe  childe  was 
maad  hoole  in  pe  same  houre,  ])at  Crist  spake  |)us.  We  shal  wite 
j)at  feij)  is  a  5ifte  of  God,  and  so  God  may  not  5yve  it  to  man 
but  5if  he  ^yve  it  graciousely.  And  J)us  alle  goodis  ])at  men  have 
been  ^iftes  of  God,  and  J)us  whan  God  rewardij?  a  good  werk 
of  man,  he  coroune]?  his  owne  5ifte.  And  ])is  is  of  grace,  for 
alle  jjingis  ben  of  grace  |>at  men  have  of  wille  of  God;  and 
Goddis  goodnesse  is  firste  cause  why  he  ^yve]?  men  ]?es  goodis. 
And  so  it  may  not  be  }>at  God  do  good  to  men,  but  jif  he  do 
|?es  goodes  freely  bi  his  grace.  And  wi])  J)is  we  shall  graunte  )>at 
men  disserven  of  God ;  for  in  grace  ])ei  maken  hem  worthi  to 
have  J)is  good  of  God;  but  we  shal  not  undirstonde  J>at  ech 
grace  of  God  is  a  lump  of  |)ingis  ]?at  may  be  bi  hymself,  but 
grace  is  a  manere  in  man  bi  which  he  is  graciouse  to  God, 
and  o|7er  grace  on  Goddis  side  is  good  wille  of  God.  And 
for  siche  grace  in  God  men  resceyven  grace  in  hem,  and 
chiding  of  ydiotis,  as  was  Pilagius  and  oj^er,  })at  conseyven  not 

^  So  in  B  ;  towe,  A  ;  hetrew,  C. 


Interpretation. 


The  error  of 
Pelagius. 


9^ 


WFC  LIF'S 

jjat  a  Jjing  may  be  but  ^if  it  be  bi  himsilf,  as  ben  substancis,  is 
for  to  scorne  and  to  leve  to  foolis.  For  nyne  kyndis  of  acci- 
dentis  have  contrary  manere,  si]?  ech  of  hem  is  a  manere  of 
substance  of  a  j^ing,  and  it  may  not  be  by  himsilf,  as  heretikes 
dreemen.  And  herfore  leeve  we  })is,  and  lerne  we  of  ]?is  kny5t 
to  be  meke  in  herte  in  word  and  in  dede,  for  he  grauntide 
first  Jjat  he  was  under  mannis  power,  and  5it  bi  power  of  man 
he  myjt  do  many  jjingis ;  myche  more  shulden  we  knowe  ]?at 
we  ben  undir  Goddis  power,  and  ])at  we  may  do  noo  J)inge 
but  by  power  of^  God;  and  5if  we  disusen  J)is  power,  woo 
shal  us  be  jjerefore.  And  so  ]?is  rote  of  mekenesse  shal  gete 
o])er  vertues  to  us,  and  grace  of  God  to  disserve  mede  of 
hevene  and  goodis  of  glorie,  as  it  was  in  }>e  gentil  knyjte. 


Christ  stills  the 
tempest. 


f»E   FOUR>E   SONDAY   GOSPEL  AFTER   OCTAVE  OF   TWELF>E  DAI. 

[SERMON     XXXV.] 

Ascendente  Jesu  in  naviculam. — Matt.  viii.  [23.] 

pis  gospel  telli])  a  myracle  )>at  Crist  dide  in  |)e  water,  and 
syche  myraclis  confermen  |>e  feij?  of  holy  Chirche  ful  myche  in 
rude  men;  al  jif  J?ei  ben  hard.  And  so  doinge  of  myraclis 
in  water  and  londe  bitoknej)  ]?at  Crist  shewide  his  woundris  to 
dyverse  men.  Sum  resseyveden  hem  not  to  hele  of  her  soule, 
for  J>ei  weren  unstable  as  water,  and  fordiden  soone  Cristis 
prente^;  but  oJ)er  men  weren  stable  as  lond,  j^at  helden  \q, 
prente  )?at  Crist  putt  in  hem,  and  bi  Jje  ground  of  siche  fei)> 
{)ei  wenten  fulli  ]?e  wey  to  hevene.  pe  storye  tellij)  of  Jesus 
J>at  he  stepide  iii  to  a  boote,  and  his  disciplis  sueden  him.  And  lo, 
pe  water  movede  fast,  so  pat  pe  boot  was  hid  with  wawis,for  pe 

wynd  and  pe  water  weren  contrary e  to  hem  : Criste  slepte  in 

])is  tyme^  in  jje  boot,  as  he  hadde  ordeyned.  pe  disciplis  comen 
and  wakiden  him,  and  seide  pus  to  Crist,  Lord,  save  us,  for  we 
perishcn.  And  Crist  seide  to  hem.  What  dreden  y  of  litil  feip  ? 
And  Crist  roos  up  anoon,  and  comandide  to  pe  wyndis  and  pe 
water,  a?id  pei  weren  rest  id  aiioon.     And  al  pe  puple  woundride 


^  om.  A.  2  prynte,  B. 

in  the  italics ;  C  rightly  excludes  them. 


A  and  B  include  the  words  '  in  l>is' 


SERMONS. 


93 


hero/,  and  saiden  atnong  hem  selfe^  What  is  he  pis,  for  the  wyndis 
and pe  see  obeishe?i  to  him  ? 

SiJ^e  alle  j)e  dedes  j^at  Crist  dide  tcchen  men  how  |?ei  shulden 
do,  |)is  restyng  of  Crist  in  J>is  boot  bitokene};  lore  to  be  markid. 
We  shulden  be  tymes  reste,  and  preye  to  God  in  scilence\  and 
heere  of  him  heelful  lore  |)at  we  shulden  after  teche  ]?e  puple. 
And  |)us  shulde  techers  flee  preisynge  of  )je  peple,  as  Crist  dide. 
And  j?is  is  a  pryvy  synne  amonge  men  Jjat  prechen  to  ]?e  puple, 
and  certis  it  is  a  greet  synne,  for  God  shulde  have  al  hool  ]?e 
)?ank.  And  {jus  ]>e  sleping  of  Crist  bitokene))  his  verre  manhede, 
and  maki]>  his  ^  myracle  more,  and  to  preye  him  hertlier  in  nede. 
And  Jjus  al  oonli  we  dreden  for  defaute  of  fei]?  in  us,  and  Crist 
slepijj  not  to  us  but  for  defaute  of  fei|>,  for  |>e  godhede  may  not 
slepe,  and  3it  we  speken  unto  him,  Ryse,  why  slepist  |)0U,  Lord? 
and  helpe  us  in  ])is  nede.  And  ])us  on  two  maneres  faili]?  bileve 
in  men.  First,  whan  men  wanti])  bileve,  as  |)es  jjat  trowiden 
not  j?at  Crist  was  God;  for  jif  ]?ei  hadden  trowid  ]?is  hooli, 
\€\  shulde  have  trowid  Jjat  Crist  myjte  slepinge  have  done  |)is 
myracle  and  myche  more.  On  ]je  secounde  manere  failij? 
bileve,  whan  it  v/orchi]?  not  wele  in  dede,  but  is  ydel  as  a 
slepynge  man;  and  }>an  clerkes  seyen  it  is  in  habite^'.  And 
J)us  may  no  man  do  synne  but  ^if  his  bileve  faile  ou]?er  on  oo 
manere  or  on  o]?er ;  for  5if  he  hadde  freishely  bileve  how  foul 
his  synne  is,  and  hou  myche  it  harme]?  him,  he  wolde  not  for  al 
])is  worlde  do  J)is  synne,  but  fleen  it.  And  herfore  preyden  dis- 
ciplis  to  alarge  him^  bileve,  and  Crist  seide  to  Petre,  Whi  doutist 
]?ou  of  litil  bileve .?  And  Crist  seide  to  a  man  j?at  he  shulde 
trov/e,  for  alle  ])ingis  ben  possible  to  men  jjat  bileve.  And 
shortly  no  kyn  vertue  was  preisid  more  of  Crist  ]>an  was  ri3t 
bileve,  for  it  is  ground  of  alle  o]?er ;  ne  doute  we  not  how  bileve 
may  now  be  lesse  and  now  be  more,  si|>  ]?an  partis  of  bileve 
my3ten  go  awey  and  come  newe,  and  J>an  ])er  weren  dyverse 
bileves  for  dyversitee  of  parties.  Siche  doutes  we  shulden 
sende  to  ]?e  scole  of  Oxenforde,  and  we  shulden  wite  wel  bi 
God  \2X   dyverse  feijjis   in  a  man,  now  on*  and  now  oj^er, 

^  silence,  C,         ^  \>is,  C.         ^  hem,  B  ;  hem  in,  C.     Hij7t  is  the  purer  and 
older  form  for  the  dative  plural  of  the  third  personal  pronoun.  *  oon,  B. 

*  That  is,  iv  e^ef,  to  use  the  language  of  Aristotle,  not  eV  ivepyelcf. 


Interpretation. 


Speculative 
doubts  should 
be  referred  to 
the  school  of 
Oxford. 


94 


WFCLIF'  S 


Jer.  xvii.  5. 


make  no  feij?  in  him,  ^he,  jif  j?e  tjme  be  dyverse  ]?at  |>is 
fei]?  J)us  comej?  or  goi]j.  And  ])us  may  God  encrese  oure 
feij?,  and  we  by  synne  enfeblen  oure  feij?;  and  Crist  slepi}^ 
ofte  to  us  for  siche  slepynge  of  oure  synne.  For  whan  Myndis 
of  mennis  bost  maken  us  to  drede  of  worldely  harmes,  and 
flodis  of  tribulacioun  comen  to  us,  ]?ei  maken  us  dreden  and 
crye  on  Crist  to  have  helpe  for  failinge  in  our  bileve.  For  we 
shulden  trowe  J^at  noo  siche  a  cas  my5te  anoy  us  but  for  synne, 
and  3if  it  come  for  oure  synne,  it  is  just,  and  Goddis  wille. 
Whi  shulde  we  be  j)us  distemprid  for  J)ing  j^at  is  nede  to  come  ? 
Love  we  God,  and  do  we  his  wille,  and  drede  we  noo  ]?ing  but 
hym.  For  defaute  in  oure  bileve  maki]?  us  to  drede  for  siche 
jjingis.  For  [jcs  foure  mannis  affecciouns,  drede  and  sorewe, 
hope  and  joye,  changen  a  mannis  wille  after  Jjat  he  ha|>  vertues. 
And  if  he  be  rootid  in  synne  ]>ei  chaungen  myche  in  a  man, 
for  he  hajj  drede  of  ]?ing  of  not^,  and  after  joye  of  worldely 
}>ingis,  and  also  sorewe  of  losse  of  })inge  J>at  were  betere  to  him 
to  want,  and  hope  of  jjingis  ferre  fro  his  helpe,  as  is  welfare 
of  ]?is  worlde.  And  alle  Jjes  techen  ])at  his  wille  is  not  sette 
on  hevenly  |>ingis,  ne  his  bileve  groundid  in  God  for  defaute 
of  good  love,  for  ech  man  shulde  drede  more  loss  of  Goddis 
love  by  synne  jjan  he  shulde  drede  losse  of  ony  worldely 
|?ingis.  For  as  bileve  teche]?  us  loss  of  Goddis  love  were  wers, 
whi  shulde  we  not  drede  J)is  more,  si]?  it  bringi]?  more  harm 
to  us,  and  hope  more  helpe  bi  charite  jjan  bi  any  mannis 
helpe  ?  And  J)us  cursij?  |?e  prophete  him  ]?at  tristi]?  ])us  in  man. 
And  here  may  men  have  a  myrroure  to  juge  wher  j^ei  love 
God  and  where  J^ei  ben  in  charite,  bi  ]>e  ordre  )>at  jjei  shulden 
have  5if  J)ei  loven  God  wel ;  jjei  shulde  more  have  joie  of  him 
]?an  of  ony  er]jelye  Jjinge.  And  so  of  his  loss,  5if  it  come; 
jif  )>ei  lesen  j^e  love  of  God  bi  |?er  synne,  jjat  |?ei  shulden 
knowe,  \q\  shulde  have  more  sorewe  ];erof  jjan  of  loss  of  o]?er 
jjing.  And  jjis  joye,  wij?  |)is  loss,  wolde  make  men  to  flee 
synne.  SiJ?  many  men  with  diligence  fleen  losse  of  worldely 
goodis,  and  kepen  hem  ]?at  \>q\  ben  not  dampned  in  siche  los 
by  mannis  lawe,  and  drede  not  so  myche  to  lese  goodis  of 
grace  j)at  be    beter,  it   is   open  )>at    charite   is   not  ordynel  in 

'   nou-^t,  B. 


S  E  R  AI 0  N  S. 

hem.  And  ])us  of  goodes  of  kynde,  men  drede  myche  to 
lesen  hem,  as  reule  of  kynde  techijj  us,  and  comoun  expe- 
riens;  and  ^if  ]>e\  comen  to  us,  we  joien  ful  myche,  as  we 
witen  well;  but  goodis  of  grace  we  putten  bihynde,  and  |)at 
fordoi})  oure  charite.  And  3if  we  feynen  falsehede  in  ]>es  two 
Jjingis,  bo]?e  God  and  our  bysynes  shal  be  jugis  a5ens  us. 
Lord !  whe]?er  traveilen  we  more,  aboute  goodis  of  |>es  two 
|)ingis  or  aboute  goodis  of  grace  r  Oure  owne  traveil  shal 
juge  us;  what  preest  bisie]?  him  more  now  for  to  sue  Crist  in 
vertues,  |)an  for  to  gete  a  benefice,  or  for  to  gete  worldely 
goodis  ?  And  ]?is  techij)  |)at  he  joie]?  more  of  worldely  goodis 
J3an  goodis  of  grace.  How  ever  |?at  we  stryven  now,  oure  juge 
shal  dampne  us  at  J>e  laste.  And  bi  ]>is  same  skile,  hope  and 
sorewe  shal  jugen  us,  for  we  casten  more  oure  bisynes  in  hope 
of  a  worldely  prowe  ]?an  w^e  done  in  hope  of  hevene  or  hevenly 
blisse  ])at  we  shulden  have ;  and  ])us  we  dreden  more  of  loss 
of  worldely  goodis  J)at  we  hopen  ])us,  j^an  we  done  of  goodis 
of  blisse ;  and  ]?is  reversi]>  al  oure  lyf. 


9.5 


pE   FYFJ^E   SONDAI  AFTER   OCTAVE   OF   TWELF>E   DAI. 


[SERMON      XXX  VL] 

Simile  est  regnum  celoruju  homini  qui  seminavit. 
Matt.  xiii.  [24.] 

Crist  in  ]?is  parable  telli}?  |?e  staat  of  his  Chirche,  and  sei]? 
\2Xpe  kyndom  of  hevene  is  lyke  to  a  vian  pat  sew  good  seed  in  his 
felde.  pe  kyngdom  of  hevene  tellij?  bojje  togidere,  Crist  and  his 
mayne,  but  principali  Crist.  And  herfore  Crist  is  often  clepid  \q 
kyngdome  of  hevene,  and  ]je  Chirche,  ]>at  is  his^  wyfe,  is  o  persone 
wi|>  him.  And  ]?us  ])e  kyngdome  of  hevene  sei])  ])is  spouse  and 
his^  wyfe;  but  here  is  jjis  kyngdom  take  for  Jesus  Crist,  |jat  is 
bo]?e  God  and  man,  and  ordeynej?  wel  for  his  Chirche.  pz>  man 
sew  first  good  seed  in  pefeld  of  ]?is  Chirche ;  for  he  puttide  first 
good  feijj  in  herte  of  his  servauntis,  and  |?is  seed  is  Goddis  word, 
as  Crist  himsilf  sei}?.     Ffirst  ])is  seed  growide  clene,  and  brou^t 


The  parable  of 
the  tares. 


'  So  in  C ;  om.  A,  B. 


^  \>is,  C. 


96, 


wrCLIF'S 


Application  of 
the  parable  to 
the  present 
time. 


for]?  good  fruyt,  but  ]je  fend  had  envye  ])at  ))is  seed  growide  ]?us ; 
and/z'j"  man  pat  is  enemy e  to  Crist  and  his  Chirche  cam  and  sew 
tares  whan  men  weren  aslepe.  For  bi  dowynge  of  ]?e  Chirche 
and  necligence  of  prelatis  is  mannis  lawe  medlid  wi|)  Goddis 
lawe.  And  ]?es  double  mannis  lawes,  }>e  popis  and  J?e  emperours»> 
letten  Goddis  lawe  to  growe,  and  gnaren  \q  Chirche,  as  tares 
gnaren  corn,  and  letten  it  to  ])ryve.  And  |>e  fend  went  awey, 
and  ceesside  sum  what  to  tempte  men,  for  he  was  sikir  of  |)is 
tare  |)at  it  shulde  myche  lette  ])e  Chirche.  And  |>is  is  \q  cautil 
of  ]?e  fend,  to  wi|)drawe  his  malice  and  shewe  signes,  as 
myraclis,  whan  he  haj)  sowen  yvel  seed,  as  if  God  were  wel 
paied  wij?  sowyng  of  siche  seed.  And  as  wete  somers  nurishen 
siche  tares,  so  lustful  lyf  of  men  \2X  shulden  florishe  in  vertues 
bryngi])  in  siche  lawes  biside  wordis  of  bileve.  And  |)is  iettij> 
trewe  men  to  telle  Goddis  lawe,  and  letti]?  ])e  Chirche  to  growe 
in  feij?  and  o]?er  vertues.  And  first,  whan  jje  Chirche  growid 
wi])  j)is  tare,  3it  it  was  hidd  long  after  jje  dowynge^',  but  si  J? 
was  |)is  tare  shewid,  and  Goddis  lawe  hidde.  For  many  wete 
someres  ben  comen  to  Jjc  Chirche,  and  so  mannis  lawe  growij) 
and  Goddis  lawe  is  lettid^  and  speciali  bi  lawes  of  |>es  newe 
ordres.  But  whan  malice  of  |)es  lawes  was  knowun  to  trewe 
men,  )?anne  \€\  and  aungels  spoken^  to  God  and  preyd  Him 
|jat  \€\  my^t  gedre  awey  ])es  tares,  so  ])at  Goddis  lawe  my3te 
renne  freely  as  it  first  dide.  But  Crist  denyej)  }?is  to  hem,  for 
harm  \2X  my^t  come,  for  good  corn  my5te  be  drawun  up 
bifore  {?at  it  were  rype,  as  trewe  men  in  God  my3te  be  sone 
kild,  ^if  J)ei  shewiden  to  myche  ]?is  cause,  of  clennesse  of  Goddis 
lawe.  But  God  ha|)  ordeyned  his  seed  to  growe  til  it  be  rype, 
as  God  haj)  ordeyned  his  membris  to  helpe  a^ens  Jje  fendis 
lymes,  as  longe  as  it  is  good  \2X  |)e  Chirche  profite  here  bi  hem. 
And  ])us  5if  sowynge  of  )?e  fend  tarie])  here  Cristis  Chirche,  and 
maki|?  here  Cristis  corn  ful  Jjinne,  and  makij?  ]?icke  J)e  fendis 
lymes,  nejjeles  ]>is  good  corn  growe})  more  medefulH  to  j^e 
Chirche,  for  |?ei  have  more  lettinge,  but  wel  is  him  )?at  may 
stonde.     And  herfor  biddi]?  Crist, /^z/  men  shal  stiff  re  hope  pes 

^  So  in  B ;  spoken,  C  ;  spehen,  A. 

''  The  canon  law  and  the  civil  law.       Church  by  Constantine  under  Pope 
^  The  supposed  endowment  of  the       Sylvester. 

WYCLIF. 


SERMONS. 


97 


two  gr owe  til  pet y me  of  repinge,  and  pan  shal  he  sey  to  pe  repers, 
Gidere  ^e  first  pes  tares  togidere,  and  bynde  hem  in  knytchis  to 
brenne,  but  gedere  y  pe  good  corn  to  my  berne.  Tyme  of  |?is 
repinge  is  clepid  j?e  day  of  dome,  or  ellis  tyme  ny3  it,  and 
J)es  repers  ben  good  angelis,  |)at  gederen  partis  of  Cristis 
Chirche ;  and  |;es  good  angels  shal  bynde  Cristis  enemyes  in 
knytchis  ;  and  after  jjei  shal  brenne  in  helle  bi  })e  ryjtful  dome  of 
God,  and  trewe  servauntis  of  Crist  shall  be  gederid  bi  good 
aungelis  and  come  to  hevene  as  Goddis  bern.  And  here  sup- 
posen  men,  si|)  it  is  ny5e  domes  day,  j?at  soone  hereaftir  shal  be 
distryed  bo]>  mannes  lawe  and  her  makers,  and  so,  ^if  God  wil, 
bojje  ypocritis  and  trynauntis  ^  shal  be  distryed,  as  |)e  Antipope 
wij)  his  court,  and  |?es  newe  religiouse.  And  J>an  shal  Goddis 
lawe  regne  wij?  )?e  trewe  partis  of  his  Chirche ;  for,  as  ]?is  gospel 
telli]),  j?es  tares  shal  be  gedrid  first ;  but  at  ]?e  day  of  dome  Cristis 
lymes  shal  first  be  comfortid ;  and  so  it  seme]?  }?at  Crist  speki]? 
here  of  tyme  bifore  )>e  day  of  dome,  and  ]?us  he  move))  many 
men  for  to  trete  ]?is  mater  now.  And  prey  we  al  devoutely  Jjat 
God  do  here  as  him  lyke|>,  and  stonde  we  stif  in  Goddis  lawe, 
and  preise  we  it  bifore  j^is  tare. 

Many  men  musen^  of  undirstondinge  of  jjis  gospel,  and 
))enken  j^at  it  is  foly  to  speke  a^ens  Anticrist,  sij>  treuj>e  of 
Goddis  lawe  telli]?  jjat  he  shal  vencuschen  Cristene  men  for 
a  tyme,  and  we  may  see  J)is  at  eye.  And  |)us  telli]?  J)e  gospel 
))at  God^  wole  ))at  tare  growe  til  ]>e  day  of  dome  among 
good  corn,  but  who  shulde  reverse  God  and  do  a^ens  his 
wille?  Here  shal  we  suppose  comoun  bileve  and  comoun 
distincciouns,  jjat  ben  said  in  Latyn,  and  Jjanne  me  jjinki]?  jjat 
we  shulden  preien  Jjat  Goddis  wille  be  done,  as  it  is  in  hevene, 
so  here  in  erjje.  And  over  |)is  we  shulden  stonde  sadde  in 
bileve  of  God,  and  lyve  in  vertues  as  Goddis  lawe  biddi])  us, 
and  assenten  not  to  synne  of  Anticrist  jjat  regnej?  now,  but 
have  sorewe  |?erfore,  si])  Crist  hadde  sorewe  for  synne  and 
wepte  never  but  juries  for  synne,  as  Goddis  lawe  techi]?  us, 
and  resoun  acordij)  herwi]?;  sij)  synne  is  moost  yvel,  and 
so    we    shulden    more  have    sorewe    for   synne    Jjan    for    ony 


The  anti-pope 
Clement  and 
the  friars 
compared  to 
the  tares. 


The  opinion 
that  it  is  folly 
to  contend  with 
Antichrist,  as 
he  is  destined 
to  triumph  for 
a  time. 


tiratinds,  B  ;   tyrantis,  C.  '^  tnosyn,  C. 

SERMONS.  H 


'  So  in  C  ;  om.  A  and  B. 


98 


w  r  C  L  I F'  s 


Confuted. 


The  parable  of 
the  labourers 
in  the  vineyard. 


o\qx  yvel.  And  ]?us,  5if  we  my3te  lette  synne,  we  shulden 
be  Goddis  proctours,  al  if  we  dien  jjerfore,  and  profiten  here 
no  more.  But  lyve  we  wel,  and  God  failij?  not  to  consaile 
us  how  we  shal  do,  and  |)us  assente  we  not  to  synne  but 
profite  we  as  God  biddi|)  us.  And  herby  may  we  answere 
to  J?e  fendis  argument.  Suppose  we  ];at  Anticrist  shall  vencushe 
trewe  men  for  a  tyme;  but  ])is  is  in  bodily  victory  and  not 
in  vencushing  of  treujie;  for  |)us  he  vencuschi]?  no  man,  but 
ever  is  overcome  him  silf.  And  ]?us  trewe  men  shal  ever  have 
mater  for  to  fi^te  goostly,  bo|.^e  wij?  ])e  fend  and  his  membris, 
j?at  ben  wickide  men  of  j?is  world.  And  so  wi])  |>is  undir- 
'  stondinge  fi3te  we  wisely  wi]?  |)is  world,  but  algatis  loke  ])at  we 
be  armed  wij?  pacience  and  charite ;  and  ])an  ]?e  fi5ting  of  J>e 
fend  may  no  wey  do  us  harm.  And  if  |?is  skile  shulde  move 
men  to  performe  Goddis  wille,  never  shulde  man  fi^te  wi]j 
synne,  for  God  wole  jjat  synne  profite.  But  what  witen  we 
wher  tyme  be  come  ]?at  God  wole  ]>at  })is  tare  be  distryed  ?  And 
herfore  worche  we  wiseli,  and  fi3te  we  a5ens  |>e  fend,  sij>  ])is 
stondij)  wi]?  Goddis  lawe  and  wi]?  fillinge  of  Goddis  wille. 


pE  Gospel  on  Septuagesime  Sonday. 

[SERMON     XXX  VII.] 

Simile  est  regnum  celorum  homini patrifamilias. — Matt.  xx.  [i.] 

pis  gos}>el  tellij)  bi  a  parable  how  God  ha]?  ordeyned  for  his 
Chirche  fro  ]?e  bygynnynge  of  j>e  world,  as  longe  as  it  dwelli)) 
here.  The  kyngdom  of  hevene,  sei]?  Crist,  is  lyke  to  a  good  huse- 
boonde^ ;  pat  wente  first  eerly  to  hire  werkmeii  into  his  vyneyrde. 
pis  housbonde  is  God,  and  ])is  vyne^erde  is  his  Chirche,  and  at 
]?e  bygynnynge  of  |)e  world  he  hyred  men  to  wirche  ))erynne, 
foralle  jjes  men  ]?at  comen  to  hevene  wirchen  wel  in  j?is  Chirche; 
and  her  hire  is  a  peny  pat pei  taken^  for  dai  of  hir  lyf.  And  J)is 
peny  is  hadde  of  men  bi  godhede  and  manhede  of  Crist.     And 

«  Bonde  in  the  Scandinavian  dialects  has  the  sense  of  peasant,  or  small 
proprietor. 


SERMONS. 


99 


aftir  pis  acorde  ?nade,  he  senie  pes  werkmen  into  his  C  hire  he.  And 
pis  housbonde  wente  out  in  pe  pridde  hoiire  of  his  day,  and  say  oper 
stondinge ydel  in  pe  cheping  to  be  hired,  and  pis  fadir  seide  to  hem, 
Go  y  in  to  7?iy  vyneyrde,  and  pat  ping  pat  is  ri'^t  Y  shal  ^yve 
'^ou.  pes  werkmen  ben  seintis  ]?at  God  hadde  ordeynede  for  to 
travaile  in  his  Chirche  after  ]>e  first  age,  and  ])ei  stoden  ydel  in  ]>e 
way  to  heveneward  bifore  )jat  God  hadde  moved  hem  to  traveile 
in  his  Chirche.  And  God  bihi^t  |)at  he  shulde  ^yve  hem  jjat  were 
ri3tful  hem  to  have,  and  ]jat  is  ]>e  blisse  of  hevene,  J)at  falli]>  to 
]jis  large  lord.  For  it  is  uncerteyne  to  hem  where  ])ei  shal 
perfourme  j?is  travail,  herfore  he  bihetij?  to  hem  to  ^yve  hem  Jjat 
were  ri5tful.  And pei  wentenforj?  and  wrou-s,ten  wel,  werke  of  J)is 
vyne^erde ;  and  pus  he  dide  in  pe  sixte  houre  and  in  pe  ny?ipe 
houre  also.  For  God  hirede  laborers  after  |>at  his  Chirche  hadde 
nede,  and  so  he  bood^  first  oo  our  and  sij?  two  to  hire  servauntis. 
He  wenieforp  aboute  pe  enlevenpe  hour,  and  fond  oper  men  stondinge, 
and  seide  to  hem,  Whi  stonde  y  here  al  dai ydel  fro  traveil  af  |?is 
vyne3erde  ^ .?  And  pei  seiden  to  him,  for  7io  ma?i  hadde  hirid  hem; 
and  he  seide  unto  he?n,  A  nd  go  y  in  to  my  vyneyrde.  He  made 
noon  o})er  covenaunt  wi|>  hem,  for  two  bifore  weren  ynow. 

pes  fyve  houres  bitokenen  boJ)e  )>e  elde  of  ]?e  Chirche  from  ]?e 
bigynnynge  til  ])at  Crist  cam,  and  trewe  men  |?at  traveiliden  |?er- 
inne.  For  it  is  seid  comonly  ]?at  ]?e  world  haj?  sixe  eeldis.  pe 
first  was  from  Adam  to  Noe ;  ])e  to])er  from  Noe  to  Abraham  ; 
\q  l^ridde  from  Abraham  to  David ;  |?e  four)?e  from  tyme  of 
David  to  passinge  in  to  Babiloyne ;  and  })e  fyfte  fro  ])at  tyme  til 
|>e  natyvyte  of  Crist,  pe  sixte  age  is  undirstonde  from  ]?ennes 
til  \>e  day  of  dome,  pan  shal  the  li5t  of  Crist  go  doun  fro 
dwellinge  in  ])is  world,  and  shyne  in  \e  tojjer  worlde  by  mene  of 
)>e  day  of  dome,  and  for  notablete^  of  Crist.  He  tellij?  not 
hirynge  for  jjis  horn* ;  and,  for  ]?is  tyme  is  to  come,  and  Goddis 
lawe  is  ful  hereof,  he  tellij?  not  of  jjis  sixte  hiryng,  but  undir- 
stondi])  it  in  o]?er.  Ne  we  shulde  not  knowe  nowe  ]>e  quantite 
of  |)is  age  ])at  lasti]?  fro  Cristis  ascencioun  unto  dai  of  jugement. 
pe  traveile  in  ]?is  vyne3erde  stondi]>  in  j^es  ]jre  ]>ingis :  firste,  digge 
aboute  J)e  vyne  rotis,  and  dunge  hem  wel,  and  hile  hem  )>anne. 

^  abode,  C.  ^  So  in  C ;  A  and  B  wrongly  include  the  clause  in  the 

italics.  ^  notahlite,  B ;   nolahilite,  C. 

H   2 


The  six  ages 
of  the  church. 


lOO 


WrCLIF'S 


Mystical  inter- 
pretation. 


pe  secounde  traveile  in  ))is  vynejerde  is  to  kitte  wel  ]?e  braunchis; 
and  J)e  J)ridde  traveile  herof  were  to  araile  ])es  growynge  vynes. 
Sum  of  })is  perteyne]?  to  God  and  sum  is  done  bi  mannis  traveile. 
God  himsilf  makij?  |>es  vynes,  and  plantij)  hem  in  his  5erde ;  for 
God  maki])  trewe  men,  and  ^yve]?  hem  witt  to  bryng  good  fruyte  ; 
and  prechours  ben  helpours  of  God,  and  delven  aboute  bi 
bileve,  but  God  5yve])  ))e  growynge,  al  ^if  men  planten  and 
watren.  For  |>us  dide  Jeromye  in  J)e  olde  testament;  and  ])us 
also  dide  Poul  in  ))e  tyme  of  grace.  And  so  })es  laborers  have 
nede  to  delve  aboute  ])es  rotis,  lest  yvel  eerbis  growen  ))ere, 
and  bastard  braunchis  wijjouten  bileve.  pei  ben  dungid  wij) 
fyve  wordis,  J)at  seint  Poul  wolde  teche  |?e  puple ;  J)e  whiche 
sum  men  undirstonden  hevene  and  helle  and  weies  to  hem ;  but 
])e  first  word  and  ])e  fifjje  is  J)e  holy  Trinite.  Whan  jies  fyve 
sentencis  ben  prechid,  and  declarid  on  good  manere,  Jjan  J?es 
vynes  ben  dungid,  and  wele  hilid  wi})  er]?e.  But  wise  men 
kitten  ])es  branchis,  whan  |)ei  wi))drawun  cursid  men  Jjat  ben 
superflue  in  ]>q  Chirche,  and  letten  it  to  brynge  for]?  wyne.  And 
to  J)is  helpen  my^ti  men  ]?at  drawen  fro  clerkis  worldely  goodis 
\dX  Jjei  have  a5en  Goddis  lawe,  and  done  harm  to  his  Chirche, 
but  j)ei  ]jat  martiren  Goddis  servauntis,  be  |?ei  kny^tis,  be  Jjei 
preestis,  \q\  be  foxis  ])at  ben  aboute  to  distrie  J)is  vyne5erd. 
pe  railynge  falli]?  to  prelatis  and  o})er  vikeris  of  God,  J)at  maki)) 
j?e  statis  of  men  to  stonde  in  J)e  bondis  ))at  God  ha]?  ordeyned ; 
and  5if  wyndis  or  o}?er  weders  putten  doun  ]?es  statis  to  }?e  erj)e, 
bi  vertue  and  streng]?e  of  prelatis  shulde  }}es  statis  ben  holden 
up.  And  so  ech  cristene  man  shulde  helpe  ]?is  vyne^erde ;  for 
growynge  of  coolwortis  and  ojjer  wedis  maken  malencolie  and 
o})er  synnes,  and  gladen  men  not,  to  wende  to  hevene,  but 
maken  hem  hevy  to  falle  to  helle.  And  whan  evenynge  was 
come,  pe  lord  of  pis  vyneyrde  seide  to  his  pr  odour,  and  bade  hem 
clepe  pes  werkmen,  and  ^yve  hem  her  hire,  bigyftynge  at  pe  last 
werkmen  unto  pe  first  laborers. 

pe  lord  of  })is  vyne^erde  is  }?e  godhede  of  Crist,  and  ])e 
proctour  herof  may  be  clepid  his  manhede.  pis  evenynge 
is  })e  day  of  dome,  J?at  sum  tyme  is  clepid  myd  nyjt,  and 
sum  tyme  clere  dai,  to  dyverse  men  ])erinne,  as  ])e  same 
tyme  is   clepid   here   day  and  here  ny^t,  here   faire   tyme  and 


SERMONS. 


lOI 


hoot,  and  her  foule  wedir  and  coold.  Clepynge  of  ]>es  werk- 
men  is  clepynge  to  goddis  dome,  )>at  is  j)e  laste  trumpe  j?at 
seint  Poul  spekij>  of.  Crist  shal  bigynne  at  men  of  Jjis  last 
tyme,  for  men  of  |>is  last  age  shal  be  more  blessid,  and  be  first 
in  worJ)ynesse  ))an  men  of  o]?er  ages,  sij>  ]?e  manhede  of  Crist  is 
in  Jje  sixte  age,  and  his  modir  wij)  apostlis  shulen  passe  o])er 
in  blisse,  and  so  in  o|?er  agis  |)e  later  hadden  more  grace,  sij? 
Crist  is  J)e  emperoure,  )jat  wendi]?  ever  alarginge.  pe  sevenjje 
age  is  clepid  of  men  ])at  slepen  in  purgatorye,  and  j?e  ei^te 
age  of  blissed  men  in  hevene,  and  in  }>es  eijte  agis  endi]) 
al  ))is  world. 

And  so  al  pes  laborers  toke  ech  one  his  peny.  But  men  of  pe  first 
hour  demeden  pat  pet  shulden  have  more  J)an  men  of  ])e  enleven]?e 
hour,  ffor  pei  travailiden  first  and  longer.  And  pus  pei  grucchiden 
ayn  pe  housebonde,  and  seiden  to  him  ;  pes  comen  in  pe  last  houre, 
andpou  madist  hem  evene  to  us,  pat  bar  en  pe  charge  and  pe  hete  of 
pe  daie  of  traveile.  But  he  answeride  to  oon  of  hem,  and  seide  pus 
to  him,  Frend,  Y  do  pee  no  wronge  ;  for  of  a  peny  pou  cordist  wip 
me.  Take  pat  is  pine,  andgofulpaied,for  Y  wole  ^yve  pis  laste 
as  myche  as  Y  wole  ^yve  pee.  Where  it  is  not  leveful  to  me  to  ^  do 
wip  my  owne  ping  as  Y  wole  ?  Wher  pin  eyen  ben  wickidfor  pat 
Y  am  good?  pus  shal  pe  laste  be  firs  te,  and  pe  first  be  last ;  for 
many  ben  clepid,  but  f ewe  of  hem  ben  chosen,  pis  grutchinge  of 
)>es  seintis  is  not  stryvinge  of  hem,  but  woundringe  in  soule,  as 
Seint  Gregore^  sei]>.  And  so  ]?is  demynge  and  grutching  J)at  |)is 
gospel  speki])  of  is  woundrynge  in  soule,  and  jjankinge  of 
Goddis  grace,  \2X  he  3af  so  myche  joie  to  men  for  so  litil 
traveile.  For  more  joie  jjei  my3t  not  have,  but  fuUi  as  myche 
as  }>ei  wolden.  And  so  shal  al  witen  wel  J)at  God  doi]?  no  wrong 
to  hem,  but  \2X  he  hi^t  hem  graciously,  he  ha]?  fully  ^yven  hem  ; 
ne  noon  of  hem  shulde  grutchen  a^en  goodnesse  of  jjis  just 
fadir,  for  he  may  jyve  of  his  owne,  more  J?an  ony  man  may 

*  So  in  B  and  C  ;  om.  A. 


'  See  the  nineteenth  Homily  of 
Pope  Gregory  (Benedictine  edition, 
Paris,  1705),  vol.  i.  p.  151 2.  The 
labourers  that  murmured  are  inter- 
preted to  mean  the  saints  under  the 
old  dispensation,  who,  though  they 


had  merited  heaven  by  their  good 
lives,  yet  obtained  it  not,  till  the 
descent  of  Christ  into  hell  had  set 
them  free,  and  opened  to  them  the 
gates  of  Paradise. 


I  Cor.  XV.  52. 


Sleep  in  pur- 
gatory. 


102 


WVC  LI  F'S 


The  parable  of 
the  sower. 


Interpretation. 


,  disserve  bi  mannis  ri5twisnesse,  or  evenhede^  of  ony  chaffare^. 

And  so  God  sei]?  to  ech  seint  )?at  he  shulde  take  his  mede  by 
'  grace,  and  so  go  in  to  })e  blisse  of  hevene  where  seintis  shal 

ever  dwelle  in  pees. 


Sexagesime  Sonday  Gospel. 

[SERMON     XXXVIII.] 

Cum  turha  plurima. — Luc.  viii.  [4.] 

pis  gospel  telli]?  in  a  parable  hou  })at  holy  Chirche  growide 
bi  graciouse  sowynge  of  Crist,  and  growinge  of  J)is  holy  seed ; 
and  in  tyme  of  Sexagesime  men  sowen  bodili  seed,  pe  storye 
of  jje  gospel  tellij?,  Whan  myche  puple  was  come  to  Crist,  and  pei 
hastiden  of  citeis  to  heere  of  him  Goddis  word,  he  seide  hi  a  simili- 
tude ;  He  wente  out  pat  sowip  ay  to  sowe  his  seed  in  his  lond ; 
but  on  foure  maneres  felle  his  seed  upon  his  lond.  Sumfellen 
bi  side  pe  wey,  and  was  defoulid,  and  foulis  of  heven  ete  it.  And 
sum  felle  on  a  stone,  and  whan  it  was  sprongen,  it  dryed  up,  for 
it  hadde  no  moisture.  Sum  felle  among  pomes,  and  pomes  grow- 
inge strangliden  it.  And  sum  felle  in  to  good  erpe,  and  pat  s prong 
up,  a7idmade  an  hundrid fold fruyt.  And  Crist,  seiyng pes  ivordis, 
cryede  and  seide  to  jje  puple.  He  pat  hap  eeres  to  heere,  heere  he, 
and  undirstonde  J)is  witt.  And  evermore,  as  seintis  seyen,  whan 
God  biddi|)  men  heere  Jjus,  his  sentence  is  presciouse  and 
shulde  be  markid  wel  of  men.  And  his  disciplis  axiden  him 
what  7}ient  pis  parable,  and  Crist  seide  unto  hem,  pat  to  hem 
was  grauntid  to  hiowe  pe  privy  te  of  pe  rewme  of  God,  and  to 
oper  men  in  parablis,  pat  pei,  seynge  wij?outen  forJ>,  se  not 
wi]?ynne  in  her  soule,  and  pei  heerynge  j)e  wordis  of  ]?e  parable 
undirstonden  not  J?e  witt  of  ]?em. 

Crist  ?,e.\diQ  pat  pis  is  undirstonding  oi  ]>\'S>  parable,  pe  seed  is 
Goddis  word,  })at  felle  to  men  on  foure  maneres. — pis  first  seed 
is  Goddis  word,  |)at  fell  in  sum  biside  ]>e  wey;  for  sum  ben 

^  ony  nede,  C. 
a  The  meaning  is, '  or  according  lo  the  just  understanding  of  any  bargain.' 


SERMONS. 


■03 


cumbrid  wi})  })e  fend,  and  so  defoulid  wij?  })e  worlde  |jat  j^e  er)?e 
is  not  able  to  take  |)is  seed  and  hilen  it ;  and  her/ore  comep  pe 
ftmd  and  takip  Goddis  word  fro  |:^er  hertis,  for  he  puttij?  in  her 
]70U5t  strange  |)ing  fro  ]?is  seed  and  so  he  taki])  fro  ))er  witt  |)e 
vertue  of  Goddis  seed.  And  herfore  it  is  perelous  to  dwelle  ]?us 
biside  J?e  weye,  and  be  defoulid  wi|)  |je  fend  and  wij?  sentence 
)jat  he  wole  teche.  pe  fend  taki})  fro  men  Goddis  word  |?at  \qa 
trowe  not  in  it;  and  for,  bi  suche  trou|)e,  men  may  sunnest 
be  saif,  J)e  fend  purposij?  to  take  awey  Goddis  word,  last  ]>at 
men  trowen  in  it,  and  so  be  saaf.  pe  fendis  may  dwelle  in 
comoun  weye,  where  God  wole  not  sowe  his  seed,  and  pike 
awey  jje  seed  biside,  and  aspie  unsow  place,  and  gedere  jje  seed 
))at  is  sowen.  He  ha]?  noo  power  of  }?is  seed,  but  power  of  jje 
man  by  synne.  And  jjus  men  out  of  bileve,  ])at  ben  hardid  in 
f^er  untreujje,  maken  a  comoun  weye  and  playne,  where  fendis 
and  beestis  may  freely  go ;  and  on  londis  biside  ]?is  weye  ben 
many  voide  places,  for  many  semen  in  bileve,  but  feij?  is  voided 
fro  hem.  p^  secounde  place  o/^is  lond  |)at  Goddis  seed  is  sowen 
ynne,  is  stony  lond  wi]?  brood  stoonys,  upon  which  pis  seedfallip^ 
and  stones  ben  hard  and  er})e  litil,  and  for  a  tynie  pei  taken  wip 
joie  pe  wordis  of  God  Jjat  ben  sowen,  hut  hem  wantip  rootis  of 
charite ;  and  so  J)ei  turnen  to  ])e  world,  for  coveitise  of  worldely 
goodis.  And  J)is  seed  wanti]?  rotis  of  love  to  stonden  in  Goddis 
lawe,  for  jjei  loven  more  erjjely  goodis  ]?an  \q  fruyt  of  bileve. 
For  ])is  seed  of  Goddis  word  mut  be  rootid  in  charite,  so  \dX 
nei))er  poverte  ne  peyne  ne  manasse  made  of  Antecrist  make 
men  falle  fro  Goddis  lawe,  for  stabilnesse  in  |)e  roote.  ^e  pridde 
lond  jjat  taki})  })is  seed  is  ful  oi pomes  and  yvel  weedis,  and  ]?es 
growen  up  wi})  })e  corn,  and  distrye  good  seed ;  for  siche  ben 
30ven^  to  worldely  lustis,  and  lustful  ])ing  lyke}»  hem,  as  })ingis  ])at 
plesen  \q  bodi,  as  mete  and  drynke,  and  ydlenesse,  and  leichery, 
wi}>  worldely  goodis  ])at  susteynen  bodily  lustis.  And  })us  it 
fare])  as  Gregory  sei}>  ^:  al  5if  rychesse  liken  ])e  fleishe,  ne])eles 
})ei  ryven^  })e  soule,  and  maken  it  bisye  aboute  veyn  })ingis ;  and 
})us  })ei  prycken  and  wounden  })e  soule,  as  })ornes  done  harm  to 
})e  fleishe. 

'  So  B  ;   A  has  -^yve.  ~  reyven,  C. 

^  S.  Greg.  Homil.  in  Evang.  xv.  §  3. 


T04 


WFC  LIF'S 


The  good 
ground 


I  John  ii.  i6; 
James  iv.  1-5. 


John  xii.  24. 


Questions 
raised  and 
answered. 


And  ]?us  )3is  lond  is  undisposid  bi  |>ree  enemyes  of  a  man, 
))e  which  be,  })e  fend,  jje  world,  and  J)e  fleishe  wanton  of  a 
man.  Of  j^es  speken  Joon  and  James,  and  Crist  here  in  her  ^ 
wordis;  for  |)es  |?ree  letten  Goddis  word  to  bryng  for]?  fruyte 
in  mannis  soule.  And  )?erefore,  ^if  \o\x  coveite  in  God  )>at  his 
seed  profite  to  J)ee,  chastise  wele  ]?es  |)ree  enemyes  |>at  letten 
Goddis  seed  to  growe,  and  |)an  ]?ou  hast  good  land  and  wel 
disposid  to  take  ])is  seed,  and  it  bryngi]>  in  siche  soulis  fruyte  to 
an  hundrid  fold ;  si]?  goodis  of  blisse  jjat  ben  in  hevene  passen 
alle  oure  goodis  here,  as  an  hundrid  done  oon.  And  ])es  in 
substaunce  ben  })is  seed,  and  |>is  lore  is  profitable  to  holi  Chirche 
and  maki[)  it  growe,  and  reisij)  it  fro  J)e  er|)e  to  ]je  heynesse  of 
hevene.  pis  seed  ha]?  many  propertees  J?at  fallen  to  bodily  seed, 
for  it  is  litil  in  quantite  and  ]?e  vertue  of  it  is  hid,  but  Goddis 
grace  mut  quykene  it,  as  lijt  of  hevene  quykene]?  o])er  seed,  and 
dewe  of  grace  ])at  come]?  of  God,  wi})  ]?e  hete  of  charite,  norishen 
J?is  goostly  seed,  and  maken  it  growe  up  to  hevene.  But  as  J)e 
gospel  of  Joon  sei]?,  })e  corn  of  whete  falli]?  in  to  er]7e,  and  si]?  it 
die]?,  and  ]?an  it  growe]?  many  folde  to  myche  corn,  pis  whete 
corn  is  Cristis  bodi,  }?at  bicam  man  here  in  er]7e,  ]?at  first  was 
deed  and  sij?  roos,  and  brou3te  of  him  many  partis;  and  ]?us 
growide  holi  Chirche  from  oon  to  hir  ful  noumbre.  But  beestis 
and  lymes  of  ]>q  fend  be  myche  to  blame  for  J)is  fruyte,  for  \q.\ 
letten  it  to  growe  many  weies  bi  fendis  cauteUs,  and  sum,  bifore 
)>at  it  be  rype,  ]?ei  kitten^  and^  letten  fruyte  to  come.  And  her- 
fore  hey  wardis  shulden  be  ware  and  do  ]?er  ofiice  in  ]?e  Chirche, 
for  ellis  ]?ei  ben  trai tours  to  God,  in  fals  kepinge  of  his  felds. 
And  vertues  of  a  soule,  and  specialy  mannis  pacience,  ben  as 
marie  or  dunge  to  men,  and  maken  hem  bryng  for]?  siche  fruytis. 

Aboute  })is  tixt  may  men  doute,  how  ])is  seed  may  wexe 
drye,  or  faile  in  ony  wyse,  si]?  it  is  Cristis  word,  and  Crist 
seij)  \2X  hevene  and  er]?e  shal  passe  and  faile,  but  not  his 
word.  But  here  we  witen  how  treu]?e  of  God  may  not  faile 
in  his  substaunce,  si]?  it  is  kynde  of  God,  ]?at  nedely  is  yS. 
ou^t  be;  but  \t  fruyte  J?at  it  shulde  make  may  faile  in  men 
by  synne  of  hem.     And  ]?us  ]?is  seed  haj?  many  names,  and  bi 


hh,  C. 


^  om.  E. 


^  om.  E. 


SERMONS. 


T05 


many  resouns  is  knowen,  and  bi  diversite  of  resouns  may  men 
assoile  J)es  doutes.  But  moreover  )?es  men  douten  here,  si]? 
God  is  sower  of  |)is  seed,  and  He  is  ful  of  witt  and  myjt,  whi 
sowij?  he  in  yvel  lond  ?  But  here  we  shal  undirstonde  )?at  noo 
defaute  may  be  in  God;  but  as  he  3yve]>  reyn  and  wedris  to  good 
men  and  to  yvel,  so  he  offrid  his  seed  bojje  to  lond  good  and 
yvel ;  and  al  ^if  fruyte  J?at  it  shulde  have  perishe  ofte  for  mannis 
synne,  nejjeles  substaunce  of  J)is  seed  may  not  faile,  si|)  it  is 
God.  And  ]?us  mene]?  Anselme^  |?at  jjere  is  no  treuj?e  but  oone, 
for  ech  treu])e  in  his  ground  is  ]?e  first  treu|)e  of  alle.  And  leve 
we  to  5onge  men  scole  tretynge  of  J>is  matere,  but  ^it  men  douten 
what  move]?  God  to  wi])drawe  his  grace  fro  men,  and  to  lette 
))is  seed  for  to  growe,  as  he  shewij?  it  in  parablis.  But  here 
sei]?  Poul  jjat  no  man  shulde  blame  God  for  his  good  dede,  si]? 
he  doi]?  bi  his  grace  al  ]?ingis  ))at  he  doi]?,  and  wijjdrawi)?  never 
his  grace,  but  5if  man  unable  him  selfe ;  and  |>an  bi  ri^twisnesse 
of  God  nedij)  ]jis  synner  to  be  punishid.  But  sum  men  seyen 
jjat  alle  |)ingis  moten  nedis  come  by  God,  and  so  what  harmes 
comen  in  j^is  world,  profiten  unto  ]?is  world,  eijjer^  to  make 
good  |?ing  beter,  o])er  to  make  good  anewe^,  or  ellis  to  preyse 
God  and  to  joie  for  peyne  J)at  is  to  men  in  helle.  And  so  Crist 
telli)?  in  parablis  his  witt  for  many  causis.  First,  for  men 
unworjji  to  knowe  it  ben  blyndid  bi  derke  speche;  moreover, 
for  men  ]?at  medefulli  traveilen  for  to  knowe  )>is  parable  witt 
bojje  shal  traveile  more  medefulli  and  betere  printe  |)e  witt  J)us 
gate;  and  also,  in  siche  parablis  as  myche  philosophic  is 
knowen  as  is  nedeful  for  a  man  for  to  cunnen  in  Jjis  weie. 
And  so,  3if  God  ordeyne  })us,  it  is  best  ])at  it  be  so. 


^  eu);>er,  A ;  for,  E ;  the  reading  in  the  text  is  that  of  B. 
onewe,  A;  0/ neive,  E;  of  new,  C. 


2  So  in  B ; 


"  '  Improprie  hujus  vel  illius  rei 
esse  dicitur  [veritas]  ;  quoniam  ilia 
non  in  ipsis  rebus,  aut  ex  ipsis,  aut 
per  ipsas,  in  quibus  esse  dicitur,  ha- 
bet  suum  esse ;  sed  cum  res  ipsae 
secundum  illam  sunt,  quae  semper 


praesto  est  his  quae  sunt  sicut  de- 
bent,  tunc  dicitur  hujus  vel  illius 
rei  Veritas.'  S.  Anselm  Dialog,  de 
Veritate,  ch.  xiii.  The  heading  of 
the  chapter  is  '  Quod  una  sit  Veritas 
in  omnibus  veris.' 


Rora.  ix.  18-23. 


io6 


WYCLIF'S 


Christ  foretells 
his  passion. 


QUINQUAGESIME    SONDAY    GOSPEL. 

[SERMON    XXXIX.] 

Assumpsit  Jesus  duodecim  discipulos. — Luc.  xviii.  [31.] 

pis  gospel  tellij)  how  Crist  warnede  his  disciplis  bifore  of  his 
passioun,  to  teche  \2X  he  ordeynede  it,  and  suffride  not  a3ens  his 
wille,  but  chees  for  love  \2X  he  hadde  to  man  to  sufTre  ])us  and 
bigge  man.  Jesus  toke  his  twelve  disciplis,  and  seide  pus  unto 
hem,  Loo,  we  steien  to  Jerusalem,  and  alle  pitigis  pat  ben  writun  bi 
prophetis  oj  mannis  sone  shal  be  endid,  as  ]?ei  nedis  mote.  Crist 
clepi]?  himsilf  mannis  sone  ble]?eliche  \  for  |>is  cause.  Foure 
maneres  j^ere  ben  of  men  jjat  ben  brou3t  in  to  J)is  world,  pe 
first  man  was  made  of  er]je,  but  Eve  was  made  of  man.  pe 
J?ridde  man  cam  of  hem  two  by  comoun  gendrure  of  man ;  but 
Crist  worshipid  ^  womans  kynde,  and  cam  bi  myracle  of  Marye, 
so  Jjat  whan  ]>at  Crist  clepi]?  himsilf  wommans  sone,  or  his 
modir  womman,  he  specifie]?  his  manhede.  And  so,  jif  prophetis 
and  o]jer  men  weren  soj^eli  seid  mannis  sones,  najjeles  Crist  was 
propreli  sone  of  a  persone  of  mankynde,  for  he  was  a  virgyns 
sone,  wijjoute  man  |)at  gate^  Crist  of  hir.  pes  forfadris  of  whiche 
Crist  cam,  as  Abraham,  David,  and  o|?er,  gendriden  not  Crist  of 
Marye,  for  she  kepte  ever  her  maydenheed.  And  so  for  worship 
of  his  modir,  and  of  kynde  of  men  and  wommen,  Crist  wolde 
clepe  him  mannis  sone,  and  specific  his  manheed.  Sixe  J?ingis 
telli])  Crist  to  come  in  his  passioun.  First,  Crist  shal  be  '^ovun  to 
Pilat  and  kny3tis,  to  be  slayn ;  and  alle  |)es  weren  hepene  men, 
and  figuriden^  jjat  jjei  shulden  be  turned.  And  ypocrisie  of 
Jewis,  whan  \^\  feyneden  unleveful  to  hem  for  to  slee  Jesus 
Crist,  tellij)  \2X  \€\  shulden  be  endured  b.  After  Crist  was  many 
weies  scorned,  and  aftir  he  was  tormentid,  and  after  he  was  spitt 
upon  ;  and  aftir  ])is  turment  he  ivas  kild,  and  he  roos  on  pe  pridde 
day,  as  it  was  shewid  aftir  in  dede.  But  disciplis  oi  Jesus  undir- 
stoden  not  of  pes  sixe  pingis  ;  for  al  ^if  })ei  herden  ]>q  voicis,  ]>ei 
undirstoden  })an  noon  of  }>es,  for  it  was  unsemely  to  hem  })ai 

'  bleliche,  B,  C,  E.  -'  gat,  B,  C.  '  figurid,  C. 

^  That  is,  dignified.  ''  That  is,  hardened. 


SERMONS. 


107 


ony  of  )?es  jjingis  shulde  falle ;  and  so  \)t\  supposiden  jjat  Crist 
spake  mystily  in  |)es  wordis.  And  whan  Crist  cam  nyy  Jerico^ 
a  biynde  ma?i  saie  bi pe  weye  and  beggide,  for  synne  of  jje  puple 
})at  wolde  not  helpe  him  wi}>outen  siche  begginge,  al  3if  Goddis 
lawe  forfende  siche  beggars  for  to  be.  Whan  |)is  biynde  man 
herde  jje  '^m'^Xq  pas  singe  wi|>  Crist  in  j?e  weye,  he  axide  what  pat 
was  ;  and  pei  seiden  ayn  to  him  pat  Jesus  of  Nazarep  pas  side 
perbi.  And  he  criede  on  him,  and  seide,  Jesus, pat  art  David  sone, 
have  mercy  on  me.  And  men  pat  wenten  bifore  Crist  blameden 
him,  and  bade  him  holde  his  pees ;  but  he  cryede  myche  more,  David 
sone,  have  mercy  on  me.  And  Jesus  ble]?eli  dide  mercy  whan  he 
was  clepid  David  sone,  for  it  was  soj)  bi  Goddis  heste;  and 
David  was  woundirful  meke,  and  figuride  Crist  specialy  in  many 
J)ingis  ))at  felle  to  him.  A?id  pus  stood  Jesus,  and  made  pis  man 
be  brou^t  to  him,  and  whajine  he  ca7Ji  nye,  Crist  axide  him,  what  he 
IV aide  pat  Crist  did  to  him.  And  he  seide.  Lord,  pat  Y  see.  And 
Jesus  seide  to  him,  pan  loke  pou,  pi  bileve  hap  made  pee  saaf.  And 
he  saw  a7ioon,  and  suede  Crist,  heriyifige^  God ;  and  al  pe  puple, 
whan  pei  sawe  pis,  yiven  loovynge'^  to  God. 

pe  goostly  sence  of  ]?is  gospel  move})  men  to  vertues,  al  if 
fleisheiy  disciplis  undirstonden  ])is  not.  A  vertuous  man  must 
suffre  of  his  kynde  six  maner  of  suffringis,  as  Crist  dide 
here,  and  j^an  in  siche  pacience  is  pis  man  ordeyned  to  go 
to  hevenly  Jerusalem,  as  Crist  wente  here  in  er])e  to  bodili 
Jerusalem.  A  man  shulde  first  be  50vun  to  jjes  he]?ene  fendis ; 
and  l^ei  first  scornen  ]>\s  man,  and  tempten  him  bi  his  fleishe ; 
and  si))  jjei  puten  him  on  ]>q  cros  to  chastise  his  fleish  as  Poul 
dide,  and  sij?  to  die  to  ))is  world,  and  si])  to  ryse  spiritualy, 
for  |)us  men  shulden  flee  J)er  fleishe  and  ryse  to  God  in  ])er 
goost.  And  3if  ])es  wordis  ben  scorned  of  fleishly  men  and 
worldely,  ne])eles  it  shulde  be  |)us,  bi  bileve  Jjat  men  shulden 
have ;  and  ])us  we  shulden  sue  Crist,  suffringe  as  he  suffride, 
and  we  shulden  wende  bi  Jerico,  and  speke  wi])  |)is  biynde  man, 
and  do  werkes  of  mercy  to  him  goostly  as  Crist  dide. — Jerico 
is  |)e  mone%  or  smellynge  J>at  men  shulde  have,  for  ech  man  in 

'  So  B,  C,  E;  heerynge,  A.  '^  lonyng,  E;  lowyng,  C. 

*  Jericho  means  "  '  place  of  frag-  derive    it    from   r\y  ,    Jar  each,    the 

ranee,'  from  r\T\,  Rnach,  to  breathe,  moon."   (Smith's  Diet,  of  the  Bible.) 
n"*"!!!,  to  smell;  older  commentators 


The  blind  man 
restored  to 
sight. 


Mystical  sense. 


t  Cor.  ix.  27. 


io8 


WFCLIF'S 


J)is  lyf  shulde  smelle  Crist,  and  sue  hym.  And  ri3t  as  ]je  mone  is 
principale  planete  after  |je  sunne,  so  Cristis  manhede  is  principal 
after  his  Godhede.  And  as  fadris  of  |?e  olde  lawe  smelliden 
Crist  in  ]?er  dedes,  so  myche  more  we  shulden  now  smelle  Crist 
in  alle  oure  dedes,  and  ]?anne  we  shulden  sue  j?is  moone,  and 
eende  sikirly  ])is  weie.  For  J)is  smelle  is  Crist,  clepid  plantinge 
of  rose  in  Jerico,  and  his  weye  is  smellinge  of  a  ful  felde  ])at 
God  hadde  blessid,  and  |)is  smel  hadde  Jacob  and  ojjer  fadris 
)?at  trowiden  in  Crist,  pis  blynde  man  is  mankynde  jjat  was 
blyndid  bi  synne,  and  beggide  bojje  of  God  and  man,  for  it 
was  nedid  herto.  Ech  man  mote  begge  of  God  and  axe  of  him 
his  ech  dales  breed,  and  begge  goostly  werkis  of  mercy  of  his 
bre|)eren,  for  Jjei  ben  slowe  to  do  ]jes  werkes  as  J^ei  ben  holden 
to  do  bi  ]?e  lawe  of  God.  And  |>es  men  sitten  bi  ])e  weye  jiat 
ben  temptid  of  J>e  fend,  Jjat  takij?  of  hem  Goddis  word,  and 
maki))  hem  pore  in  bileve.  pes  men  heeren  jjat  Jesus  passid  bi 
))is  wey  in  many  membris,  and  ]?ei  cryen  fast  on  him  to  helpe 
hem  in  ])is  nede ;  but  Jesus  biddij?  siche  blynde  men  to  be  brou^t 
to  him  in  jjer  bileve ;  and  ])ei  axen  first  of  Jesus,  to  see  wel  in 
ri5t  bileve.  And  men  ])at  ben  worj^i  herto,  seen  anoon  in  \qt 
bileve,  suyinge  Crist  and  lovynge  God,  for  J?an  )?ei  witen  how 
]?ei  shulden  lyve.  But  J?es  men  ]?at  comen  bifore  blamen  faste 
)>is  blynde  man  and  letten  him  for  to  crye  and  axe  helpe  ]>us  of 
Crist.  For  many  comen  not  wij)  Jesus  in  |)er  lore  jjat  Jjei  techen, 
but  comen  bifore  him,  and  seien  \>2X  \qi  ben  betere  ]?an  he,  and 
suen  him  not  in  jjer  lyf,  but  holden  a  lyf  ]jat  ))ei  have  founden. 
And  Jjes  men  ]?at  smellen  Crist  in  his  lyf,  and  his  lawe,  ])ei 
clepen  hem  ypocritis,  and  maken  hem  ceese  to  speke  of  Crist. 
But  |)es  men  ]>at  saveren  God  bi  suche  wordis,  speken  more, 
and  preien  Crist  to  helpe  hem  to  ))e  tyme  j)at  jiei  ben  dede,  and 
ever  Jjese^  men  smellen  more  of  Jesus  Crist,  J>at  is  ]>\s  rose.  For 
good  J)ing  comfortijj  men,  3he  more  whan  it  is  more  defoulid. 
And  j)us  })ei  seen  and  suen  Crist  to  hevenly  Jerusalem,  and 
loven  him  in  word  and  dede  from  ]>q  tyme  jjat  jjei  have  \\s  sijt. 


^  So  in  B ;  \>es,  C  ;  \>is,  A. 


SERMONS. 


T09 


PE   FIRSTE   SONDAI   GOSPEL   IN   CLEENE   LeNTUN. 


[SERMON    XL.  J 

Ductus  est  Jesus  in  desertum. — Matth.  iv.  [i.] 

pis  gospel  tellij)  how  Crist  was  temptid  Jjre  tymes  of  j^e  fend, 
and  how  he  overcam  j>e  fend,  to  teche  us,  how  we  shulde  do. 
pe  storye  telli})  J>at  Jesus  ivas  ladde  of  pe  Holy  Goost  in  to  pe 
desert  sone  after  his  fastynge,  to  he  temptid  of  pe  fend.  For  \^ 
fend  tempti]?  men,  whan  he  supposi}>  |>at  |?ei  ben  moost  feble. 
pe  fend  supposid  ])is  of  Crist  whaji  he  hadde  fastid fourty  daies, 
and  resouns  of  ])Q  fend,  where  Crist  was  bo])e  God  and  man, 
marrid  him  so  ])at  he  wiste  nevere  where  |?is  was  so}?  or  fals. 
And  J)is  coveitide  he  to  wite,  for  |>anne  he  wolde  have  lettid  men 
to  do  Crist  })us  to  |?e  de]?,  lest  he  savyde  mankynde.  It  was 
not  pleyne  to  \>q  fend  ]jat  Crist  was  God  for  J)is  fastynge.  For 
Moyses  and  Ely  boj^e  fastiden  fully  fourty  daies,  and  5it  nei]>er  of 
hem  was  God,  as  |je  fend  wiste  wel.  But  Jesus  bi  his  manere  of 
fastinge  passide  bo]>e  Moyses  and  Hely.  For  Crist  fastide  fourty 
daies,  and  neijjer  ete  ne  drank  in  Jjis  tyme,  and  he  was  in  quyke 
age,  and  listide  wel  to  ete,  and  he  was  not  occupied  on  o])er- 
wise  as  ]?es  two  weren.  Moyses  was  in  ]?e  mount  wi]?  God,  and 
fed  wij)  him  in  al  ]?is  tyme.  Hely  was  an  oold  man,  and  fedde 
wij?  drede  of  Jjc  kyng.  But  Jesus  was  a  ^onge  man,  and  fourty 
daies  lyvede  wi]?  beestis,  and  suffrid  of  God  for  to  hungre  more 
|)an  ony  o])er  dide.  And  so  Crist  passide  bojje  f)es  two  and 
Joon  Baptist  wi])  hem,  al  3if  he  lyvede  after  comoun  lyf  to  jyve 
ensaunple  to  his  Chirche,  but  Baptiste  lyvede  more  comounly 
peynful  lyf  |)an  dide  Crist. 

pe  fend  bigan  to  tempte  first  Crist  at  pryde  and  glotonye, 
for  him  Jjou^t  bi  Jjcs  two  he  shulde  sounest  overcome  Crist. 
pzi-  tempter  seide  j)us  to  Crist,  "i^if  pou  be  Goddis  sone,  sey  pat 
pes  stones  be  maad  loves,  for  Jje  fend  wiste  wele  jjat  |jis  my5te 
God  lijtly  have  do,  for  Crist  dide  more  wounder  whan  he  made 
J)is  world  of  not,  and  whan  he  fed  so  many  folk  wi]?  fyve  loves 
and  fewe  fishes,  as  jje  fend  wiste  wele  after,  but  yX  |)is  was  hidde 


The  tempta- 
tion of  Christ. 


The  first  temp- 
tation. 


no 


WrCLIF'S 


The  second 
temptation. 


fro  him.  And  here  we  witen  ]?at  oure  philargis  ben  more  foolis 
J>an  is  ]>e  fend ;  for  |?e  fend  \yote  wele  }?at  God  may  li3tly  make 
stones  loves,  but  oure  philosophris  seyen  as  foolis  J^at  J)is  ]?ing 
may  no  wey  be.  And  so  Ipe  fend  supposid  of  Crist,  5if  he 
were  God,  he  shulde  do  |)is,  bo]?e  for  shewynge  of  his  my^t 
and  for  to  ^  abate  his  hunger.  But  here  answeride  Crist  to 
]>e  fend  bi  autorite  of  holy  writt,  and  seide,  //  is  writun  J^ere 
inne  pat  7iot  oonly  in  breed  lyvep  f?ian,  but  in  ech  word  pat 
comep  of  Goddis  moup ;  |?at  is,  his  vertue  to  speke  to  men  in 
J)er  soule;  and  ])is  passij)  erjjely  breed.  And  so  ]?e  fend 
failide  foule  in  jns  temptacioun  of  Crist,  for  5if  Crist  wolde 
for  pryde  do  j?is  myracle,  and  make  |)us  breed  of  stoones,  he 
wolde  in  comunalte  ^  do  jjis  dede,  and  not  ]?us  oonli  in  desert. 
And  5if  Crist  my^t  |jus  make  breed,  he  my5t  ]?us  make  bo]?e 
fleish  and  fishe,  and  ]>an  Crist  hadde  noo  nede  |?us  to  hungre 
a^ens  his  wille.  And  so  j)e  fend  was  a  fool  whan  he  temptide 
Crist  j)us.  But  Crist  answeride  wisely,  and  for  to  5yve  men 
ensaumple  to  answere  bi  Goddis  lawe,  and  to  love  more  it  jjan 
er])ely  ]jing. — A  sophistre  wolde  denye  ]?is  resoun  jjat  J>e  fend 
made  to  Crist,  but  he  coude  not  teche  ]?us  ]?at  Goddis  word 
is  more  to  love  ))an  ony  er|?ely  mete,  and  so  it  shulde  not 
be  lefte  ]?erfore.  And  )?us  5if  we  can  answere  covenably  bi 
Goddis  lawe  whan  \zX  we  ben  temptid  of  pryde,  of  glotonye 
or  ojjer  synne,  we  may  wel  overcome  |)e  fend  and  ech  jjing  ])at 
temptij?  us  ]?us.  For  ^if  we  love  betere  Goddis  word  ]?an  ony 
mete  }>at  we  shulden  ete,  we  shulden  not  leve  Goddis  word 
and  chese  ])is  mete  a5ens  resoun. 

pe  secounde  temptacioun  in  which  Jje  fend  temptide  Crist 
was  done  on  j)is  manere,  for  to  move  Crist  to  pride.  \fe 
fend  take  him  in  to  pe  holy  citee,  and  as  men  seien  comounly, 
]?e  fend  bare  him  over  Jerusalem,  as  Crist  were  fleyng  in 
J>e  eire,  and  putte  him  above  pe  pynacle  of  pe  temple :  jjat  sum 
men  seyen  weren  ]?e  aleis,  and  seide  to  Crist,  yf  he  were 
Goddis  sone,  pat  he  shulde  make  hini  silf  go  doun.  And  herto 
aleggid  ))e  fend  to  Crist  ]?e  psalme,  \2X  he  my^te  surely  do  jjis, 
for  God  bade  his  aungelis  of  Crist  to  kepe  him  in  at  his  weies, 


^  So  in  B  and  C  ;  om.,  A. 


communete,  B. 


SERMONS. 


Ill 


lest  he  hurte  his  foot  at  pe  stoone.  And  myche  more  Crist  shulde 
not  hirte  him  at  |)e  eire,  ne  in  his  fallyng  at  jje  er|)e,  ne  at  no 
|>ing  )>at  Crist  mette.  And  here  men  passen  foly  of  j^e  fend. 
For  he  wolde  alegge  holy  writt  in  temptacioun  of  Crist  to  prove 
him  ))at  it  were  sykir;  but  Antecrist  deyne|)  not  to  alegge  Goddis 
lawe  for  his  power;  but  he  sei]?  |)at  if  men  denyen  it  )?ei  shal 
be  cursid,  slayn,  and  brent  ^.  But  |jus  J>e  fend  temptide  not  Crist, 
al  3if  he  were  of  more  power  J^an  ben  j?es  Antecristis  disciplis 
to  tempte  Crist  or  Cristen  men.  But  Crist  answeride  bi  holy 
writt  as  J>e  fend  aleggide  it  to  him,  and  seide  to  ]?e  fend  ])at  it 
2vas  writun  pat  noon  shulde  tempte  pe  Lord  his  God.  But  it  were 
al  oone  to  lepe  doun  |)us  and  to  tempte  God.  And  so,  si}>  Crist 
chargide  more  Goddis  word  j^an  ony  worship  or  mete,  myche 
more  he  chargide  J>e  synne  Jjus  for  to  tempte  God. — Lord  !  what 
nede  shulde  Crist  have  to  lepe  doun  ]?us  fro  \q  pynacle,  si]?  he 
my^te  on  ojjer  maner  surely  come  doun  bi  Jje  aleis.  And  ^if 
men  perseyveden  not  ])e  heyng^  of  Crist  to  ]/e  pynacle,  ne 
berynge  of  him  over  \q  citee,  for  mennys  eyen  as  it  is  seide 
weren  hid  fro  lokynge  upon  Crist,  myche  more  men  shulden 
not  wite  hou  Crist  cam  doun  to  ])e  erjje.  For  lesse  it  is  to  come 
doun  from  an  hey  place  }>an  to  come  |)ider.  And  jjus  feilide 
foly  of  j^e  fend  to  tempte  Crist  ]>us  to  pryde.  But  here  men 
douten  comounly  what  it  is  to  tempte  God,  and  it  is  seid 
comounly  ]?at  ech  man  temptij?  God  f)at  chesi]?  |)e  werse  weye, 
and  levej?  jje  beter  jjat  he  shulde  knowe.  And  so  no  man  may 
do  synne  but  3if  he  tempte  God  in  a  manere,  for  God  dide  no 
wronge  to  man  jif  he  dampnede  man  for  synne,  were  it  never 
so  li3t  synne,  and  ^if  his  temptynge  were  never  so  stronge.  And 
|)us  |)enken  many  men,  })at  who  ever  entre  a  newe  religioun  |?at 
was  not  first  ordeyned  of  Crist,  he  tempti]?  God  and  synnej) 
gretely.  For  two  weyes  ben  putte  to  him.  pe  toon  is  re- 
ligioun of  Crist  of  whiche  he  shulde  be  sure  bi  feij?  Jjat  it  is  J)e 
best  ]?at  may  be,  and  J)e  to}?ir  is  new  founden  of  synful  servauntis 
of  Crist,  j)at  men  shulden  wite  is  not  so  good  as  Cristis  ordre 

^   hyeng,  B,  C. 


Those  tempt 
God  who  eater 
a  new  '  re- 

lijjioun.' 


^  This  passage  alone  would  prove 
that  there  had  been  question  among 
the  bishops  of  resorting  to  the  tdtif7ia 


raiio  of  fire  and  faggot,  many  years 
before  the  enactment  of  the  statute 
of  1 40 1. 


112 


WVCLIF'S 


The  third 
temptation. 


Apoc.  XX.  2. 


more  lijt.  And  so  ])is  man  tempti]?  God  J)at  chesi|>  ])us  j^is  newe 
ordre,  and  jjis  synne  is  comoun  now  among  men  for  chesing 
of  state.  For  who  ever  chesi]?  him  a  state  to  lyve  inne,  and  to 
serve  God,  but  ^if  he  trowe  ]?at  J)is  state  be  betere  to  him  and 
more  siker,  jjat  man  in  ]?is  temptij?  God,  and  ])is  man  mut  putte 
awey  ])e  worlde,  J?e  fend,  and  his  fleishe,  ])at  ]jei  disseyven  him 
not  in  chesynge  of  siche  state. 

pe  })ridde  temptinge  of  |?e  fend  made  to  Crist  is  ]?us  told. 
p(?  fend  toke  Crist  in  to  an  hill  pat  tvas  ful  hi-:,,  and  shewide 
hym  al  pe  rewmes  of  pis  world  and  pe  jqye  of  hem,  and  seide 
to  Crist,  Al  pise  shal  Y  ^^yve  pee,  yf  pou  falle  and  loute  me. 
And  pan  seide  Jesus  to  pe  fend,  Go  awey,  Sapanas,  ffor  it  is 
writiin  in  Goddis  lawe,  pe  Lord  pi  God  pou  shall  worshipe, 
and  to  him  oone  pou  shal^  serve  pus.  And  here  men  marken 
how  |>at  Crist  was  pacient  in  two  temptyngis  bifore,  but  in  ]?e 
]?ridde  he  my3te  not  suffre  }>at  ne  he  spake  sharpely  to  J)e  fend. 
And  in  ])is  be  we  tau^t  to  suffre  mekely  oure  owne  wronge,  but 
a3en  wrong  of  God  we  shulden  be  wood  to  venge  it.  For  |>us 
dide  Crist  and^  Moyses  and  ojjer  men  ]?at  sueden  him.  And  ]?us 
in  j?ree  temptaciouns  oure  Lord  Jesus  overcam  Jje  fend  by  ]>e 
wisdom  of  God,  and  autorite  of  holy  wrytte.  And  5if  we 
marken  wel  ])es  })re,  we  may  not  be  temptid  of  yvel  spirit,  but 
5if  we  have  lore  to  overcome  him,  3if  we  studien  wel  J)is  gospel. 
And  after  |jes  })re  victories  pis  greet  fend  lefte  Crist,  and  good 
aungelis  comeji  to  him  and  serveden  to  hi7n  as  toper  God.  And^ 
sum  men  seien  \2X  |)is  fend  was  Saj^anas,  jje  moost  of  alle, 
Jjat  si]?  was  bonden  in  helle  a  Jjousand  ^eer,  as  seint  Joon  seij), 
for  as  men  seyen  comounly  whan  a  fend  is  J)us  vencushid, 
he  ha]>  no  power  to  tempte  \2X  man,  and  specialy  of  \2X  synne. 
And  })us  delyveride  Crist  |)is  world  of  })is  fend  and  his  felowis, 
j)at  \€\  anoiden^  lasse  his  Chirche  after  bi  )?is  })0usand  jeer. 


'  schalf,  B,  C.  ^  So  B  and  C  ;  A  has  to. 

has  As.  *  anoieden,  B;  anoyden,  E. 


^  So  B  and  C  ;  A 


WYCLIF. 


SERMONS. 


113 


J?E    SECOUNDE    SONDAI    IN    LENTEN. 

[SERMON     XLL] 

Egressus  Jesus  secessit  in  partes  Tyri. — Matt.  xv.  [21.] 

pis  gospel  tellij)  a  myracle  of  Crist  to  stire  men  to  hope 
mercy,  al  ^if  \€\  ben  synful.  pe  story  telli]>  how  Jesus  wente  oute 
oj Jude  andjel  in  pe  contrees  oj  Tiry  a7id  Sidon,  ))at  were  countres 
occupied  wi]?  hejjene  men,  and  ny^e  to  Jude.  And  hem  visitide 
Crist,  and  lo,  a  woimnan  oJ  Canaan  wente  out  oJ  hir  coostis,  and 
cryede  upon  Crist,  and  saide  pus  to  him,  Lord,  have  mercy  on  me, 
David  sone,  my  dowi^tir  is  yvel  traveilid  oJ  ajend.  And  Crist  to 
contynue  devocioun  of  ])is  womman,  ajisweride  not  first  a  word 
to  hir.  And  here  may  we  lerne  to  contynue  oure  good  werke, 
al  5if  God  graunt  not  oure  wille  at  jje  bigynnyng ;  for  God  wole 
have  oure  herte  devoute  to  him  wij^outen  ende,  here  and  in 
hevene.  pe  disciplis  cam  to  Crist  and  spake  pus  to  him.  Lev e  pis 
womma7i,for  sche  criep  ajter  us.  But  Crist  answer ide  and  seide 
J7US  comounly^^,  Y  am  not  se?it  but  to  pe  perishid  sheep  ojpe  hous 
of  Israel,  wher  ]?is  woman  be  siche^.  And  bi  pis  pis  womman 
came  and  loutide  Crist,  a7td  seide.  Lord,  help  me,  and  Crist 
answeride  and  seide.  It  is  7iot  good  to  take  pe  breed  pat  fallip  to 
children  and  '^yve  it  to  hou7idis  to  ete  fro  Jjes  children.  A7id  pis 
wom77ian  answeride  knowinge  Cristis  speche,  a7id  grau7itide  pat 
it  were  good ;  as  if  she  wolde  mene  ]>us ;  si]?  ])0U  clepist  me  an 
hound,  and  Y  suffre  mykely,  5yve  ])0U  sum  mete  of  children 
to  )?is  \iOM'i\^,  for  whelpis  eten  of  crummes  pat  fallen  fro  lordis 
boordis.  A7id Jesus  answe7-ide  to  her,  and  wiste  hir  entent^,  and 
seide  J  0  W077i77ian,  grete  is  pi  feip  ;  be  it  done  to  pee,  ri'^t  as  pou 
wilt.     A7id  hir  dowdier  was  heelid  ri'^t  in  pat  hour. 

Here  men  douten  comounly,  where  Crist  mysseide  ]>is 
womman  or  scornede  hir,  or  putt  on  hir  jjat  she  was  an  hound. 


^  So  rightly  in  E ;  A  and  B  include  the  words  in  the  italics, 
rightly  in  B,  C,  and  E.      The   clause   is   included   in   the    italics 
^  So  rightly  C ;  clause  included  in  the  italics  in  A  and  B. 


2  So 
in   A. 


The  healing  of 
the  daus^hter 
of  the  woman 
of  Canaan. 


comounly  is  equivalent  to  '  in  general  terms.' 


The  use  of 
scornful 
or  ironical 
language 
sanctioned 
in  Scripture. 


SERMONS. 


ir4 


WFCLIF'S 


I  Kings  xviii. 
87. 


2  Cor,  xii.  13. 


Mystical  sense. 


Or  ellis  al  J>es  wordis  of  Crist  shulde  be  take  axingly, — 
Here  we  shal  bileve  [jat  Crist  dide  alle  gatis  evene  as  he 
shulde  do,  and  |>us  ^if  Crist  scornede  hir,  ])at  Y  dar  not  seye, 
scornynge  was  leveful,  as  holy  writt  prove|>.  For  Hely  ))e 
prophete  bade  priestis  of  Baal  jjat  |)ei  shulde  strongely  crye, 
leste  |)er  god  slepte,  or  spake  wij)  o])er  men,  ]?at  he  my^te  not 
here  hem.  And  |)us  scorne|>  Poul  spekynge  to  Coryn|?ios, 
Where  Y  dide  lasse  to  you  jian  o]?er  apostlis  diden,  but  |)at  Y 
toke  not  of  30U,  for^yve  ^e  me  \\s  wronge.  And  so  ofte  in 
Goddis  lawe  is  scornynge  wel  ment,  as  3if  it  were  leveful  done 
on  good  manere.  But  it  is  seide  comounly  |>at  \re  |)ingis  ben 
hard  to  men,  to  scorne  men  medefully,  or  medefulli  plete  wij? 
men,  or  ellis  for  to  fi^t  wi])  man,  bi  ]?e  weye  of  charite.  But  al 
jjis  may  be  done,  as  wise  men  ]?enken.  But  for  J>ei  ben  perelous, 
many  men  supposen  |)at  Crist  uside  hem  never,  but  wente  \e 
kyngis  hye  weye.  And  so  Crist  axide^  bi  manere  of  ques- 
tioun  where  it  were  not  good  to  take  children  mete  and  5yve  it 
unto  houndis,  as  who  sei|>.  Telle  ]?ou,  and  }>us  hej^ene  men 
weren  clepid  houndis  of  Goddis  folc,  for  properte  of  houndis 
acordinge  to  hej)ene  men.  But  jjis  womman  mekely  grauntide 
si]?  question,  and  }>us  men  clepid  houndis  may  bicome  Goddis 
children  as  it  bifel  of  many  he]?ene,  ]?at  weren  convertid  to  Crist 
and  made  Cristene-  men.  And  }?us  Crist  preiside  ]?is  womman 
by  hir  greete  fei]?,  and  wi]?  j>is  bodili  myracle  made  hir  soule 
hole,  and  liguride  |>at  hej^ene  folk  shulden  be  turned  to  him, 
and  of  men  jjat  weren  first  houndis  shulden  be  maad  by  grace 
his  children.  And  so  J)e  word  of  Crist  ^,  jjat  he  was  not  sent  but 
to  ]?e  seke  children  of  Jacobis  hous,  was  soo|>  to  ]?is  entent, 
]>at  he  was  sent  to  hele  J>es.  For  what  man  it  be  |?at  Crist 
converti]?  and  save]>  him  in  hevene,  he  is  Israelis  sone,  for  he 
supplanti])  Jje  fend  as  Jacob  dide  Esau,  and  he  is  maad  a  man 
jjat  see|)  God  bi  fei)).  And  Crist  is  clepid  ]?us  bo|)  Jacob  and 
Israel,  and  o]>er  holy  fadris  J^at  figureden  Crist,  and  ])us  men 
ben  maad  by  grace  of  ]je  hous  of  Jacob. 

But  it  were  to  wite  \q  moral  sense  of  ]?ese  wordis,  si])  ])is 
kernel    is    more    swete    ))an    sense    of  ])e    storye.     Tyrus   and 

^  So  B  and  E ;  axid,  C  ;  axinge,  A.  '^  A  and  B  insert  here  the  word 

sheivi]?,  which  makes  the  sentence  ungrammatical ;  E  and  C  have  it  not. 


SERMONS. 


1 1 


Sidoun  weren  of  \>e  lond  of  biheest,  nye  ]>t  hill  of  Libanye, 
but  Israel  sufficide  not  to  cast  hem  out  of  })is  lond,  and  so 
hejjene  folk  dwelten  ])ere  til  |>at  Crist  earned  And  so  |)is 
paynym  womman  is  ]?e  substans  of  mennis  soule,  j^at  is  moved 
of  God  to  preye  for  hir  dou3tir  heele.  For  bo})e  vertues  of  j>is 
soule  and  werkes  )>erof  ben  drecchid'  of  ]?e  fend  and  lyven  un- 
medefully.  And  suche  a  soule  wendi)?  out  of  J>e  coostis  of 
Chanaan,  ffor  it  forsaki}?  |)e  paynym  life  [^at  it  was  before  inne, 
and  it  sekej)  not  oonly  Crist  in  \>t  hous  but  upon  ]>e  weye,  and 
crye})  on  him  keneli  ^  whan  by  contemplacioun  it  is  devoute  in 
God.  And  in  doinge  of  werkes  it  preie|>  to  him  ]>at  it  do  fully 
to  plesaunce  of  God.  And  interpretacioun  of  Canaan  acordij), 
si])  Canaan  is  chaungid  or  chaunging  '^,  and  a  soule  j^at  is  first 
hej>ene  and  ])us  turned  to  Crist  is  chaungid  by  myracle  more 
|?an  ony  body.  And  Crist  norishij)  and  scharpi)?  \>q  preier  of 
siche  souHs  til  j>at  )>ei  ben  worjji  to  have  grace  of  him.  And  so 
j)es  soulis  knowun  ]>at  |>ei  ben  seke  sheepe  of  )>e  hous  of  Israel 
J)at  have  nede  of  confort.  And  J)ei  seien  |jat  siche  whelpis 
shulden  ete  trenchours  of  lordis,  and  knowe  how  God  ha|)  fed 
his  children,  and  so  do  bi  hem.  For  it  is  li3t  to  God  to  make 
of  siche  whelpis  hool  sheepe  of  Jacobis  hous,  and  j>us  converte 
her  soulis.  And  J>us  bi  greetnesse  of  feij?  enfourmed  wi|>  charite 
ben  siche  soulis  maad  hool,  and  turned  unto  Goddis  children. 
And  ri^t  as  in  Cristis  tyme,  and  after  bi  hise  apostlis,  he  turnede 
many  hej)ene  men  to  Cristis  religioun,  so  now  in  tyme  of  Ante- 
crist  ben  Cristene  men  maad  hejjene,  and  reversen  Cristis  lawe, 
his  lore  and  his  werkes.  As  now  men  seyen  )>at  ]>t\  shulden,  bi 
lore  of  Jjer  fei)>,  werre  upon  Cristen  men,  and  turnen  hem  to  |>e 
pope,  and  slee  J?er  persones,  ])er  wyves,  and  |)er  children,  and 
reve  hem  j^er  goodis,  and  j)us  chastise  hem.  But  certis  ))is 
came  nevere  of  chastyment  of  Crist,  sij?  Crist  seij>  he  cam  not  to 
lese  lyves,  but  save  hem.  And  herfore  ]>\%  is  chastyment  of  t^e 
felle  fend,  and  nevere  chastyment  of  Crist,  jjat  uside  pacience 
and  myraclis.    For  Crist  techij?  in  his  lawes  |)at  al  )>at  we  shulden 


dretchid,  E. 


So  B ;  kenely,  C,  E ;  A  has  keneely. 


a  This  sentence  is  almost  literally 
translated  from  De  Lyra. 


^  See  Excursus  at  the  end  of  the 
volume. 


An  allusion 
apparently  to 
the  crusade 
of  Bishop 
Spencer. 


I    2 


ii6 


WFC  LIF'S 


wille  ]?at  men  diden  skilfulli  to  us,  we  shulden  do  to  hem.  But 
what  man  wolde  by  skile  be  })us  chastisid  of  his  bro]?er,  for 
mannis  obedience  |)at  he  douti]?  to  be  a  fend  ?  Crist  axide  not 
siche  obedience  to  be  done  to  him,  but  who  so  wolde  wi]?  good 
wille  obeishe  to  him  wijjouten  3ifte,  Crist  wolde  take  hem  to 
grace ;  but  }?es  men  taken  to  tirantrie.  But,  as  ]?e  sixte  sermoun 
sei]?^,  scribis  and  pharisees  seiden  ]jat  man-sleynge  was  forfendid, 
but  neijjer  yre  ne  yvel  word.  But  Crist  diffine]?  ]?us,  jjat  who  so 
is  wro]?  to  his  broj^er  is  worJ)i  of  jugement,  to  be  dampnyd  in 
helle;  and  who  so  wi|>  )?is  ire  spekej?  wordis  of  scorne,  he  is 
worJ>i  to  be  dampned  bi  counseile  of  J)e  Trinite.  And  whoso 
wi|)  |?is  wra]7e  spekij?  folily  wordis  of  sclaundre,  he  is  wor]?i  to 
be  punishid  wi|>  ]?e  fier  of  helle.  INIyche  more  5if  preestis  now 
wi|70uten  cause  of  bileve  sleen  ^  many  ])Ousand  men,  ])ei  ben 
worpi  to  be  dampnyd — Croiserye  ne  assoilinge  feyned  now  of 
prelatis,  shal  not  at  \>q  dale  of  dome  reverse  Cristis  sentens. 
And  take  we  hede  to  J>es  Jjree  J)at  Crist  chargij?  bi  ordre :  wra))e, 
and  scorneful  speche,  and  foli  speche  of  sclaundre ;  and  to  J)es 
]?ree  Crist  shapi]?  jugement,  conseil,  and  J>e  fier  of  helle.  It  is 
hard  to  be  dampned  bi  jugement  of  Cristis  manhede,  but  it  is 
hardere  to  be  dampnyd  bi  conseile  of  J)e  Trinite,  but  it  is 
hardest  to  be  putt  bi  jjes  to  jje  fier  of  helle.  Lord !  5if  God 
punishe  ])us  wille  and  mannis  wordis,  myche  more  shal  he 
punishe  wille,  word,  and  wickide  dede. 

pE   t>RIDDE    SONDAY   GoSPEL    IN   LENTEN. 

[SERMON     XLII.] 


The  miracle  of 
casting  out  a 
dumb  devil. 


Erat  Jestcs  ejiciens  demonhim. — Luc.  xi.  [14.] 

pis  gospel  tellij?  how  Jesus  bi  a  myracle  and  witty  wordis 
enforme})  his  Chirche  to  flee  synne  and  perel  Jjerof  pe  storye 
telli]?  how  Jesus  ivas  castynge  out  a  fend  of  a  man  and  pis  fend 
was  doumhe.     For  he   made   Jjis  man    dombe.     Aiid  whan  he 

^  So  B  and  E ;  A  has  slen. 
^  See  page  16,  supra. 


SERMONS, 


117 


hadde  cast  out  pi's  fend,  pis  mafi  domhe  hi/ore  spake  and  the  puple 
ivoundride  hero/ {or  gretnesse  of  |?e  myracle.  But  ]?e  enemyes 
of  Crist,  as  weren  scribis  and  pharisees,  whan  \e\  my^ten  not 
denye  ]?is  dede,  for  it  was  open  to  \e  puple,  |>ei  enterpretiden 
it  amys ;  and  seideit  pat  Crist  dide  suche  woundris  in  pe  power 
of  a  fend,  to  whom  he  servede  bisily.  And  pis  fend  was  clepid 
of  hem  Belsabub,  a^  prince  of  oper.  And  ]jes  men  j>at  defameden 
Crist  J>us  weren  preestis  or  pharisees;  htii  oper  men  bi  lasse 
envye  "^  axiden  of  Crist  a  signe  of  hevene,  to  conferme  J^at  he  dide 
J)is  bi  ]>e  vertue  of  God.  But  Crist  when  he  knew  per e  pou-i^tis, 
\2X  \€\  weren  turned  ])us  fro  treuj^e,  bi  many  resouns  proved 
hem  ]?at  ]?ei  weren  fals  in  jjou^t  and  word.  And  first  he  seide 
J>us  to  hem,  Ech  rewme  dividid  in  him  silfe  shal  he  desotatid, 
and  hous  shalfalle  upon  hous  ;  and  pus  yf  Sapanas  be  dividid  in 
him  silfe  as  y  seieft,  how  shal  his  rewme  stonde  stably  wi]?outen 
eende  ?  For  si]?  50  seien  |)at  Y  cast  out  a  fend  bi  ano]?er, 
nedis  o  fend  mut  be  contrarye  to  ano])er.  pe  first  word  ]?at 
Crist  toke  is  so])  by  open  resoun,  for  Jje  strengjje  of  a  rewme 
come])  of  acord  of  })e  partis  of  it,  and  5if  oon  contrariej)  ano|)er, 
nedis  })e  streng})e  is  enfeblid.  And  ^if  })e  partis  mut  ever  laste 
and  oon  wite  anojjeris  state,  ])at  rewme  mut  nede  be  desolate, 
al  5if  })es  partis  shal  laste  ay;  for  on  hous  of  a  more  my5ti 
prince  shal  falle  upon  anoJ?er  hous,  and  bi  fi^tynge  amonge  hem 
shal  al  })e  rewme  be  feblid,  si])  ])es  partis,  ful  acordid,  shulden 
helpe  ])is  rewme  and  make  it  strong.  And  ri3t  as  a  ruynous 
hous  falli])  on  ano])er  and  breke])  it,  so  o  maynb  of  a  rewme 
falli])  on  anojjer  and  enfebli])  it.  And  so  shulde  it  be  of  })e 
fendis,  ^if  o  prince  contraried  ano})er.  And  so  5if  Sa])anas, 
prince  of  fendis,  be  ])us  dividid  in  him  silfe,  how  shulde  his 
rewme  be  streng])id  by  dedes  })at  Crist  doi])  ?  but  myche  more 
Cristis  rewme,  J)at  is  streng[)id  a5ens  the  fend,  shulde  have 
ano])er  prince  contrarie  to  Sa])anas.  Also,  ^if  V  cast  out  a  fend 
in  vertue  of  Belsabub,  '^our  children,  \2X  ben  my  postlis,  in  whos 
name  shulden  pei  cast  out  fendis  ?  Certis  not  in  my  name,  for 
])an  Y  were  a  wickide  man,  and  si])  \€s.  done  ])us  comounly  in 
my  name,  \2X  is  Jesus,  pei  shal  juge  ^ou  as  fals  in  ])is  interpre- 

'  om.   E.  -  Words   rightly   excluded   from    the   italics   by   E,   but 

included  by  A,  B,  C. 


Interpretation. 


]iS 


WrCLIF'S 


Christ  van- 
quishing the 
evil  one. 


The  last  state 
worse  than  the 
first. 


tacioun.  But  certis  yf  Crist  cast  out  pus  pe  fendis  in  special 
werk  of  God,  ]?e  rewme  of  God,  })at  is  his  Chirche,  is  comen  * 
amounge  hem.  And  so  Jjc  heed  of  )>is  Chirche,  contrarye  to  Sa- 
l^anas,  is  comyn  among  hem,  in  whos  vertue  ]>es  dedis  ben  done. 
And  so  bi  chasynge  of  ]?es  fendis  done  bi  Crist  in  |)is  manere, 
myjte  j>ei  wele  wite  |)at  Crist  was  evene  contrary  to  jje  fendis, 
and  jjan  Crist  was  a  spirit  Jjat  was  nedis  bo]?e  God  and  man. 

Also  ■yf  a  strong  7nan  wel  armed  kepe  his  castel,  alle  pingis 
pat  he  hap  perynne  ben  surely  kept  in  pees :  and  yf  oon  stronger 
pan  he  com  on  him  and  vencushe  hi?7i,  he  wole  take  awey  his 
armes  in  which  he  affiede  him.  And  si|?  |)is  is  done  to  fendis, 
as  56  may  se  bi  ])er  dedis,  50  mut  graunt  J)at  a  prince  more 
strong  ])an  ]>e  fend  is  comen.  pis  strong  man  is  ]>e  fend ;  his 
armes  ben  his  cauteHs ;  his  castel  ben  his  lymes  ]?at  he  dwelli]) 
inne.  pe  strenger  is  Crist  Jjat  come]?  upon  jje  fend;  j)at  ven- 
cushide  Jje  hede  fend,  in  his  ]>re  temptaciouns,  and  ofte  tymes 
he  cast  out  fendis  of  men.  Al  ]?e  cautelis  of  \q  fend  toke  Crist 
awey,  and  kyndely  vertues  of  men  J)at  Jjc  fend  spuylide  Crist 
delte  graciousely  ajen,  as  ]?e  gospel  telli]?.  And  as  Matheu 
seij),  Crist  toke  awey  \t  vesselis  of  men  Jjus  segid  wi])  fendis, 
whan  he  dide  awey  her  synnes,  j^at  weren  ful  of  venym  to 
5yve  men  to  drynke,  and  \^  poweris  of  |)e  soule  Crist  fillid 
wij)  vertues.  Also,  J)e  generalte  of  lordship  of  Crist  shewi]?  ))at 
))e  fendis  ben  contrary  to  him ;  for  whoever  is  not  wip  Crist,  he 
is  ayns  him,  as  whoever  is  not  wij?  trouj^e  holdi})  wi]>  false- 
hede ;  and  who  ever  gederip  not  wip  Crist,  scaterip  of  his  good. 
And  si]?  ]?e  fend  is  not  wi]?  Crist,  he  mut  nedis  be  ajens  him ; 
and  herfore  comaundide  Crist  ]?e  fendis  ])at  he  caste  out  J?at 
J)ei  shulden  not  speke  to  witnesse  his  Godhede,  for  ]?es  weren 
fals  witnessis  to  prove  siche  treu]?e.  And  here  supposi]?  Crist 
j?at  he  is  treu]?e,  and  J?at  })e  fend  is  fadir  of  lesyngis,  and  \2X 
his  lordship  ha]?  noon  enemye  but  falshede.  And  J?anne  is  \t 
resoun  pleyne  bi  his  general  lordship  and  bi  his  contrarite 
of  J?e  fende  }?at  was  ofte  shewid. 

And  after  J?es  fyve  resouns  Crist  telli]?  a  sharpe  sentence  of 
malis  of  })e  fend  and  how  |?at  it  is  endid.    Whan  an  uncletie  spirit 

^  So  B  and  E ;  A  has  comoiin. 


SERMONS. 


119 


IS  went  oiitfrojri  a  t?ian,  he  waundrip  bi  drye  placis  and  sekip  him 
reste  ;  and  whan  he  fitidip  nooti,  he  seip  to  him  sil/e,  Y  shal  turne 
ay  ft  to  pat  house  pat  Y  caju  of.  And  whati  he  comep  to  pat  house, 
hefyndip  it y del,  clensidwip  besemes^,  and shynyngely  arrayed,  pan 
he  goip  a?id  takib  wip  hi?7i  sevene  oper  spirit  is  worse  pa  fi  him  sil/e, 
and  pei,  entrid  in  to  pe  man,  dwellen  iji  him,  and  pus  pe  taste  of  pis 
man  ben  ivorse  pan  he  was  bifore.  pis  unclene  spirit  is  |>e  heed 
fend,  and  J)is  man  ensegid  bi  him  is  \t  kynrede  of  \%  Jewis, 
of  whom  Crist  shulde  come,  and  jjerfore  he  assailide  it ;  but 
patriarkes  and  holy  fadris  fou^ten  wele  a5en  ]je  fend,  ]>at  him 
J'0U5te  he  hadde  not  ))ere  a  plesinge  place  to  dwelle  inne. 
And  so  he  wente  to  he]>ene  folc  J)at  weren  wijjouten  grace,  and 
jit  he  likide  not  wi]?  hem  for  |)er  kyndely  resoun.  And  })anne 
))e  fend  seide  to  him  silfe  j^at  he  wolde  go  ajen  to  generacioun 
of  Crist  and  perverte  it  more.  And  in  tyme  \2X  preestis 
regneden,  he  entride  to  aspie  it,  and  he  fond  it  ydel  from 
kepyng  of  Goddis  lawe,  and  occupied  wi|>  mannis  lawe  \2X 
sownede  unto  coveitise.  And  bi  Jjis  jjei  swepten  comynalte  of 
men  and  maden  hem  bare  and  colde  as  floures  ben  maad. 
But  housis  of  preestis  weren  woridely  arayed,  and  ]?ei  kepten 
as  sacramentis  many  of  her  fynding,  and  bi  J>es  \^  fend  jjoujt 
|?at  he  shulde  overcome  hem.  And  he  gidere  to  him  al  manere 
of  fendis,  and  dwelte  wi]?  |?is  peple,  and  made  hem  worst 
men;  for  ]jei  growiden  ever  in  malice,  til  J>ei  hadden  killid 
Crist.  And  ]?us,  sei]?  Crist,  shal  be  to  Jjis  worste  kynrede,  si)> 
ende  of  mennis  wickidnesse  was  to  slee  Crist.  And  so,  it  is 
lickely^  \2X  ])e  Chirche  fari|)  now  bi  sleynge  of  treujje  J?at  is 
Goddis  lawe,  so  ]?at  men  in  erj)e,  clepid  Cristen  men,  passen 
in  malis  ^  Jewis  and  Sarasynes.  And  rote  of  |?is  malice  is  co- 
veitise of  preestis,  and  levynge  of  Goddis  lawe,  and  hi3yng  of 
mannis  lawe.  Bi  |)is  is  |)e  comynalte  of  puple  maad  pore,  and 
swepte  as  ]?e  pament  from  hilyyng  of  stree,  and  coldid  in  cha- 
rite,  bo})e  \€\  and  preestis.  But  housis  of  preestis  ben  woridely 
arayed,  and  )?is  aray  is  hid  from  partynge  of  comounes.  And 
j)is  is  wey  of  Antecrist,  and  ende  of  jje  last  yvel.  And  soone 
after  J)is  lyfe  shal  come  J)e  dale  of  dome,  but  bifore,  jif  God  wole. 


New  sacra- 
ments. 


^  besemys,  B ;  besomes,  E, 


^  licit,  B ;  licly,  E. 


^  malice,  E. 


I20 


WFCLIF'S 


The  Church  in 
peril. 


The  miracle  of 

the  loaves  and 
fishes. 


the  Chirche  shal  be  mendid.  And  |)is  is  ))e  moost  perelous 
harme  ))at  J^e  Chirche  hadde  ever,  for  cautelis  of  Antecrist 
disseyven  many  men.  And  whan  Jesus  saide  pes  wordts,  a 
womman  ofpepiiple  heyed^  her  vois  and  seide pus  to  Crist,  Blessid 
be  pe  womhe  pat  hare  pee  in  to  pis  world,  ajid  blessid  be  pe  tetis 
pat  pou  hast  soukid.  Bui  Crist  blessid  more  pes  men  pat  heeren 
Goddis  word  and  kepe  it  wi|jouten  lesyng,  as  oure  Lady  dide ;  ffor 
]?is  bi  himsilfe  maki]?  a  man  blessid.  And  it  is  Hckely  J>at 
|)is  womman  undirstood  Cristis  wordis,  and  herfore  she  blesside 
jje  moder  j>at  bare  sich  a  child. 


pE    F0URJ?E    SONDAY    GOSPEL    IN    LeNTEN. 

[SERMON     XLIIL] 

Abiit  Jesus  trans  mare. — John  vi.  [i.] 

pis  gospel  tellijj  |?e  first  feste  Jjat  Crist  made  to  j^e  puple, 
bi  multipliynge  of  mete,  as  |>re  gospelis  tellen.  pe  story  tellij) 
\2X  Jesus  wente  over  pe  water  of  Galile  pat  is  clepid  Tiber iadis, 
and  many  oj^er  names,  for  contres  and  touns  ])at  it  5ede  bi- 
twene.  A7id  a  greet  multitude  suede  Crist  here,  Jor  pat  pei  seien 
pe  signes  pat  Crist  dide  on  syke  men.  And  Jesus  whan  he  cam 
over  J>is  water  of  Galile,  he  wente  in  to  an  hill  and  sate  pere 
wip  hise  disciplis.  And  Paske  was  Jul  nyy,  a  greet  feste  a77iong 
Jewis.  A  nd  whan  Jesus  cast  up  his  eiyn,  and  saw  a  Jul  grete 
multitude  was  comen  to  him,  he  seide  unto  Philip,  Wherof  shal 
we  bigge  looves,  pat  pes  men  ete.  And  pis  seide  Crist  to  temple 
Philip,  for  he  wist  ivhat  he  was  to  do.  And  Philip  seide  to 
Crist  pat  looves  of  two  hundrid  pens  suffiden  not  to  hem,  pat  ech 
man  take  a  litil  ivhat.  And  oon  of  Cristis  disciplis,  Andrew, 
Petris  broper,  seide  to  Crist,  per  was  a  child  pat  hadde  fyve 
barly  loves  and  tivo  fishes,  but  what  ben  pes  amojig  so  7na7iy 
me7i?  A7id  Jesus  seide  to  hem,  to  77iake  he77i  si  tie  doim  to  pe 
mete,  for  pere  was  77iyche  hay  in  pe  sa7ne  place ;   a7td  so  pei  sate 

^  So  B,  C,  E;  heid,  A. 


SERMONS, 


£21 


tope  7}iete,  as  fyve  pousand  vien.  Ajid  Jesus  toke pes  fyve  looves, 
and  -3,0/ pa7ikynge  to  God,  aJid  deh'de  among  pes  sittinge  men,  and 
also  of  pe  fishis  as  myche  as  pel  wolden.  And  whan  pet  weren 
fit  lid,  Crist  seide  to  his  disciplis,  Gedre  y  pat  hen  lafte  relefes  pat 
pei  peri  she  not.  And  so  pei  gedriden  and  filliden  twelve  cofynes 
of  relyf  of  fyve  harly  loves  and  two  fishis  pat  weren  lefte  of  hem 
pat  hadden  ete.  And  pes  men,  whan  pei  hadde  seen  pe  signe  pat 
Crist  hadde  done,  pei  seiden  pus  of  him,  pis  is  a  verre  prophete 
pat  is  come  in  topis  world. 

pis  bodily  fode  bi  whiche  Crist  fedde  j>e  folc,  bitokene}) 
goostly  foode  bi  whiche  he  fedej?  mankynde.  His  passynge 
over  |jis  water  with  his  disciplis,  is  passyng  over  worldely 
perilis  to  take  Goddis  lore.  Cristis  sittinge  in  ])is  hille  is 
rysyng  to  spiritual  lyf,  and  Cristis  lokyng  on  ]?e  peple  is 
goostly  mercy  do^  to  hem,  and  steiynge  in  to  jje  hille  of 
Jesus  wi]?  his  disciplis  is  takynge  of  goostly  lyf  for  to  lerne 
Cristis  lawe.  Axinge  of  Philip,  J)at  was  made  to  shewe  \t. 
myracle  \q  more,  and  for  to  have  beter  in  mynde,  is  fillinge 
of  Goddis  word  in  dede.  pes  fyve  looves  Jjat  Andrew  shewide 
ben  harde  lyfe  j?at  men  moten  lyve  bifore  \€\  kunne  Cristis 
lore;  and  two  fishes  ben  |?enkinge  of  God  and  hevene.  Sit- 
tinge doun  in  ]>e  hey,  is  meke  Jjou^t  of  mennis  freelte.  And 
so  Andreu  undirstood  more  ]?an  Philip  J>at  God  jjat  multiplied 
mete,  as  \^  lawe  telli]?,  by  Helyse,  my^t  li3tly  multiplie  Jjis  mete 
and  so  fede  al  J>is  peple.  But  wi]>outen  myracle  my^te  not  so 
myche  puple  be  fedde  of  Crist.  And  |)es  fyve  j^ousend  of  men, 
wiJ>outen  wommen  and  children,  ben  ]?e  noumbre  |)at  shal  be^ 
savyd  bi  ])is  spiritual  foode;  for  fyve  is  a  round  nombre  \2X 
turne]?  wi|)Outen  eende  in  to  him  silfe.  And  so  not  al  J)at  ben 
fed  j)us  shal  come  to  |)e  blisse  of  hevene.  pe  twelfe  coffynes 
of  relyfes,  ben  alle  ])e  seintis  gloses  J^at  be  gedrid  of  Goddis 
lawe  to  fede  \q  puple  afterward.  And  goostly  lore  ha]?  properte 
to  be  multiplied  in  men ;  for  of  o  lore  come])  ano])er,  and  al 
is  })e  same  treu]7e.  And  bi  })is  fode  men  ]?anken  God,  and 
seien  \2X  Crist  is  \2X  grete  prophete  })at  is  to  come  in  to  ])is 
world,  and  fille  it  of  hevenly  lore.     For  of  o})er   myraclis   of 

^  done,  E,  C  ;  to  do,  B. 


Mystical  inter- 
pretation. 


2  Kings  iv.  43. 


122 


WFCLIF'S 


Difficulties 
stated  and 
solved. 


Crist  J)is  myracle  is  oon  of  J>e  most,  ]?at  so  fewe  disciplis 
of  hise  filliden  ^e  world  in  so  short  tyme  wi])  |)e  same  gospel 
of  Crist ;  and  he  it  was  J?at  dide  ]?is  myracle. 

And  here  men  moven  |?re  doutis.  First,  how  Criste  absentide 
him  fro  Jerusalem  at  |)is  Paske,  si]?  Baptiste  hertely  reprovede 
Heroud,  and  Crist  was  more  hardy  J)an  Joon  for  to  suffre  passioun 
for  ))e  love  of  mankynde.  But  here  we  trowen  )>at  Jesus,  si]?  he 
was  bojje  God  and  man,  dide  alle  his  dedis  at  point  devys,  and 
my3te  no  wey  be  amendid.  And  ])us  he  absentide  him  now 
to  prophite^  more  to  his  Chirche,  for  his  tyme  was  not  come 
to  die  at  })e  Paske,  J?at  he  hadde  ordeyned.  For,  as  men  seyen 
comounly,  Crist  moste  passe  ]7is  secounde  Paske,  and  in  Jje 
])ridde  Paske  die  gladly  for  mankynde.  And  so  Crist  suffride 
more  freely  ])an  Baptist  or  o}?er  martiris.  But  he  was  more 
nedid  bi  wisdom  to  suffre  as  him  silfe  had  cast,  and  so,  as 
Crist  himsilfe  hadde  ordeyned.  Baptist  shulde  die  bifore,  and 
so  go  to  purgatorye  and  be  taken  out  bi  Crist.  And  })us  Crist 
^af  ensaumple  to  us  to  fle  de}?,  whan  he  move}?  us,  as  al  his  lyf 
was  ensaumple  to  teche  men  how  })ei  shal  lyve.  pe  secounde 
doute  is  axid  here,  whi  Crist  wolde  not  take  J>e  rewme  of  Judee 
})at  was  owid  to  him,  si}>  ^e  puple  preferide  him  anoon,  aftir 
]?is  myracle  |)at  Crist  had  fedd  })us  Jjc  folk.  But  here  men 
seyen,  as  to  ]?e  first,  )?at  it  were  a  manere  of  biggynge  to  have 
})e  rewme  for  suche  a  feste,  and  of  puple  J)at  was  so  symple. 
Also,  al  jif  Crist  was  kyng,  he  wolde  not  J)us  regne  worldely, 
ne  him  was  owid  no  siche  rewme,  si])  God  wolde  not  ])at  it 
were  so.  Also  Crist  ordeynede  him  silfe  to  lyve  wiJ>outen 
wronge  of  ony  man,  and  so  he  wolde  not  regne  j?us  wiJ?outen 
})e  emperour's  leve,  ]jat  men  shulden  wite  }>at  his  lyfe  no  weye 
reversid  })e  emperour.  And  so  witnessis  ))at  accusiden  him  in 
tyme  of  his  dee]?  weren  opynly  fals.  And  \\is  as  oure  Lord 
forsoke  to  be  preisid  of  ]?e  fendis,  so  he  forsoke  now  to  take 
]?e  rewme  J?us  of  ]?is  puple. — pe  ])ridde  doute  J?at  sue}?  Jjcs 
two  is,  how  Crist  my3te  disserven  in  suffringe  of  his  passioun, 
sij)  he  was  nedid  to  suffre  ]7us.  But  here  we  witen,  as  Crist 
was  nedid  to  suffre  and  die  as  he  hadde  ordeyned,  so  he  was 


'  profile,  B,  C,  E. 


SERMONS. 

i>edid  to  have  blis  for  jjis  wilful  passioun,  si|j  al  j)is  passioun 
of  Crist  was  more  wilful  |>an  any  ojjer  niy3t  be.  And  for  myche 
wilfulnesse  was  his  passioun  more  medeful.  And  here  jjes 
blynde  heretikes  wanten  witt  as  ydiotis,  whan  })ei  seien  J>at 
Petre  synnede  not  in  smytynge  of  Malcus  ere,  but  3af  en- 
saumple  to  preestis  to  fijt.  And  })us  Crist  lettid  him  to  fi5t 
more;  for  hadde  Petre  and  o))er  apostlis  fou5ten  |)us,  jjanne 
\>e\  hadden  lettid  J>e  passioun  of  Crist  and  savyng  of  mankynde. 
But  here  J>es  blynde  heretikes,  jjat  ben  unable  to  conseyve 
sutilte  of  holy  writt,  shulden  first  lerne  jjer  owen  wordis.  So]? 
it  is  J)at  al  )>ingis  mut  nedis  come  as  God  hath  ordeyned, 
and  so  ech  dede  of  Crist  muste  nedis  be  done  as  he  dide  it. 
And  ]7us  5if  men  shulden  not  sue  Crist  here,  for  he  muste 
nedis  suffre,  no  Cristen  man  shulde  sue  Crist  in  no  }>ing  jjat 
he  dide.  For  alle  j?e  ]?ingis  ]?at  Crist  dide  musten  nedely  comen 
as  {)ei  came,  and  so  siche  heritikes  musten  nede  suen  Antecrist 
and  be  dampnyd  wi]?  him,  for  defaute  of  her  bileve.  And 
5if  J)ei  seien  ]?at  ])is  is  fals,  J>at  al  ]jing  mut  ]?us  nedely  come. 
Lord  !  hou  dremeden  ]?es  foolis  jjanne  ])at  ^if  Petre  hadde  fou3te 
forjj,  ])anne  Crist  shulde  not  have  suffrid  dee|>,  ne  have  boujt 
mankynd  1  Certis  ])es  idiotis  can  not  shewe  hou  |)is  shulde 
suen  of  ony  treuj^e,  but  jif  ])ei  supposen  here,  ]?at  jjus  it  mut 
nedis  be.  And  ^if  we  shulde  herfore  lette  to  take  ensaumple 
to  sue  Crist,  we  shulden  lette  evermore  to  sue  Crist  and  take 
his  lore.  But  si])  Crist  reprovyde  Petre  and  saide  a  cause 
general,  ]>at  who  ever  smyti]>  J>us  wi])  sworde,  he  shal  perishe 
bi  Goddis  word,  it  is  knowun  })ing  ]?at  Petre  synnede  in  j)is 
fy5tynge ;  and  myche^  more  shulden  preestis  fi3t  not  for  a  cause 
of  lasse  value. 


123 


Whether 
St.  Peter  sinned 
in  using  the 
sword. 


^  So  E ;  om.  A,  B,  C. 


->0-0<^>gg.I^.O-0^ 


12,4 


WrCLI  F'S 


t)E  FIF^E   SONDAY   GoSPEL   IN   LENT. 


Christ  with- 
out sin. 


His  answer  to 
the  Jews. 


[SERMON    XLIV.] 

Quis  ex  vobis  arguet. — John  viii.  [46.] 

pis  gospel  techij?  bileve  by  hie  wordis  ]?at  Crist  spake,  and 
hou  men  shulden  lyve  ]?ere  after,  and  trowen  in  Crist  and  suen 
him.  First  axi|)  Crist /^/  who  0/  hem  shal  reprove  him  of  synne  ; 
and  he  wolde  mene  \2X  noon  my3te.  And  so  Crist  my5te  not 
do  synne,  for  ^if  he  my^te  have  synned,  )>e  Jewis  my3ten  have 
reproved  him  of  synne,  as  \€\  enforsiden  many  gatis,  but  \€\ 
traveiliden  in  veyn.  And  here  we  undirstonden  reprofe  for 
matere  Jjat  is  trewe  for  cause  jjerof.  As  false  peny  is  noo  peny, 
so  fals  reprofe  is  no  repreefe,  for  ech  ]?ing  mut  have  treu]?e  in 
\2X  \2X  it  ha])  beyng.  And  in  ])is  word  Crist  wolde  mene  J>at  he 
was  bo])e  God  and  man,  for  5if  he  hadde  not  be  God,  he  my^te 
have  synned  as  aungelis  diden.  And  it  were  li3t  for  to  synne  in 
veyn  glory  or  in  gabbyng,  for  ech  gabbing  is  synne,  and  Crist 
gabbid,  or  he  was  God.  And  after  ]?is  bileve  of  Crist,  prove]? 
he  Jjat  ]?ei  shulden  trowe  him.  For  sij)  he  sei]>  but  treuthe  to 
hem,  as  he  may  noo  gatis  synne,  \€\  shulden  trowe  unto  \2X 
treu])e,  si]?  ])at  God  knowi]?  al  treu])e.  And  herfore  sei])  ])e  word 
of  Crist, /<2/  'i,!/  he  seip  tretij>e,  whi  trowen  pei  not  to  him.  But  as 
Crist  so])ely  taki]?,  he  pat  is  on  Goddis  syde,  he  heerip  Goddis 
wordis,  or  bodily  or  spiritualy ;  si])  no  man  may  be  but  ^if  he 
heere  treu})e  or  o  tyme  or  o])er.  And  so  ])es  hey  preestis  of 
Jewis  heeren  not  pus  Goddis  wordis,  for  pei  ben  not  on  Goddis 
halfe  ;    and  ])anne  \€\  ben  wi])  ])e  fend. 

But  ])es  Jewis  conceyveden  ]?es  wordis  how  \€\  weren  sharply 
seid  to  hem,  and  \€\  hadden  no  wey  to  answere  ne  to  replie 
ajens  him.  And  herfore  \€\  bigan  to  chide  and  accusiden  Crist 
wij)0uten  cause.  And  two  J)ingis  \€\  putten  on  \i\vs\,  first  pat  he 
was  a  Samaritane,  and  ^  sip  pat  he  hadde  a  fend,  \2X  was  felowe 
and  helpe  to  him.  But  Crist  lefte  answere  to  ])e  first,  and  ])e 
secounde  he  denyede ;  and  so  he  grauntide  in  a  manere  \2X  he 

^  om.  B,  C. 


SERMONS. 


125 


was  a  Samaritan,  si])  he  was  keper  of  mankynde,  as  he  telli])  in 
a  parable,  pat  man  is  seid  to  have  a  fend  whom  ^e  fend  dis- 
seyve]),  as  he  is  seid  to  have  an  heed  j>at  is  hedid  bi  ])is  hede ; 
and  so  of  o|)er  relatives  as  clerkes  knowen  in  manere  of  speche. 
And  after  ])is  answere  Crist  telli])  how  he  doi])  treu})e  and  ])ei 
done  falshede  ajen,  ffor  he  doip  worship  to  his  Fadir  and  pei 
tmworshipiden  hi??i ;  he  sekip  not  his  owne  gtorye,  but  his  Fadir 
sekip  and  jiigip.  And  ])is  is  })e  maner  of  speche  ])at  Crist  usi]) 
ofte,  })at  he  bi  his  manhede  doi])  not  suche  ]'ing,  whan  he  bi  J)is 
kynde  doi])  not  principalli  ])is  ])ing.  For  Crist  seij)  to  ])is  entent 
})at  his  lore  is  not  his,  ne  ])e  word  ])at  5e  herde  is  not  his,  but  his 
Fadris.  And  on  J)is  manere  semef)  Ambrose  ^  to  graunten  \2X 
})e  sacred  breed  is  not  after  breed  but  Goddis  body,  for  it  is  not 
after  principaly  breed  but  Goddis  bodi,  in  maner  as  Austin 
sei])  ^.  But  si])  al  werkes  of  })e  Trinite  may  not  be  departid,  al 
\t  })ree  persones  seken  glorie  of  Crist.  But  ])e  manhede  of 
Crist  is  herto  an  instrument ;  and  as  ])e  ax  hewi])  not,  but  })e 
wri3t  bi  his  crafte,  ri^t  so  Crist  sekij)  not  his  owne  glorie.  But 
Crist  to  shewe  boJ)e  his  kyndis  douhlip  ])is  ame7i,  and  telli])  \2X  he 
seip  sopeli  to  hem  ;  \2X  who  ever  kepip  his  word  shal  not  taste  deep 
wipouten  eend.  For  he  bi  comoun  speche  kepi])  a  })ing,  ])at 
wi])Outen  lesyng  kepi])  \q  same  ])ing,  and  ])us  whoever  kepi})  ony 
word  of  Crist,  he  shal  never  have  ]>e  de])  ])at  ever  shal  laste. 

But  here  ])e  Jewis  knewen  not  ])e  manere  of  Cristis  speche, 
and  replieden  a^en  him  and  seidefi,  Now  we  witen  wele  pat pou 


An  allusion  to 
the  doctrine 
of  the  Euchar- 
istic  presence. 


*  S.  Ambros,  Be  Fide,  lib.  iv., 
cap.  5.  '  Nos  autem  quotienscunque 
sacramenta  sumimus,  quae  per  sa- 
crae  orationis  mysterium  in  carnem 
transfigiirantur  et  sanguinem,  mor- 
tem domini  annunciamus.' 

^  I  have  examined  scores  of  pas- 
sages in  the  works  of  St.  Austin, 
but  have  not  found  one  which  ex- 
actly corresponds  to  the  reference 
in  the  text,  so  as  to  imply  that  the 
sacramental  bread,  after  consecra- 
tion, while  it  became  principally  the 
body  of  Christ,  yet  continued  in  a 
certain  sense  to  be  bread.  For  this 
is  clearly  the  meaning  of  Wyclif  s 
words,  and  this  was  in  fact  the  main 
point    of  his   controversy  with   the 


friars  on  the  Eucharistic  mystery; 
in  which  he  quarrelled  with  their 
definition  of  the  consecrated  species 
as  an  '  accident  without  a  subject ' 
for  this  very  reason,  that  it  utterly 
denied  the  co-presence  of  bread  in 
any  sense,  after  consecration.  It  is 
therefore  a  point  of  much  interest  to 
ascertain  whether  St.  Austin's  works 
really  contain  any  passage  which 
would  justify  the  reference  in  the 
text ;  in  other  words,  which  would 
support  Wyclif  s  favourite  theory  of 
consubstantiation ;  and  I  shall  be 
glad  if  this  note  should  be  the 
means  of  directing  the  attention  of 
theological  students  to  the  search. 
(See  note  on  p.  379,  Serm.  112.) 


126 


WFCLIF'S 


Christ's  declar- 
ing his  divinity. 


has  I  a  fend  J>at  ledi]?  })e  in  j)i  dedis.  Abraham  was  deed,  and 
oper  holy  propheies,  and  pou  seist,  whoever  kepip  my  word  shal 
never e  die.  Lord!  wher pou  he  niore pan  oure  fadir  Abraham  pat 
is  deed,  and  prophetis  also;  whom  makist  pou  pee  ?  wher  \om  be 
more  )>an  ony  of  j?ese  seintis  ?  Here  may  we  see  ]?e  folye  of 
])es  Jewis,  for  \€\  koud  not  knowe  dyversite  of  ]?es  wordis; 
who  \2X  lyvejj  })us,  he  shal  not  taaste  ))e  longe  dej) ;  and  who  so 
lyve))  )jus  shal  never  taste  de)>.  But  Jesus  lefte  ]>is  foly  and 
spake  to  \q  purpos;  ^if  Y glorifie  pus  my  silfe,  7ny  glorie  is  not, 
but  Y  have  a  Fadir  pat  pus  glorifiep  me;  and  y  seyen  pat  he  is 
'^^our  God;  buty  have  not  knowe  him;  but  Y have  knowe  him,  and 
"^if  Y  sey  nay,  Y  shal  be  like  to  you,  a  Iyer.  Abraham  '^oure  fadir 
hadde  grete  joie  to  se  my  daie,  and  he  sey  it  and  haddejoie.  But 
here  \q  Jewis  knewen  not  ])e  maner  of  ri^t  speche  of  Crist,  for 
)?ei  knewen  not  how  Crist  clepide  God  syngulerly  his  Fadir.  For 
jjan  bi  ri3t  speche  God  was  his  Fadir  bi  kynde.  God  is  oure 
al]?er  fadir  ^  but  who  ever  of  us  seij),  God  is  my  fadir,  he  bias- 
feme]?  in  God.  pis  man  is  my  fadir,  3if  ]?at  Y  have  properte  in 
gendrure  of  him  bifore  o])er  men.  And  ]?us  jjes  foolis  repHeden 
a3en  ]?e  wordis  of  Crist,  and  seiden  ;  pou  hast  not  '^it  fifty  yer  in 
age  and  yt  pou  menest  in  pi  speche  pat  pou  hast  seen  Abraham. 
And,  for  ]>e  first  blyndenesse  j^at  |?ei  weren  to  blame  fore,  Crist 
spake  more  derkely  to  hem  jjan  he  dide  bifore,  a7id  seide,  Sopely, 
sopely,  to  showe  his  two  kyndis,  Bifore  pat  Abraham  shulde  be, 
Y  am.  And  herfore  \€\  weren  depid  in  worse  synne  of  dede, 
whan  pei  token  up  stony s  to  stone  Crist  to  dee]?.  But  fesus  hidde 
him  and  wente  out  of  pe  temple,  as  it  was  li^t  to  hym  to  hiden 
him  among  many;  for  bo])e  he  my3t  stoppe  her  si3t,  and 
shewen  him  in  dyverse  formes.  And  here  he  tau3t  his  disciplis 
in  dede  for  to  flee,  but  he  tau3t  hem  nevere  for  to  fy3te  bodily. 
And  siche  blessid  cowardise  makij?  Goddis  children,  for  Crist 
sei]?  j>at  in  j^er  pacience  j?ei  shal  have  ]?er  lyf  in  pees.  But 
J)e  fend  techij)  his  children  to  be  hardy  heere,  and  fi3te  wij)Outen 
hevenly  cause,  and  |>us  jjei  lesen  \qx  lyf;  for  techingis  })us 
contrarye  leden  to  contrarye  eendis. 

But  we  ]>at  ben  in   bileve  over   {^es  blynde  Jewis    shulden 


'  aller-facbir,  C.     See  Glossary. 


SERMONS. 


127 


knowe  |)es  wordis  of  Crist  J)at  he  seid  to  hem,  Biforn  |>at 
Abraham  shulde  be,  Y  am.  But  as  we  witen  bi  oure  bileve 
|>at  J)es  wordis  ben  ful  of  witt,  so  we  witen  )jat  in  hem  Crist 
shewide  his  godhede.  For  we  witen  wel  jjat  ]?is  word,  Y  am, 
bitokenej)  )?e  godhede,  for  godhede  may  not  be  chaungid,  nei]?er 
from  5onge  to  elde,  ne  from  worse  to  beter ;  for  it  is  ever  oon, 
and  a  j^ousand  5eer  ben  to  him  as  5isterday;  and,  shortly,  al 
|?ing  |)at  was  or  ever  shal  be  hereafter  is  present  unto  him,  ffor 
streeching  of  his  longe  beying.  And  herfore  telU])  God  to 
Moyses  J>at  he  ]?at  is,  is  his  name,  and  J)is  is  a  memorial  to  God 
wijjouten  ende.  But  over  j?is  we  shulden  wite  whan  Abraham 
shulde  be.  And  certis,  si]?  ]jat  God  wiste,  3he\  bifore  he  made 
|)is  world,  Jjat  Abraham  shulde  be,  ]?anne  it  was  so]?,  and  herfore 
seyen  clerkes  jjat  ech  creature  ha)?  beyng  in  his  sample  ^  |?at  is 
wi]?outen  eende.  And  so,  ]?at  Abraham  shulde  be,  is  treujje 
wi})OUten  eende,  but  5it  bifore  J)is  treujje,  is  God  |?at  knowi]?  it. 
And  so  ]?is  word,  bifore,  bitokene]?  for|?erhede  of  beyng,  and 
not  for|?erhede  of  tyme,  sij?  al  ]?is  was  wijjouten  ende.  And  so 
to  blaberynge  in  ]?is  speche  mennis  voicis  ben  not  sufficient, 
but  sum  glymerynge  we  have  in  oure  soule  of  |)is  treu])e,  and 
betere  knowen  it  in  oure  herte  |?an  we  can  speke  it  in  vols. 
And  blessid  be  |?e  Holy  Goost  |?at  sette  siche  wordis  in  his 
lawe,  ))at  alle  men  here  in  er]?e  can  unnej?e  undirstonde  hem. 
For  Y  am  certeyn  ^if  ]?ou  be  never  so  wyse  ne  olde,  unne|?e 
J>ou  wolt  afferme  J?is  shorte  word  of  Crist,  whan  he  sei]?  })at, 
Bifore  j?at  Abraham  shulde  be,  Y  am.  And  here  tellen  seintis 
cause  of  })is  derknesse.  First  we  shulden  wel  witen  ]?at  autour 
of  J?is  gospel  is  more  witty  in  himsilf  ]?an  we  alle  can  conseyve. 

^  So  B  and  E ;  3^,  A. 


»  The  belief  that  the  ideas,  or 
original  patterns  (exemplaria — '  sam- 
ples'),  of  all  things  and  persons 
exist  from  eternity  in  the  divine 
mind,  borrowed  by  the  schoolmen 
from  the  Platonic  philosophy,  is 
defined  and  adopted  in  the  Smnma 
of  St.  Thomas.  The  following  ex- 
tract is  from  the  first  Article  of 
Quaestio  xv..  Prima  Pars.  '  Dicen- 
dum  quod  necesse  est  ponere  in 
mente  divina  ideas.  Idea  autem 
Graece,  Latine  forma  dicitur.    Unde 


per  ideas  intelliguntur  formae  alia- 
rum  rerum  praeter  ipsas  res  exis- 
tentes.  Forma  autem  alicujus  rei 
praeter  ipsam  existens  ad  duo  esse 
potest ;  vel  ut  sit  exemplar  ejus 
cujus  dicitur  forma ;  vel  ut  sit  prin- 
cipium  cognitionis  ipsius.'  Again 
(Art.  ii.)  quoting  St.  Austin,  he 
says,  '  Ideae  sunt  principales  quae- 
dam  formae,  vel  rationes  rerum  sta- 
biles atque  incommutabiles ;  quia 
ipsae  formatae  non  sunt,  ac  per 
hoc  aeternae.' 


128  WFCLIF'S 

Also  he  wole  J>at  his  preestis  traveilen  fast  in  his  lawe,  and 
kepen  hem  medefuUy  from  o]?er  occupaciouns ;  for  noon  of  us 
ha]?  matere  to  say  ]jat  he  can  alle  Goddis  lawe,  and  so  he  haj) 
no  more  to  lerne  jjerynne.  Also  we  shulden  trowe  ]?at  alle 
mennys  wordis  may  not  come  to  ]?e  witt  })at  is  in  Goddis 
wordis ;  for  we  witen  ])ai  nou5t  in  hem  is  seid  wi])Outen  chesoun, 
but  in  ech  Goddis  word  is  more  witt  ])an  we  knowe. 


PE  Gospel  on  Palm  Sonday. 


[SERMON     XLV.] 


a 


Prelates  and 
friars  again 
compared  to 
the  high  priests 
and  the  Pha- 
risees. 


Altera  autem  die  quae  est  post  parasceven. — Matt,  xxvii.  [62.] 

We  suffisen  not  here  to  telle  pleynly  ]?is  gospel,  but  ])e  ende 
j>erof  makij)  mynde  of  oure  bileve,  how,  after  ])e  tyme  J^at  Crist 
hadde  suffrid  dee]?,  J^e  nexte  day  after,  }?at  is  ]je  holy  Satirday, 
])es  men  ]jat  hadden  kild  Crist  gideren  to  gidere.  For  \^  gospel 
tellij)  })at  princes  of  prestis  and  pe  Phariseis  comen  to  gidire  to 
Pilate^  and  ]?es  two  folk,  as  hie  preestis  of  })e  temple  and  ]7es 
religiouse,  diden  Crist  to  de]?.  And  herfore  telli]?  Matheu  how 
Jjes  two  dredden  more  }?at  ])e  name  of  Crist  shulde  growe  among 
men,  and  so  J^er  defamyng  shulde  growe,  and  \€\  shulden  be 
distryed.  And  certis  as  ])ese  two  maner  of  folk  diden  Crist  to 
])e  de}),  so  \€\  ben  now  cheveteynes  to  distrien  his  lawe ;  for  Jjei 
letten  Jjat  ]?ei  may  })e  treu]?e  of  ]?e  gospel.  And  noo  woundir 
is;  for  }?ei  in  ])er  lyvynge  reversen  j)e  lyf  of  Crist,  and  ben 
weddid  to  contrarye  lyf.  And  si})  })e  gospel  telli]?  dampnynge  of 
siche  men,  and  hou  ]?at  men  shulden  flee  hem  as  heretikes  and 
fals  prophetis,  ]?ei  dreden  J?at  ]7er  gile  by  ]?is  shulde  be  knowe. 
And  herfore  }?ei  seien  ]?at  Goddis  lawe  is  fals,  but  3if  ]?ei  glosen 
it  after  j?at  |)ei  wolen ;  and  j?us  }?er  glose  shulde  be  trowid  as 
bileve  of  cristene  men,  but  }?e  tixt  of  Goddis  lawe  is  perelous  to 
trowe.  ^es  two  manere  of  folk  comen  to  gidere  to  Pilate  on  pe 
7iext  Satirday  aftir  \€i  hadden  kild  Crist,  and  ]?us  seiden  to  him, 


*  The  style  of  this  sermon  rises  occasionally  to  real  eloquence. 

WYCLIF. 


SERMONS. 


129 


Si?'e,  ive  penken  on  pat  pis  gihnir^  saidc  ivhan  he  ivas  on  lyve,pat  he 
shulde  ryse  after  pre  dates;  per/ore  commatinde  his  sepulcre  to  be 
Jiept  til  P)e  pridde  day,  test  his  disciptis  comen  and  stcten  his  body, 
andfeynen  to  pe  pepte  pat  he  is  risen  fro  dep;  and  so  pe  taste  err  our 
shal  be  worse  pan  was  pe  former.     And  Jjes  pagyn  playen  jjei  ]?at 
hiden  }?e  treujie  of  Goddis  lawe.    And  Pitat  seide  to  hem,  '^our  silf 
have  pe  kepyng ;  gop  forp  and  liepip  it  as  ye  can,  for  Jjis  is  not 
myn  office.     And  ])us  seyn  j^es  two  folk  to  princes  of  ]?e  world, 
|?at  J)es  heretikes  ben  fals  men  a3ens  holy  religioun,   and  jjei 
casten  to    distrye  lordshipis   and   rewmes;    and  j^erfore  com- 
aunden  hem   to   be  dede  or  lette   hem  to   speke.     But  lordis 
seien  a^en  |)at  jjei  shulde  knowe  Jjc  lawe  jjat  holy  Chirche  ha|),  to 
punishe  siche  heretikes ;    and  ]?erfore  ]?ei  shulden  go  for]?  and 
punishe  hem  bi  J>er   lawe.     And  bi   siche   execucioun  of  fals 
prelatis   and   freris,  is  Goddis  lawe  quenchid   and  Antecristis 
arerid.     But  God  wolde  ]?at  jjese  lordis  passiden  Pilat  in  |?is 
point,  and  knewen  \q  treu|>e  of  Goddis  lawe  in  j^er  modir  tunge, 
and   have    ]?es   two   folk   suspect,    for  ))er  cursid  lyvynge   and 
hydyng  of  Goddis  law  fro  knowyng  of  seculers.      For  bi  J>is 
cautel    of  ])e   fend  ben   many  trewe   men   quenchid.     For  ]jei 
wolen  juge  for  heretikes  al  J>at  speken  a^ens  hem,  ^he,  5if  jjei 
tellen  Goddis  lawe,  and  shewe  synnes  of  ]?es  tw^o  folke.     And 
pei  wenten  forp,  and  keptett   ivip  kny^tis  pe   sepulcre  of  Crist, 
7narkynge  pe  stoon  jjat  was  putt  at  J)e  dore  in  si3t  of  jje  keper,  to 
marke  ])er  diligence.    And  ]?us  done  oure  heye  preestis  and  oure 
newe  religiouse.     pei  dredden  hem  J>at  Goddis  law  shal  quyken 
after  ])is,  and   herfore   jjei  maken   statutis,   stable  as   a  stoon- 
and  ))ei  geten  graunt  of  kny^tis  to  confermen  hem.     And  ])is 
J)ei  marken  wel,  wi]?  witnesse  of  lordis,  lest  ]?at  treu]?e  of  Goddis 
law,  hid  in  ]>e  sepulcre,  brest  out  to  knowyng  of  ]>e  comoun 
peple.  O  Crist !  J>i  lawe  is  hid  5it ;  whan  wilt  J)Ou  sende  ]?in  aungel 
to  remove  J?e  stone,  and  shewe  \>\  treujje  to  ]>\  folk }   Wel  Y  wote 
J)at  kny^tis  tooken  gold  in  ]?is  case,  to  helpe  J^at  jji  lawe  be  hid, 
and  J>in  ordenaunce  ceesse,  but  wel  Y  wote  |)at  it  shal  be  knowen 
at  jje  day  of  dome,  or  bifore  whan  ]>e  like]?  a3en  al  ]?i  enemyes. 

Here  shulden  men  marke  J)e  passioun  of  Crist,  and  prynten 
in   ]?er  herte    sumwhat    to    shewe    it,    for   it    was    most   wilful 

'  gyIo7ir,   E. 
SERMONS.  K 


An  allusion  to 
the  new  trans- 
lation of  the 
Bible. 


The  voluntari- 
ness of  Christ's 
Passion. 


130 


WYC  LIE'S 


The  pain  of 
Christ's  Pas- 
sion. 


passioun  ])at  ever  was,  and  most  hard  passioun  ])at  ever  man 
suffride.  It  was  )>us  wilful  and  so  moost  medeful.  And  her- 
fore  tolde  Crist  jje  forme  of  his  passioun  to  his  xii  disciplis, 
whan  he  wente  to  Jerusalem;  and  herfore  Crist,  \2X^  hidde  him 
bifore  to  come  to  )>e  citee,  came  ^  now  for  to  suffre,  to  shewe  his 
free  wille.  And  herfore  he  seij)  at  his  soper  here,  WiJ>  desire  Y 
have  coveitid  to  ete  j)is  Paske  wi]?  you.  For  desire  of  his  god- 
hede  and  desire  of  his  manhede  movede  him  to  ete  |)us  and  to 
suffre  after.  But  al  ]?is  was  mene  and  figure  of  his  last  soper 
)>at  he  etij)  in  hevene  wi]?  men  j^at  he  ha]?  chosen.  And  Jjus  si|) 
noo  contrariete  was  in  Cristis  resoun,  to  suffre  ]jis  passioun,  and 
his  witt  was  moost  dene,  no  ])ing  ]?at  man  dide  was  to  him  more 
willeful.  And  si]?  Crist  suffride  ]?us  for  synne  of  his  bre]?eren,  J?ei 
shulden  suffre  ]?ancfulli  for  ]?er  own  synne.  Crist  axi]?  not  greet 
peyne  in  his  bre}?eren,  but  }?at  \€\  have  sorewe  for  ]?ere  synne, 
and  purpos"  to  forsaken  it;  and  ]?is  is  cause  whi  \2X  God 
wolde  have  his  passioun  ]?us  rehersid,  for  profit  of  his  bre}?eren 
and  not  for  his  owne.  pis  peyne  of  Cristis  passioun  passid  al 
o]?er,  for  he  was  moost  tendir  man  and  in  his  myddil  age,  and 
God  leet  bi  myracle  Cristis  wyttis  suffre,  for  ellis  he  my3te  bi 
joye  have  hadde  noo  sorewe.  But  alle  circumstauncis  \2X 
shulden  make  peyne  hard,  weren  in  Cristis  passioun  to  make 
it  more  medeful.  pe  place  was  most  solempne  and  ]?e  day  also; 
]?e  houre  was  most  knowun  to  Jewes  and  to  he]?en  men ;  and 
|)e  dispit  was  moost  :  for  men  }?at  moost  shulden  love  Crist  or- 
deyneden  ]?is  moost  foule  dee]?,  a5en  Cristis  moost  kyndnesse.  And 
we  shal  bileve  ]?at  Crist  suffride  not  in  no  manere  but  for  certeyn 
enchesoun;  for  he,  bo]?e  God  and  man,  \2X  made  al  }?ingis  in 
noumbre,  shope  his  passioun  to  answere  to  byggynge  of  mannys 
synne.  And  so  sevene  wordis  J?at  Crist  spake  on  })e  cross  an- 
sweren  woundirfully  to  alle  synnes  of  men ;  and  shortly,  no 
)?ing  \2X  Crist  ever  dide  was  done  but  for  greet  cause  and  profit 
of  men.  Suche  causes  shulde  we  studie,  and  prenten  hem  in 
oure  mynde,  for  wyte  wel  }?at  al  ]?is  was  done  for  profit  of 
Cristen  men.  And  }?us  trowe  we  not  ]?es  heretikes  ]?at  ben 
foolis  out  of  bileve,  J?at  seien  we  may  not  sue  Crist,  and  namely 
in  his  passioun,  for  Crist  was  nedid  to  suffren  here  al  ]?at  he 


'  om.  E. 


'^  and  cam,  E. 


'  .So  B,  E.  C  ;   in  pvrpos,  A. 


S  E  R  M  O  X  S. 


13 » 


suffride.  Certis  pes  founede^  heretikes  shulden  wel  wite  )>at  al 
|)ing  mut  nede  come  as  God  ha|?  ordeyned.  And  so  sue  we 
Crist  afer  in  his  blessid  passioun,  and  gedre  devout  mynd  of 
him,  and  kepe  us  aferre  fro  synne. 


J?E  Gospel  on  Eestir  Day. 

[SERMON    XLVI.] 

Maria  Magdalene. — Matt,  xxviii.  [i.] 

pis  gospel  telli]>  hou  |)es  holy  wymmen  comen  to  bileve  j?at 
Crist  was  rysen  fro  dej>.  Sum  men  seien  ]>at  here  weren  but 
two  Maries,  |)at  was  Marie  Magdalene,  and  Marie  James  modir  ; 
and  ]>is  secounde  Marye  was  bo])e  our  ladyes  sister  and  Sa- 
lomens  dau3ter.  But  sum  men  seien  \2X  jjere  weren  jjree. 
But  it  is  ynow  to  us  to  trowen  jjat  Jjei  weren  two,  and  leve 
to  knowynge  of  God  5if  jjere  weren  moo.  ]>es  two  Maries 
bow^ten  hem  at  even  oynementis,  for  it  was  leveful  to  wirchen  at 
even  in  |?e  Sabotis.  And  eerly  on  pe  Sonnenday  pei  comen  to 
pe  sepulcre  of  Crist.,  at  pe  sunne  rysynge,  and  seiden  to  gidere, 
Who  shal  turne  to  us  pe  stone  fro  dore  of  pe  sepulcre  ?  And  pei 
lokiden  perto,  and  siyn  it  turned  awey,  for  sope  it  was  ful  grete ; 
and  passide  Jjes  wommans  power  to  removen  it  fro  J^e  dore, 
by  castynge  of  ]?e  Pharisees  ;  for  ]?ei  seiden  |)at  Cristis  dis- 
ciplis  wolden  come  and  stelen  his  bodi.  And  so  ])is  stone  was 
removed  bi  service  of  aungelis,  for  disciplis  of  Crist  dredden  hem 
^it  to  walken.  And  pes  wymmen  comen  in  to  pe  sepulcre  of  Crista 
and  pei  seien  an  angel  of  God  in  forme  of  a  '^onge  man  sittynge  on 
pe  ri-3,t  side  and  hild'^  wip  a  whi'^t  stole.  And  pei  ivoundriden  of  pe 
si'^t,  but  pe  aungel  seide  to  he7n,  Wole  y  not  drede,  for  Y  knowe  youre 
purpos,  3^  sekenfesus  of  Nazarep  pat  was  done  onpe  cros,  but  he  is 
rysen  to  lyve,  and  is  not  now  here.  For  here  is  pe  stede  voide,  where 
pei  hadden  putt  him.  But  go  y  and  seie  y  to  Christis  disciplis,  and 
algatis  to  Petir,  pat  Crist  shal  go  bifore  yu  to  pe  contre  of  Galile. 
Ajid pere  shal y  see  him  as  he  saide  50U  bifore;  and  he  may  not  lye. 

Ech  word  of  )?is  gospel  berej)  grete  mysterye.     First  Crist 

'  foiinyd,  B ;  fond,  C  ;  foltid,   E.  ^  j^Uyj^  ^ 

K  2 


The  two 
Marj's  at  tile 
sepulchre. 


132 


WFCLIF'S 


Christ  mani- 
fested ten 
times  between 
the  Resurrec- 
tion and  the 
Ascension. 


apperide  to  |)es  holy  wommen,  fer  to  graunt  a  privylegie  to  wom- 
man's  kynde.  For  it  is  seid  comounly  ]?at  Crist  apperide  ten  tymes 
from  hour  of  his  rysynge  to  his  steiynge  into  hevene.  First  Crist 
apperide  unto  Marye  Magdalene,  and  made  her  sterre  of  ]>q  see, 
to  5yve  li3t  to  men,  and  to  put  hir  fro  dispeire  of  hir  first  synnes. 
We  denyen  not  ))at  ne  Crist  bifore  ])is  apperide  to  his  modir, 
hou  |)at  he  wolde,  or  in  body  or  in  soule,  for  she  was  ever  sad 
in  fei]?.  pe  comynge  of  jjes  two  Maries,  ]?at  was  |?e  secounde 
shewynge  )>at  Crist  shewide  him  on  lyve  ]jat  \q  gospel  telli]?, 
techij?  hou  Crist  wolde  shewyn  him  unto  many  statis,  and  hou 
men  shulde  be  disposid  to  have  the  si3t  of  Crist,  pis  eerly 
comynge  with  li5t  of  ]>e  sunne  is  redy  comynge  in  grace  for  to 
serve  Crist,  and  ^it  ]>e  making  redy  on  ]?e  ny3t  bifore  is  done  of 
Crist,  but  not  in  siche  grace.  The  musing  of  ]?ese  wommen  as 
jjei  wenten  by  ]>q  wey,  bitokene]?  bisy  ]?0U3t  how  men  shal  come 
to  serve  Crist.  But  lore  of  good  aungelis  opne]?  to  men  |)is 
lessoun,  for  ]>e  stoone  of  unbileve  is  first  ful  grete  in  synful  men. 
pis  entrynge  to  |>e  sepulcre  is  comynge  to  ))e  service  of  Crist, 
pis  aungel  ]>at  techij?  men  treujje  is  good  aungel  of  God  ]?at 
sittij?  on  jje  ri3t  side,  to  teche  men  J?e  wey  to  hevene,  and  to 
sitten  on  Cristis  ri3t  hond  on  J^e  dale  of  dome,  pe  whitnesse 
of  ]?is  stole  is  clenesse  of  victorye  J^at  siche  men  have  of  ]?er 
goostly  enemyes.  And  as  Gregory  notijj^,  jje  face  of  jjis  aungel 
semed  as  li3tnynge,  and  his  clo}>is  whi3t  as  snow ;  for  Crist 
and  his  aungelis  ben  dredeful  to  wickide  men,  and  plesyng  to 
good  men.  3he,  to  ]?e  day  of  dome  })is  aungel  confortij)  men, 
and  ri5ti]?  ]?er  purpos,  and  telli)?  hem  how  now  Crist  is  sittynge 
in  hevene,  for  his  staat  here  in  erjje  is  fulli  performed.  And 
office  of  suche  men  is  aftirward  enjoyned  hem,  J?at  Jjei  shulden 
parte  wij?  |>er  brejieren  goostly  werkes  of  mercy,  not  oonly  wi]j 
comounnes^  but  also  wij?  prelatis.  pe  goynge  bifore  of  Crist  to 
J>e  contre  of  Galile  is,  goinge  bifore  of  Crist  to  hevene.  pere  he 
shal  she  wen  him  to  men  as  he  ha]>  hi3t  to  hem  ofte  in  |)e  gospel. 

^  comyns,  E. 

"^  S.  Greg.  In  Evang.   Horn.  xxi.  blandus  est  justis,  recte  testis  resur- 

'  In   fulgure    etenim    terror   timoris  rectionis  ejus  Angelus  et  in  fulgure 

est,    in   nive    autem    blandimentum  vultus  et  in  candore  habitus  demon- 

candoris.       Quia    vero    omnipotens  stratur  ;  ut  de  ipsa  sua  specie  et  ter- 

Deus    et    terril^ilis    peccatoribus,  et  reret  reprobos,  et  mulceret  pios.' 


SERMONS. 


^33 


Here  after  |)is  witt  men  may  large  |)is  gospel,  and  trete 
what  mater  jjat  |jei  wenen  shulde  profile  to  \q  puple ;  but 
it  is  comounly  told  of  })e  sacrament  of  ])e  auter,  and  how 
men  shal  disposen  hem  now  to  take  |jis  sacrament.  And 
it  is  seid  comounly,  })at  as  )?es  holy  wymmen  hadde  lefte 
]?er  former  synne,  and  taken  jjer  freishe  devocioun;  so  men 
shulden  come  to  |?e  chirche  to  take  ]?is  holy  sacrament,  and  ]?us 
come  wij?  ]7es  hooly  wymmen  wi|>  li3t  of  }?e  sunne.  And  |)us 
men  shulden  clojjen  hem  wi}?  \es  jjre  vertues,  bileve,  hope,  and 
charite,  to  resceyve  j)is  sacrament.  Bileve  is  first  nedeful ;  and 
algatis  of  |?is  breed,  hou  it  is  Goddis  body  by  vertue  of  Cristis 
wordis.  And  so  it  is  kyndely  breed,  as  Poul  seijj  ^,  but  it  is 
sacramentally  verre  Goddis  bodi.  And  herfore  sei]>  Austyn^, 
|>at  }?ing  is  breed  ]?at  ]?i  i3en  tellen  |;ee  and  jjat  ]?ou  seest  wi]? 
hem.  For  it  was  not  trowid  bifore  Jje  fend  was  losid^,  J>at  ])is 
worj?i  sacrament  was  accident  wi})outen  suget.  And  ^it  dwellen 
trewe  men  in  \q  old  bileve,  and  laten  freris  foulen  hem  silfe 
in  |)er  newe  heresie.  For  we  trowen  ])at  f>ere  is  beter  |?ing  |?an 
Goddis  bodi,  si}?  |?e  holy  trinite  is  in  eche  place.  But  oure 
bileve  is  sette  upon  ])is  point ;  what  is  ])is  sacrid  boost,  and  not 
what  |)ing  is  J^ere.  pe  secound  vertue  ]?at  shulde  clojje  trewe 
men  is  J)e  vertue  of  hope,  ]?at  is  ful  nedeful ;  how  men  shulde 
hope  bi  |)er  lyfe  here,  and  first,  wij)  Jjc  grace  of  God,  for  to  come 
to  hevene.  And  to  |>is  entent  men  taken  now  J>is  sacrament, 
so  })at  bi  takynge  herof  j>er  mynde  be  freschid  in  hem  to  |?enken 


This  gospel 
commonly 
applied  to  the 
sacrament  of 
the  altar. 


'^  I  do  not  know  to  what  passage 
the  writer  refers. 

b  I  am  indebted  to  the  kind  as- 
sistance of  Professor  Stubbs  for  the 
discovery  of  the  passage  in  the  works 
of  St.  Augustine  to  which  the  text 
probably  refers,  though  some  force 
appears  necessary  to  make  the  words 
of  the  saint  bear  the  meaning  which 
Wychf  imposes  on  tliem.  The  pas- 
sage is  in  a  remarkable  sermon,  No. 
272  (vol.  v.,  p.  1 104  of  the  Bene- 
dictine edition),  addressed  '  ad  In- 
fantes '  on  their  due  reception  of  the 
Eucharist.  The  impression  left  by 
the  entire  sermon  might  certainly,  to 
a  mind  already  prepossessed,  accord 
with  the  view  of  the  Eucharist  taken 


by  Wyclif ;  on  the  other  hand,  the 
language  is  quite  compatible  with 
the  view  taken  by  his  opponents,  the 
friars.  The  words  most  to  the  pur- 
pose are  these :  '  Ista,  fratres,  ideo 
dicuntur  sacramenta,  quia  in  eis  aliud 
videtur,  aliud  intelligitur.  Quod 
videtur,  speciem  habet  corporalem ; 
quod  intelligitur,  fructum  habet  spi- 
ritalem.' 

*-■  It  had  become  a  popular  belief 
by  this  time,  among  the  spiritual 
Franciscans  and  the  various  revo 
lutionary  sects,  that  since  the  year 
1000  A.D.  the  devil,  after  his  mil- 
lennary  captivity  (Apoc.  xx.  2),  had 
been  let  loose  from  the  bottomless 
pit  '  to  deceive  the  nations.' 


134 


WVC  LI  F'S 


I  Cor.  xi.  29. 


on  kyndenes  of  Crist  to  maken  hem  clene  in  soule.  And 
herfore  sei)?  Poul  ]>at  he  ])at  wantij)  jjis  ende,  etij>  and  drynkei|> 
his  judgement,  for  he  jugij)  not  jje  wor)?ines  of  Goddis  bodi, 
ne  worshipi]?  his  ordenaunce.  pe  J>ridde  vertue  nedeful  for  to 
take  f>is  sacrament  is  vertue  of  charite ;  for  })at  is  ever  nedeful, 
sij)  no  man  comej)  to  Cristis  fest  but  5if  he  have  ]?is  cloj>ing. 
And  |)us,  as  Austyn  declari])^,  foure  poyntis  ])at  falli))^  to  makinge 
of  breed  techen  us  |)is  charite,  and  algatis  to  have  it  now. 
For  ellis  we  greggen ""  our  synne  in  etynge  of  )>is  breed.  And 
5if  we  have  ]?is  clo]>inge,  takinge  j?is  mete  in  figure,  it  shal 
brynge  us  to  hevene,  ]?ere  to  ete  Goddis  body  goostly  wifjouten 
ende  ;  and  Jjat  is  mennis  blisse. 


pE   FIRSTE    SONDAI    GOSPEL   AFTIR   EESTIR. 


The  fifth  ap- 
pearing of 
Christ  after  his 
resurrection. 


[SERMON     XLVII.] 

Ctif?i  esset  sero  die  una. — John  xx.  [19.] 

pis  gospel  telli])  of  j?e  fifjje  apperynge,  ])at  was  jje  last,  and 

late  done  upon  Paske  daie,  and  ])is  is  told  wi|?  o]?er  to  conferme 

bileve  of  j?e  Chirche.      As  \e  secounde  apperynge  was  to  |je 

holy  wommen,  so  ))e  first  apperynge  was  alone  to  Marye  INIag- 

dalene,   as  tellij)  jje  gospel  of  Joon   in  ]?e  same   capitle.     pe 

jjridde  tyme    Crist  apperide  to  Petir    as   Seint  Luke  telli)>  in 

eende  of  his  gospel ;  and  jjis  was,  as  sum  men  seyen,  whan 

Petre  and  Joon  comen  fro  ]>e  sepulcre,  and  Petre  went  bi  him- 

silfe  woundrynge  and  musinge.    pe  fourjie  apperynge  was  maad 

to  two  disciplis  Jjat  wenten  to  Emawus,  and  Crist  soupid  wij>  hem. 

Of  ])is  tellij?  |?e  eende  of  Seint  Lukes  gospel,   pe  fif J)e  apperynge 

was  ))is  jjat  oure  gospel  telli|>  of,  and  j)is  was  last  of  fyve,  ])at  Crist 

^  (igreggen,  E. 

processes  are  distinctly  set  down  as 
fottr :  threshing,  which  answers  to 
conversion  by  preaching ;  grinding, 
which  represents  the  discipline  of 
fasting  and  exorcism ;  mixing  witli 
water,  which  is  Baptism ;  and  baking, 
which  corresponds  to  the  flames  kin- 
dled in  souls  by  the  Holy  Ghost. 


'  fallen,  B,  C,  E. 

*  I  have  to  thank  Professor  Stubbs 
for  this  reference  also.  In  Serm.  272, 
already  quoted,  and  also  in  Serm. 
227,  the  various  processes  that  enter 
into  the  making  of  bread  are  com- 
pared to  the  spiritual  operations 
which  combine  to  make  the  perfect 
Christian.     But  in  Serm.  229,  these 


~1 


SERMONS. 

shewide  on  Paske  daye.     And  on  )?at  dai  sevene  ni3t  Crist  ap- 
pcryde  ))e  sixte  tyme,  and  of  jjes  two  apperingis  telli|)  f^is  gospel. 

pe  storye  sei]?,  zt'y^^z;/  //  was  late,  pe  first  day  of  pe  woke  jiat 
came  nexte  after  \t  Fry  daye  j>at  God  was  done  to  dej?  on, 
and  )>at  was  in  |>e  Sonenday  next  after  \t  Sabot.  But  it 
was  late,  and  pe  disciplis  weren  gedrid  pere,  to  conforte  hem 
to  gidere,  and  for  drede  pat  pet  hadde  of  J  ewes  \2X  weren  her 
enemyes  :  per  'i^atis  weren  fast  shitty  for  drede  of  ])e  same 
folk ;  fesiis  ca?n,  not  lettinge  pat  pe  '^atis  iveren  shitt  j)us,  and 
stood  in  pe  myddis  of  his  disciplis,  and  seide  pus  unto  hem;  Pees 
be  to  ^ou^for  Y  am  alyve,  wole  y  not  drede  ]je  while  3e  have  siche 
a  keper.  And  he  shewide  to  hem  his  hondis  and  his  side,  atid pe 
disciplis  hadden  joie^  wha?t  pei  hadden  seen  pus  pe  Lord.  For 
sorewe  of  his  de]?  and  drede  of  Jewis  weren  clenly  putt  awey 
bi  si3t  of  j)is  lord.  And  Christ  seide  ayn,  Pees  be  to  '^ou,  to 
tellen  hem  |>e  ful  pees  |>at  })ei  shulden  have  ]?erafter  bo))e  in 
bodi  and  soule,  for  })ere  medeful  pacience.  And  \t\  shulden 
not  grutche  for  J?is  short  pilrsuynge,  for  Crist  telli|>  |)at,  as  his 
Fadir  sent  him  so  he  sendip  hem,  to  suffre  tribulaciouns  ;  and  jjei 
shulden  holden  hem  paied  of  sich  form  of  sendinge.  And 
whan  he  hadde  seid  |)us,  he  blew  on  hem  and  seide.  Take  y  pe  Holy 
Goost,  for  herby  3e  shulen  be  stronge  by  power  and  by  witt, 
j)at  3e  shal  have  by  him. 

Here  we  shal  wite  jjat  Crist  blew  not  bi  childhode  upon 
his  apostlis  but  bi  greet  witt ;  for  herby  Crist  tau3t  ]7at  J)e 
Holy  Goost  come])  boJ)e  of  ]>e  Fadir  and  ]?e  Sone,  as  wyne 
of  er|)e  and  water.  And  comyng  forj)  of  ]jis  Gost  is  not 
nativite,  but  sutil  inspiringe  of  Jies  two  persones,  and  her- 
fore  |)ei  ben  clepid  o  principle  of  ])is  Gost.  And  holy  writt 
graunti]?  j?at  |)e  Sone  sendij>  j?is  Goost,  and  herfore  Crist 
graunti]?  |)is  privylegie  to  his  disciplis,  pat  whos  synnes  pat  pei 
for'^yven,  pei  ben  foryvun  to  hem,  and  whos  synnes  pat  pei 
wipolden,  pei  ben  holden  to  hem.  And  boste  men  not  for  J)is 
privylegie  grauntid  to  )je  apostlis,  for  it  is  undirstonden  in 
as  myche  as  siche  apostlis  acorden  wi]>  \q,  keies  of  ]>e  chirche 
above.     And  herfore  shulden  siche  bostours  ben  certeyne  at 

*   So  in  E  ;    A  wrongly  excludes  th£  words   '  and  joie  '   from  the 

italics. 


^?^S 


Double  proces- 
sion of  the 
Holy  Ghost. 


136 


WVC  L  IF'S 


))e  firste  J>at  ))ei  ben  verrey  vikers  of  ))e  holy  apostlis.  And 
si]?  God  enspirij)  ^  hem  and  5yve])  hem  witt  and  power  to 
bynden  and  to  lousen  as  Crist  him  silfe  doi]?,  or  ellis  hem 
\vantij>  Jjis  power,  and  Jjanne  })ei  shulde  not  boste  J^at  |?ei  have 
siche  pow^r,  so  ]>ei  my3te  not  pleynher  shewen  hem  to  have 
no  siehe  power  ]>an  fer  to  bargayn  herwi]?,  and  boste  hem  to 
have  siche  power.  For  |>anne  ]>ei  ben  noon  of  hem  to  whom 
Crist  5af  ]?is  power  ;  for  5if  ])er  weren  two  popis,  the  toon  a3ens 
]?e  tojjir,  and  J?e  toon  looside  alle  ])at  jje  to|)er  boond,  it  were 
not  for  to  dreme  whej^er  of  hem  did  soj^ely,  but  whe])er  more 
suede  Goddis  doynge  and  resoun.  And  si}>  God  may  not 
folde  fro  ri5t  and  resoun,  it  is  knowen  bi  Goddis  lawe  jjat  no 
pope  assoili})  but  in  as  myche  as  Crist  assoiU])  first  f^.  And  her- 
fore  Seint  Petre  and  o])er  Cristis  apostlis  asoilliden  not  |?us, 
ne  5yve  siche  indulgencis ;  for  ]?ei  diden  never  siche  dedis  but 
whan  God  enspiride  hem.  And  so  no  J>ing  is  falser  jjan 
ypocritis  to  boste  |?us,  and  5if  men  loke  to  resoun  ])ei  may 
wele  se  }?at  many  siche  feynyngis  ben  of  )?e  fendis  scole.  For 
ellis  my3te  a  pope  assoile  men  bo]?e  of  peyne  and  blame  •'j  for 
jjei  killen  )>er  evene  cristene^,  and  ever  while  ]jei  done  so;  and 
5if  ]7ei  ceessen  fro  sich  killing,  |)er  assoilinge  shal  ceesse.  But 
what  men  wolden  triste  to  siche  assoilinge '?      Wei  we  witen 

^  So  in  B  and  C  ;  enspire)p,  E  ;   A  has  enspirit. 

"  This  position  recalls  one  of  the 
twenty  four  conclusions,  condemned 
by  the  '  earth-quake '  synod  of  1382  : 
'  That  no  prelate  ought  to  excom- 
municate any  one,  unless  he  first 
know  that  he  is  excommunicated 
by  God.'     Lewis's  Wyclif,  p.  108. 

''  The*  ordinary  indulgence  ab- 
solved poena  sed  noii  culpa.  In 
theory,  the  guilt  of  sins,  and  the 
eternal  punishment  due  to  them, 
were  remitted  in  the  sacrament  of 
penance ;  it  was  the  temporal  pun- 
ishment only,  the  poena,  which  the 
indulgence  professed  to  remit,  in 
whole  or  in  part.  But  it  is  well 
known  that,  during  the  fourteenth 
and  fifteenth  centuries,  a  great  laxity 
prevailed,  if  not  in  the  actual  word- 
ing of  indulgences,  at  any  rate  in 
the  language  of  those  to  whom  their 
distribution    was    entrusted.       The 


form  was  probably  observed  strictly 
enough  all  along ;  so  that  the 
preacher's  words  must  be  taken 
with  some  allowance.  In  turning 
over  the  pages  of  the  BuUarium,  I 
observe,  under  the  year  15 15,  only 
two  years  before  the  first  public 
appearance  of  Luther,  the  formal 
grant  by  Ixo  X  of  two  indulgences, 
and  in  both  cases  the  form  of  words 
is  ;  —  [Indulgemus]    '  quod    quilibet 

Christi   fidelis plenariam 

omnium  peccatonim  suorum.  de  qui- 
bus  corde  coiitritus,  atque  ore  confessus 
fuerit,  indulgentiam  et  remissionem 
consequatur.' 

•=  The  allusion  is  to  Bishop  Spen- 
cer's crusade.  When  it  was  over, 
and  men  should  cease  to  kill  their 
fellow-Christians,  then  the  papal  in- 
dulgence, or  '  assoilinge,'  would  also 
cease. 


SERMONS, 


^^1 


[>at  God  is  moost  lord  of  al  ojier,  and  no  man  may  do  synne, 
but  5if  he  synne  a3ens  him,  and  no  synne  may  be  for30vun  but 
5if  God  first  for3yve  it.  And  so  it  is  propre  to  God  to  for^yve 
)>us  offence,  and  5if  a  man  for3yve  siche  synne,  |>at  is  bi  power 
of  viker ;  and  siche  power  haj?  he  not,  but  3if  God  shewe  it 
him.  For  eUis  my3te  he  graunte  pardoun  for  longe  after  )>e 
day  of  dome  to  men  |)at  God  wole  have  dampnyd,  for  a  newe 
founde  praier,  and  heien  it  for  mannis  love  more  ]?an  \t  Pater 
Noster  :  as  men  seien  ]>at  a  pope  ha})  grauntid  two  jjousand  3eer 
to  ech  man  |>at  is  contrite  and  confessid  of  his  synne,  )>at  seij> 
jjis  orisoun  '  Domine  Jesu  Christe '  bitwene  ]?e  sacringe  of  jje 
masse  and  |)e  J?ridde  Agnus  Dei.  And  jjan  it  were  ydil  to 
traveile  for  ony  pardoun,  sij?  a  man  my3te  at  home  gete  him 
fourty  Jjousand  3eer  bi  noone.  And  so  Jiat  man  J>at  shal  be 
dampned,  ]?at  is  confessid  and  contrite,  and  seij?  j>us  ofte  |)is 
praier,  shulde  have  many  |?ousand  5eer  in  helle  after  Jje  daie  of 
dome.  Triste  we  to  ])e  old  bileve  ]?at  Crist  assoili]>  as  he  wole, 
and  })is  forme  is  hid  to  men  as  ojjer  treu))is  ]?at  God  wole  hide. 

Thomas  oon  of  pe  twelve  pat  is  clepid  Didimus  ivas  not  wip 

pes  te7i  wha7i  Jesus  came  and  dide  pus ;   and  oper  disciplis  tolden 

hifu  hou  pat  pei  saien  pe  Lord.    But  he  seide  unto  hem,  But  y/  V 

see  in  his  hojidis  picching^  of  pe  naillis,  and  putt  my  fynger  in  pe 

place  pat  Crist  was  ynaillid  in,  and  put  my  hond  in  his  syde 

where  he  was  persid  wip  pe  spere,  Y  shal  nevere  trowen  pat  oure 

Jesus  is  rysen.    And  on  pe  Sonday  nexte  after,  weren  pes  disciplis 

inne  arid  Thomas  wip  hem;   and  Crist  shewide  him  as  bifore. 

For  he  came  whan  pe  '^atis  weren  closid  and  stood  a?}iyddis,  and 

saide,  as  he  saide  bifore,  Pees  be  to  you.     Atid  after  he  seide  to 

Thomas,  |)at  he  sente  after  to  Inde,  Putt  in  here  pi  finger  and 

se  ?ny  hondis  arid  putt  hidir  pin  hond  and  putt  in  to  my  side,  and 

wole  pou  not  be  untrewful  but  trewe  in  bileve.     Thomas  answeride 

and  seide  to  Crist,  My  Lord  and  my  God.     And  Jesus  seide  to  him 

pan.  For  pou  say  me  pus,  Thomas,  pou  bilevidst  in  me;  but  blessid 

ben  po  pat  saien  not  pis,  and  trowen  as  ))0u  doist.     Many  oper 

signes  dide  Crist  in  si'^t  of  his  disciplis,  but  pes  few  ben  writun  in 

pis  book  for  pis  ende,  pat  y  bileve  pat  Jesus  is  Goddis  sane,  and 

pal  y  for  pis  bileve  have  blisse  in  his  name.     Amen. 

'  pitchyng,  E. 


'3« 


WYC  LIF\S 


PE   SECOUNDE    SONDAY   GoSPEL   AFTIR    EeSTIR. 


[SERMON      XL  VI  II.] 


Christ  the 
good  shep- 
herd. 


The  Pope 
compared  to 
Antichrist, 


Ego  sum  pastor  bonus. — John  x.  [ii.] 

Christ  tellij)  in  |?is  gospel  ))e  maners  of  a  good  herde,  so  j>at 
herbi  we  may  witen  how  oure  herdis  failen  now.  And  defaute 
of  siche  heerdis  is  moost  peril  in  )?€  Chirche ;  ffor,  as  xh^X.  office 
of  hem  shulde  moost  bringe  men  to  heven,  so  defaute  of  ]?is 
office  drawij)  men  moost  to  helle.  Crist  tellij?  of  him  silf,  how 
he  is  a  good  herde,  for  he  is  J)e  beste  herde  ))at  mankynde  may 
have.  For  he  is  good  bi  him  silf  and  may  no  wey  faile,  for 
he  is  bojje  God  and  man ;  and  God  may  no  wey  synne.  And 
j>us  we  have  Jje  mesure  to  knowe  a  good  herd  and  an  yvel, 
for  ]>Q.  more  J)at  an  herd  is  lyke  to  Crist,  he  is  ]?e  beter,  and 
]?e  more  ]jat  he  strangij?  from  him,  he  is  ]?e  worse  in  ]?is  office. 
And  efte  whan  Crist  ha)>  3yve  ))e  mesure  for  to  knowe  good 
herdis,  he  telli)?  ]?e  heieste  proprete  jsat  fallij?  to  a  good  herde  : 
a  good  herde,  as  Crist  st\^,puiiij?  his  lyf  for  his  sheep;  for  more 
charite  may  noon  have  jjan  to  putte  his  lyfe  for  his  frendis, 
and  5if  he  worchij?  wj'sely^,  for  to  bring  Jjes  sheep  to  hevene. 
For  ])us  |)e  herde  ha])  moost  peyne  and  j)e  sheep  moost  profit. 

pus  we  may  see,  who  is  good  herde  and  who  failij?  in  j>is 
office ;  for  as  Crist  puttij)  wisely  his  owen  lif  for  his  sheep,  so 
Antecrist  putti])  proudly  many  lifes  for  his  foule  lyfe.  As,  5if 
\t  fend  ledde  })e  pope  to  kille  many  j^ousend  men  to  holde  his 
worldely  state,  he  suede  Antecristis  maneres.  And  sij?  ])is  pro- 
pirte  of  herde  groundi})  charite  in  men,  eche  man  shulde  have 
herof  algatis  more  or  lesse ;  as  he  is  ferre  fro  J)is  maner  \2X  wole 
not  3yve  his  worldely  goodis  to  his  sheep  or  his  bre}>eren,  whan 
\€\  have  grete  nede  Jjerto,  for  sich  goodis  ben  worse  \zxi 
mannis  lyfe.  And  })us  semen  oure  religious  to  be  exempte 
fro  charile  ;    ffor  nede  a  man  nevere  so  myche  to  have  helpe 


om.  E. 


j^ 


SERMONS. 


139 


of  siche  goodis,  366,  al5if  \q\  have  stoonys  or  o|>er  jewelis  |>at 
harmen  hem,  but  |)ei  wolen  not  ^yve  siche  goodis  ne  value  of 
hem  to  helpe  j)er  bre|?eren,  ne  ceesse  to  anoye  hem  silf  in 
bilding  of  hye  housis,  ne  to  gaderen  sich  veyn  goodis,  ^if  it  do 
harm  to  ))er  brejjeren.  Sich  averous  men  ben  ferre  fro  maneres 
of  a  good  herde,  and  so  thes  newe  religious  J)at  j^e  fend  ha]> 
tollid  inne,  bi  colour  to  helpe  jjer  former  heerdis,  harmen  hem 
many  weies,  and  letten  ])is  office  in  \q  chirche.  For  trewe 
prechinge  and  worldely  goodis  ben  spuylid  bi  siche  religiouse  ; 
and  herfore  techi|>  Crist  to  flee  hem,  for  ])ei  ben  ravyshinge 
wolvys.  Sum  wole,  as  breris,  tere  wolle  of  sheepe  and  make 
hem  coold  in  charite,  and  sum  wole  sturdly,  as  J>ornes,  sleye 
sheep  of  Holy  Chirche,  and  |>us  is  our  moder  shent  for  defaute 
of  mennys  help.  And  more  mede  my^t  no  man  have  |)an  to 
helpe  );is  sory  wydewe ;  for  princis  of  preestis  and  Pharisees 
jjat  calliden  Crist  a  giloure  have  crocchid  ^  to  hem  \q  chesynge 
of  many  heerdis  in  J)e  Chirche.  And  |?ei  ben  tau3t  by  Ante- 
crist  to  chese  hise  herdis  and  not  Cristis,  and  |?us  failij?  Christis 
Chirche.  Lord  !  sij?  heerdis  shulden  passe  |)er  sheep  as  men 
passen  bletyng  sheep,  how  shulde  Cristis  Chirche  fare,  5if  |>es 
heerdis  weren  turned  to  woolvys  !  But  Crist  seij?  |)at  |>us  it 
fare]?  among  J)e  heerdis  of  |je  Chirche,  |?at  many  of  hem  ben 
hired  hynes  and  not  heerdis  over  pe  sheep,  for  pe  sheep  ben  not  per 
owun.  And  so  \€\  loven  to  litil  ]?e  sheep,  for  3if  jjei  have  ])ere 
temporal  hire,  \€\  recken  not  how  ]>er  flok  fare.  And  ]jus 
done  alle  |?es  curatours,  J)at  tellen  more  by  worldely  wynnynge 
}?an  by  vertues  of  J)er  sugettis  or  soule  hele  to  come  to  hevene. 
Siche  ben  not  heerdis  of  sheep,  but  of  dunge  and  wolle  of  hem, 
and  ))es  shal  not  have  in  hevene  joie  of  )>er  sheep  |)at  ]?ei  kepen. 
Siche  hynen  seen  pe  wolvys  comynge  to  flokkis  \2X  )?ei  shulde 
kepe,  and  pei  fleen  for  drede  of  not^,  and  jjes  wolvys  ravyshen 
pe  sheep  and  scateren  hem,  for  |)is  eende  |)at  \€\  |)anne  may 
souner  perishe.  And  ])us  moved  Poul  to  found  none  ordre, 
for  Christis  ordre  is  ynou3,  and  |)anne  shulde  alle  Cristen  men 
be  more  surely  in  o  flok.  Lord !  3if  cowardise  of  siche  hynen  be 
})us  dampned  of  Crist,  how  myche  more  shulden  wolvys  be 


the  friars  to 
wolves. 


^  crochidy  B,  C,  E. 


«o«3/,  B,  E. 


140 


WYCLIF'S 


Three  func- 
tions proper 
to  a  good 
shepherd. 


dampnyd  |>at  ben  putt  to  kepe  Cristis  sheep.  But  Crist  sei)) 
a  clene  cause  ivhi pes  hired  hynen  fleen  ]>us.  For  he  is  an  hyred 
hyne,  and  pe  sheep  perteynen  not  to  him,  but  |?e  dung  of  siche 
sheep,  and  ))is  dung  suffisi]?  to  hem,  howevere  jje  sheep  faren. 
Sum  ben  wolves  wijjouten  for]?,  and  sum  ben  wolves  wi)jinne, 
and  jjes  ben  more  perilous  \  for  homely  enemyes  ben  \q  worste. 
Yvel  wolvys  ben  religiouse,  \2X  Crist  sei]?  in  Mathew's  gospel, 
ben  wolvys  ravyshinge,  al3if  \€\  comen  in  sheepis  clo]?is ;  for  bi 
])is  ypocrisye  ]?ei  disseyven  sonner  ]?e  sheep.  And  al3if  j>er 
dwellyng  be  wijjouten  parishens  of  jjes  sheep,  and  \€\  ben 
strange  and  newe  brou^t  in  by  ]>e  fend,  5it  jjei  for3iten  not  to 
come  and  visite  ]?e  sheep.  But  comounly  whan  \€\  comen, 
\€\  comen  moost  for  to  spuyle;  and  ))us  done  generaly  bo)> 
freris  and  monkes  and  chanouns.  But  ]?ei  ben  wolvys  wi)?inne 
})at  seien  |>at  jjei  have  cure  of  soulis,  and  ravyshen  goodis  of 
J)es  sheep,  and  feden  hem  not  goostli,  but  raj^er  moven  hem 
to  synne,  and  waken  not  in  heerdis  office. 

But  Crist  seip  he  is  a  good  heerde,  and  knowip  his  sheep,  and  pei 
him.  For  jie  office  ))at  falli]?  to  heerdis  makij?  him  known  among 
hem,  as  my  Fadir  knowip  me,  and  Y  ayn  knowe  my  Fadir.  So 
seij)  Crist,  Y putt  ??iy  lyfto  kepe  my  sheep  a^en  wolvys.  And  as  ]?is 
knowynge  my3t  not  quenche  bitwene  Crist  and  his  Fadir,  so 
shulden  |>es  heerdis  waken  upon  ])er  sheep ;  and  \€\  shulden 
knowen  him  not  by  bodili  feestis  ne  o]?er  synnes  |?at  he  doi]?, 
but  by  ])ree  offices  of  heerdis  Jjat  Crist  ha]?  lymytid  to  hem.  It 
falli]?  to  a  good  herde  to  lede  his  sheep  in  hole  pasturis,  and 
whan  his  sheep  ben  hirt  or  stabbid,  to  hele  hem  and  to  grese 
hem ;  and  whan  o])er  yvel  beestis  assailen  hem,  ]?an  helpe  hem. 
And  herto  shulde  he  putte  his  lyfe  to  save  his  sheepe  fro  siche 
beestis.  pe  pasture  is  Goddis  lawe,  ]?at  ever  more  is  greene 
in  treu])e,  and  rotun  pasture  ben  ojjer  lawes  and  o]?er  fablis 
wi]?outen  ground.  And  cowardise  of  siche  heerdis  J?at  dar  not 
defende  Goddis  lawe  witnessi]?  J?at  ]?ei  fallen  in  two  offices 
suyng  after;  for  he  ]?at  dar  not  for  worldes  drede  defende  }?e 
lawe  of  his  God,  how  shulde  he  defende  his  sheep  for  love  ]?at 
he  ha]?  to  hem  t    And  3if  J?ei  bryngen  in  newe  lawes  contrarie 


'  So  B  ;  perilouse,  E ;  A  has  perolous. 


SERMONS. 


141 


to  Goddis  lawe,  how  shulden  jjei  not  fallen  after  in  ojjer 
offices  })at  }iei  shulden  have  ?  But  Crist  ]>at  is  heed  of  herdis 
seij>^  pat  he  hap  oper  sheep  pat  ben  not  y'te  o/pisjlok,  and  hem  ?nut 
he  brynge  togidere,  and  teche  hem  to  knowe  his  vois.  And  so  shal 
pere  be  00  Jlok,  and  oon  herde  over  hem  alle.  pes  sheep  ben 
hej>ene  men  or  Jewes  |>at  Crist  wole  converte,  ffor  al  jjes  shal 
make  o  flok,  j^e  which  flok  is  holy  Chirche;  but  ferre  fro  jjis 
undirstondinge,  jjat  alle  men  shal  be  convertid. 


J?E   >RIDDE   SONDAI   GOSPEL   AFTER    EeSTIR. 

[SERMON      XLIX.] 

Modicum  etjam  non  videbitis  me. — Joon  xvi.  [16.] 

Here  telli]?  Crist  to  his  Chirche  how  |?er  wille  shulde  be  tem- 
prid,  for  variynge  of  ]>qv  heed  after  his  resureccioun.  He  sei]? 
ferst  to  his  apostlis  pat  per  is  ny  a  litil  tyme  and  pei  shal  not  see 
him,  for  he  shal  be  deed  and  buried ;  for  |)es  wordis  of  Crist 
weren  seid  J>e  nexte  pursday  bifore  his  dee]) ;  and  aftir  Crist 
sei))  to  his  disciplis, /«//^r^  shulde  sue  a  ??iore  tyme  and  pan  pei 
shulden  see  Crist,  and  ofte  tymes  be  confortid  by  him.  And  |)at 
was  fro  rysynge  of  Crist  to  j^e  tyme  J^at  he  steye  to  hevene. 
But  for  Crist  haj)  lymytid  tyme  jjat  he  shuld  come  to  his  Fadir, 
Crist  seij)  |)is  time  shal  be  \\\\\,/or  he  goip  to  his  Fadir.  For  bojje 
Cristis  liynge  in  J)e  sepulcre  and  his  dwellinge  here  in  er]>e 
was  litil  tyme  as  God  limitide,  to  answere  to  his  ascencioun. 
A7td  sum  of  disciplis  of  Crist  saiden  togidere,  What  is  pis  pat 
Crist  seip  to  us,  a  litil  and  efte  y  shal  se  me,  for  Y go  to  my  Fadir. 
And  pei  seiden,  What  is  pis  litil,  for  we  witen  never e  what  he 
vienep.  And  fesus  iviste  pat  his  disciplis  wolden  axe  him  of  bis 
unknowun  jjinge^  and  he  seide  pus  to  hem;  Of  pis  y  axen  among 
you,  pat  Y  seide,  a  litil  tyme  shulde  come,  and  pan  y  shal  not  se  me, 
and  sip  a  litil  but  more  tyme,  and  pan  y  shal  see  me.  Forsope, 
fforsope,  Y  seie  to  you,  pat  y  shal  bope  grete  and  wepe,  but  pe  world 


^  So  E ;  A  and  B  wrongly  italicise  the  word. 


142 


WFCLIF'S 


Four  endow- 
ments of  the 
glorified  body : 


I.  subtilty, 


2.  agility, 


panne  shal  Joie,  and  pan  shal  5*?  be  soreu/ul,  but  ^oure  sorewe 
shal  turne  to  joie.  And  })is  was  so]?  of  ))e  apostlis  aftir  ]?e 
rysyng  of  Crist,  ffor  first  ]?ei  maden  more  sorewe,  and  sij)  lasse, 
and  sijj  joie.  And  worldely  men  contrarieden  hem,  jiat  first 
hadden  joie  and  si]>  sorewe,  for  Jjei  joieden  of  apostlis  sorewe 
and  sorewiden  of  aposdis  joie.  And  efte  Crist  tellij)  a  kyndely 
saumple,  to  prynte  J)is  word  more  in  jjer  herte. 

A  womnian,  sei)>  Crist,  whan  she  travailip  wip  child,  hap  sorewe 
of  hir  peyne,  but  aftir  whan  she  is  delyverid,  she  hap  Joie  of  hir 
child y  and forytip  her  former  sorewe,  for  man  is  bore  i7i  to  pe  world. 
And  pet  fore  y  have  sorewe  now,  but  efte  Y  shal  see  you,  and  your  e 
herte  shal  have  joie,  and  no  man  shal  take  fro  yu  yur  joie.  pis 
womman,  to  Cristis  entent,  is  oure  modir  holy  Chirche,  and 
every  party  ]?erof  Jjat  is  also  holy  Chirche.  And  as  long  as 
we  lyven  here,  we  ben  travelynge  of  child,  to  brynge  oure  soule 
to  surete  fro  bisie  sorewe  of  ]?is  world,  and  so  to  brynge  forj> 
J>e  hole  man  to  blisse  bo]?e  in  bodi  and  soule.  And  whan  we 
comen  to  |)is  state  we  j?enken  not  of  oure  former  sorewe  to 
oure  anoye  or  to  oure  mornynge,  for  joie  of  ende  J>at  sue]>; 
but  we  jjenken  in  oure  herte  ]>at  for  ]?is  peyne  )?at  we  have  now, 
we  shal  have  myche  joie  whan  we  ben  ful  made  in  ])e  world. 
And  ]jat  shal  nevere  be  done  fully  bifore  )>at  we  come  to  blisse, 
for  we  mornen  til  jjat  tyme.  For  we  may  H^tly  perishe  fro  lyfe, 
but  Jeanne  a  man  is  fully  made,  whan  he  is  corouned  in  blisse, 
for  ])anne  he  is  certeyne  to  lyve  evere  in  blis  withouten  peyne. 

Clerkis  seien  Jjat  whan  a  man  is  brou3t  |)us  to  Goddis  chambre, 
jjan  he  is  fully  spousid  with  God,  and  dowid,  boj^e  in  bodi  and 
in  soule,  of  foure  doweris  of  )>e  bodi.  Crist  toke  ernes  ^  here  in 
|>is  world,  for  whan  he  cam  out  of  his  modir  he  brak  not  J>e 
cloister  of  hir,  but,  as  )?e  sunne  come])  Jiorou^  )?e  glas,  so  Crist 
cam  fro  his  modir  wombe.  And  ]?is  morw^yve^  is  clepid  of 
clerkes,  dower  of  bodily  sutilte,  and  ofte  usid  Crist  |)is  dower 
fro  )>at  tyme  J)at  he  was  rysen.  pe  secounde  dower  of  ])e  bodi 
is  clepid  agilite,  j^at  is  swiftnesse  ))erof  and  to  moven  hou 
a  man  wole ;  and  ]>is  dower  usid  Crist  whan  he  wente  upon  |)e 
water,  and  specialy  at  \2X  tyme  ]>at  he  stied  in  to  heven.     pe 


'   ernys,  C. 


-  morwe-'^yve,  B;   tnorcw-'iy/e,  E;  more  yif,  C. 


SERMONS. 


H3 


jjridde  dower  of  J)e  bodi  is  incorruptibilite,  J)at  \>q  body  may  not 
die  ne  be  broke  bi  no  j>ing ;  and  jjis  dower  knew  ]je  fend  whan 
he  aleggide  to  Crist  J)at  he  shulde  not  hurte  his  foot,  3if  he 
lepte  doun  fro  )?e  temple.  And  by  vertue  of  Jjis  dower  jje  kny3tis 
broken  not  Cristis  jjies,  ne,  whan  he  cam  in  at  |)e  5atis  ])e  bordis 
broken  not  his  bodi.  pe  four|>e  dower  and  ))e  laste  is  cleryng 
of  mannis  bodi,  whan  it  shynej>  bri^t  in  hevene  as  j?e  sunne  or 
o]>er  sterres  ;  and  jjis  dower  toke  Crist  to  him  in  tyme  of  his  trans- 
figuringe.  And  herfore  seide  Petre  ]?anne,  ])at  good  was  hem  to 
be  J>ere,  for  jiis  is  ]>e  heiest  dower  J)at  fallij?  unto  mannis  body. 

And  after  ]?es  foure  doweris  fallen  foure  unto  ]>q  soule. 
pe  first  and  J>e  moste  dower  answerij?  to  }>e  last  of  J)e  bodi, 
|?at  a  soule  blessid  in  hevene  ha]?  clere  knowyng  of  alle 
]jingis,  ))at  is  or  was  or  ever  shal  be.  And  si]j  a  man  ha)> 
delite  to  see  a  pley  here  in  er])e,  or  a  lord,  or  ]?ing  of  wounder, 
and  jjerwij)  fedi])  his  bodi,  myche  more  ]?is  clere  si3t  of  God 
and  alle  his  creaturis  shulden  fulli  fede  |)e  blessid  soule,  and 
})ereafter  blisse  ])e  bodi.  And  herfor  sei]?  oure  Jesus,  in  the 
gospel  of  Seint  Joon,  jjat  |)is  is  lyf  wijjouten  ende,  to  knowe  ]?e 
Fadir  and  his  Sone.  For  jjan  men  knowen  in  }?is  myrour  al 
creaturis  )?at  may  be  ;  and  |?is  clere  si3t  is  more  joyeful  jjan  ony 
tunge  may  telle  here,  pe  secounde  dower  of  ]?e  soule  is  vertue 
to  kepe  ful  knowynge,  so  j)at  knowyng  of  oo  ])ing  contrarie]? 
not  to  ano|)er.  And  ri3t  as  bodi  shal  ever  last,  for  acorde  of  alle 
his  partis,  so  mannis  wittis  shal  ever  last  for  lokynge  in  ]je  first 
myrour ;  and  so  man  for3ite|j  not  in  hevene  |>ingis  ]?at  he  sum 
tyme  knewe.  pe  J^ridde  dower  of  \e  soule  is  redynesse  for  to 
knowe  al  ])ingis  |?at  man  wole,  hou  ofte  j^at  he  wole  Jjenke  on 
hem ;  for  3if  he  traveilid  in  |)is  ]30U3t  ony  J)ing  a3ens  his  wille, 
he  were  not  fully  in  blisse,  ne  wij^outen  anoyous  peyne.  And 
ne|?eles  we  bileven  J>at  seintis  have  what  \e\  wolen  have,  and 
)?ei  wolen  noo  |?ing  })at  is  yvel.  And  jjus  men  grounden  many 
blyssis,  but  al  ben  brou3t  to  jjes  foure  ]?at  we  can  rekene  in 
seintis.  As  \q  four]?e  dowery  of  man  in  blis,  answeryng  to  ]?e 
first  of  j)e  bodi,  is  sutilte  of  mannis  soule,  Jjat  it  takij?  al  kyn 
treu|/e,  and  herby  is  [not]^  undisposid  to  cast  out  oo  treujje  by 

*  The  '  not,'  which  spoils  the  sense,  is  rightly  omitted  in  E. 


3.  incorrup- 
tibility, 


4.  transpa- 
rency. 


Four  endow- 
ments of  the 
soul : 

I.  knowledge, 


John  xvii.  3. 


2.  capacity, 


3.  nimbleness, 


4.  subtilty. 


'44 


WVCLIF'S 


anojjer ;  but  as  many  blessid  bodies  ben  togidere  in  o  place, 
so  many  blessid  knowyngis  ben  togidere  in  oo  soule.  Surete 
of  siche  goodis  may  not  faile  to  |?es  seintis,  si]>  jjei  seen 
clerely  in  God  how  it  is  nede  al  Jjis  to  be.  And  so  ))ei  witen 
how  J)ei  have  al  \t  joie  ])at  ])ei  wolen,  sij)  hem  wantij)  no  kyn 
J)ing  |)at  )?ei  shulden  desire  to  have. 


pE    FOURl>E   SONDAI   GOSPEL   AFTIR   EeSTIR. 


[SERMON     L.] 


Christ  foretells 
his  ascension. 


Vado  ad  eum  qui  7nisit  me. — John  xvi.  [5.] 

pis  gospel  of  Joon  telli|>  hie  pryvete  of  |)ing  ])at  is  to  come 
bifore  jje  day  of  dome.  And,  for  Cristis  assencioun  is  ney^, 
jjerfore  Crist  telli]?  a  word  of  his  assencioun  ))at  his  apostlis 
shulden  trowe.  Crist,  to  whom  al  |?ing  |?at  shal  be  is  present, 
seij>  upon  |?e  pursday  j)at  he  shulde  die  on  J>e  morow  :  V go  to 
him  pat  hap  sent  me  to  \q  erj>e,  and  ]>at  is  a  myche  office,  to  bye 
})e  chirche  of  men.  And  for  my  steiyng  is  so  opyn,  as^  it  is  hid 
bifore  tyme,  noon  of  '^ou  axip  me  whidir  pat  Y go,  but  "^itjfor  Y 
have  spoke  pes  pingis  unto  yu,  ^e  trowen  not^  but  li3tly  ]>at  ]?ei 
ben  so|)e,  and  so  oonhed^^  sorow  hap  now  fillid  -^oure  hertis,  for 
Y  have  told  50U  how  jjat  Y  shal  suffre,  hou  Y  shal  be  reproved, 
and  how  Y  shal  die,  and  how  Y  shal  aftir  be  absentid  fro  50U ; 
and  how  Y  shal  dwelle  in  hevene  til  Y  come  to  |>e  last  day 
to  juge  ]>e  world  to  joye  or  to  peyne.  And  J>es  wordis  shulden 
make  frendis  to  mourne  among  hem  silf,  but  Y  seie  '^ou  treupe^ 
it  spedip  to  y)u  pat  Y go,  for  '^if  Y go  not,  pe  Holy  Goost  shal  not 
come  to  y)u,  and  yfY  shal  go,  Y  shal  sende  hifn  to  -s^ou.  And 
whan  he  shal  come  he  shal  reprove  pe  world  of  synne,  of  ri'^twis- 
nese,  and  also  of  Jugemefit. 


and,  E. 


now,  E. 


«  The  variations  of  the  MSS.  and 
the  fact  of  their  all  including  the 
words  '  and  so  oonhed  '  in  the  italics, 
show  that  the  scribes  themselves  did 
not  understand  this  passage.    1  have 


oon  bid,  B ;  unhid,  E  ;  on  hid,  C. 

restored  the  words  to  Wyclif,  and 
explain  the  passage  thus  ;  *  You 
readily  believe  that  my  words  are 
true,  and  so  unity  ; '  i.e.  harmonious 
and  self-consistent. 

WYCLIF. 


SERMONS. 


145 


But  j>is  shal  be  undirstonde  thus  —  God  shal  reprove  ])is 
^^'orld  0/  synne  of  unireupe^  for  pci  trowiden  not  in  vie.  And 
jjis  is  ]>e  first  synne,  and  moost  unkynde  })at  jjei  my3ten  do 
to  God ;  ffor  si]>  Crist  came  to  j?is  world  and  by-cam  our 
bro])er  to  bye  us,  and  algatis  to  profite  to  mankynde,  and 
he  is  so  opyn  treu)>e  shewid  jjus  unto  man,  |)is  is  a  greet 
synne  to  trowe  not  here  to  Crist.  For  in  synnynge  in  jjis  feij) 
unkynde  men  untrowen  to  his  Fadir  and  to  Crist  and  also  to 
))e  Holy  Goost,  for  |)is  holy  Trinite  witnessi]?  |>is  journey.  And 
as  bileve  is  first  vertue  and  ground  of  al  oj^er,  so  unbileve  is 
\t  first  synne  of  alle  o))er,  and  j^erfore  synne  take  ^  by  himsilf 
is  take  for  ]?is  moost  famous.  Of  ]?is  synne  shal  the  Gost 
repreve  men  of  ])is  world. 

Secoundly  shal  Jjis  Goost  repreve  men  of  ri-^twisnesse  ]?at  )?ei 
shulden  have  to  Crist  and  unkyndely  wanten  it.  For  sich  a 
messanger  should  be  worshipid  of  alle  men,  and  heried,  for 
sich  a  message,  si])  it  was  so  profitable.  And  so  ]>e  world 
shal  be  dampned  for  wanting  of  ]?is  ri3twisnesse,  and  spe- 
cialy,  for  siche  a  persone  goip  ayn  to  his  Fadir.  And  ])at 
shewi}?  ))at  Crist  is  J)e  secounde  persone  in  Trinite,  and  so 
bi  his  godhede  evene  wi])  his  Fadir,  and  bi  his  manheed  lasse, 
but  even  in  kynde  wi]>  his  bre])eren.  And  )jus  ri^t  wole 
axe  |>at  |)is  persone  were  worshipid. 

pe  jjridde  tyme  shal  ))is  Goost  reprove  men  of  pis  worlds  for 
pei  jugide  folily  \2X.  Crist  was  led  by  a  fend.  And  5it  ))e  most 
hie  fend,  prince  of  pis  worlde,  is  now  juged  to  helle,  for  he 
temp  tide  ])us  Crist  and  dide  him  unworshipe. 

3//,  seij>  Crist,  V  have  many  pingis  to  seie  to  '^ou,  but  y  may 
not  here  hem  now ;  but  pe  spirit  of  treupe  shal  come  to  ^ou, 
and  teche  you  alle  treupe^  and  make  50U  strong  to  here  treujie 
to  suffryng  of  dee]?,  perfore  |)is  good  maister  shal  here  by- 
gynne  for  to  teche  j)e  boke  of  lyfe,  and  he  shal  nevere  ende 
to  teche,  til  ]?at  his  disciplis  comen  to  hevene ;  and  J?ere  J>ei 
shal  clerely  knowe  eche  treu)>e  J>at  men  can  telle.  He  shal  not 
speke  of  himsilf,  wijjouten  ony  cause  bifore,  but  al  pingis  pat 
he  shal  here  of  the  Fadir  and  of  ])e  Sone  shal  he  speke  and  telle 


The  world 
reproved 
of  unbelief, 


of  unrighteous- 
ness, 


of  rash  judg- 
ment. 


SERMONS. 


'  taken,  E. 
L 


The  teaching 
of  the  Holy 
Ghost. 


J  46 


WFCLIF'S 


The  double 
procession  of 
the  Holy 
Ghost. 


Explanation 
of  verse  7. 


30U,  and  5e  shal  after  teche  his  Chirche.  A  nd  pingis  pat  here 
after  ben  to  come  shal  pis  Goost  telle  yyti.  For  Jje  apostlis  knewun 
here  al  ]>at  now  is  nede  to  knowe,  for  in  |?is  mesure  ledde 
God  hem,  and  movede  hem  to  do  his  dedis.  He  chargide 
hem  not  wi]?  ydel  witt  \2X  herfore  |>ei  shulden  be  proud,  but  alle 
]>at  nedide  hem  to  kunne,  J;ei  kouden  ]?at  redely.  pz>  Goost 
shal  clarifie  me,  for  he  shal  take  of  myne  and  shewe  y)u  ])e  treujie 
jjat  Y  am  and  ]jat  Y  have.  And  so  in  knowing  of  ]>is  treu])e 
\q  apostlis  shal  wele  knowe  Crist,  how  bi  his  godhede  he  is 
ever  wi])  Jje  Fadir,  and  anentis  his  manhede,  he  is  evere  in  kynde 
wi])  his  brejjeren.  But  in  grace  of  oonhede  he  passi]?  alle  ojjer 
men  ]jat  may  be,  sij)  no  man  may  be  God  but  he,  and  welle 
of  grace  as  he  is.  And  herfore  Crist  declari]>  him  silf,  and 
sei}>,  pat  alle  pat  his  Fadir  hap  ben^  hise,  and  herfore  he  seide 
pat  pe  Goost  shal  take  of  his  and  shewe  to  his  disciplis,  as  ben 
]?e  apostlis  and  oJ?er  after. 

And  in  j^ese  heye  wordis  of  witt,  Crist  techi]?  how  he  wi|) 
his  Fadir  is  |je  same  God  in  kynde,  and  bryngi])  forj)  ]?e 
Holy  Goost.  For  ellis  j^e  Fadir  hadde  ))is  Goost,  and  Crist 
hadde  not  ]>\s  same  Goost,  and  so  not  al  ]>at  ]>q  Fadir  ha]> 
had  Crist  as  verre  God.  But  sij>  |)is  word  of  Crist  is  so]?,  it 
shewij>  openly  |?at  Crist  is  God  and  of  him  wi]?  his  Fadir 
come|>  for])  ])e  Holy  Goost.  pis  Holy  Goost  may  not  be 
made,  but  ever  come]?  forj?  of  J)es  two,  as  ^if  ]?e  shynynge 
of  ]?e  Sonne  come  for}?  evere  of  li5t  and  bri3tnesse.  But,  for 
}?is  sentence  is  myche  hid  fro  witt  of  }?e  comoun  peple,  ]?erfore 
shulde  preestis  shapen  of  ]?e  wordis  of  ]?is  gospel,  what  my^t 
profite  to  his  puple  after  undirstondinge  of  hem. 

And  we  shulden  marke  ]?is  word  of  Crist  whan  he  sei]?  to  his 
disciplis,  but  3if  he  go  fro  hem  to  hevene,  he  shal  not  sende  to 
hem  ]?e  Holy  Goost ;  and  many  men  musen  of  }?es  wordis,  si]? 
Crist  was  every  where  almy5ty,  and  so  he  my^t  as  wele  in  erjje 
as  in  hevene  sende  hem  }?is  Goost.  Lord !  what  nedid  Crist  to 
stye  and  speke  wi}?  mou}?  wi}?  }?is  Goost.  Sich  wordis  shewen 
men  ful  rude  to  conseyve  }?is  mater,  and  }?erfore  it  were  nede 
to  hem  to  knowe  witt  of  }?es  wordis.     We  shal  trowe  }?at  Cristis 


h,  E. 


SERMONS. 


^M 


disciplis  loveden  him  here  to  fleishly,  and  \q\  musten  be  purgid 
here  of  |)is  love  bi  \t  Holy  Goost ;  and  ]>es  ]>ingis  my3t  best 
be  done  whan  manhede  of  Crist  was  fro  hem.  And  ]?us  for 
rudenesse  of  apostlis,  Crist  sei]j  ])at  it  spedi|>  jjat  he  go  fro  hem, 
but  he  dwelli])  bi  his  godhede  and  his  vertue  ever  wi)>  hem. 
And  herfore  he  seij?  anojjer  tyme,  j^at  he  is  al  daies  wi]?  hem 
unto  )>e  eende  of  ]jis  world,  bi  Godhede  and  vertue  of  his 
manhede.  And  })us  whan  Crist  was  went  to  hevene,  his 
apostlis  weren  clere  in  love,  and  leften  |)e  love  of  erjjely  Jjingis, 
and  jjou^ten  clenly  of  hevenly  ]?ingis. 

And  of  jjis  witt  taken  sum  men  |>at  it  falli]?  not  to  Cristis  viker 
ne  to  preestis  of  holy  Chirche  to  have  rentis  here  in  er]je.  But 
Jesus  shulde  be  her  rente,  as  he  sei]?  ofte  in  the  olde  lawe;  and 
j?er  bodily  sustynaunce  ]?ei  shulden  have  of  Goddis  parte,  as  of 
dymes  and  offryngis  and  o]>er  almes  taken  in  mesure ;  |je  which 
by  ])er  holy  lyf  Jjei  abliden  hem^  to  take  ])us.  Lord  !  si]?  |)e  bodi  of 
Crist  undisposid  \q  apostlis  to  take  jjis  Goost,  myche  more  shulde 
worldely  lordship  unable  men  now  to  take  )>is  Goost.  And 
si]>  \€\  have  now  o  Goost,  it  is  lycly  bi  J)er  dedis  jjat  ]?ei  have 
a  wickide  Goost  ]?at  ledi]?  hem  an  yvel  wey.  And  in  ]?es  wordis 
we  may  see  hou  religiouse  ]?at  ben  to  day,  drawen  more  to  ]?er 
abite  and  to  J)er  stynkynge  ordenaunce,  ]?an  Crist  wolde  ]?at  his 
apostlis  chargiden  J)anne^l^  presence  of  his  bodi.  And  herfore 
Crist  sent  his  apostlis  aloone,  scaterynge  into  ]je  world,  and 
certis  J^ei  weren  more  able  now  ]?an  whan  he  sent  hem  two  and 
two ;  for  now  \€\  weren  rype  by  J?e  Holy  Goost  more  sadly 
Jjan  J)ei  weren  bifore.  But  oure  freris  ]?at  ben  syke  ben  closid 
now  in  cloistre  togidere,  mo  ])an  twelve  of  Cristis  apostlis ; 
and  ]jis  seme])  by  ])e  fendis  cautel,  ])at  3if  on  blec^  not  his 
bro])er,  ano])er  worse  shulde  fylen^  hem.  And  herfore  sum 
freris  have  witt  to  holde  hem  ferre  fro  siche  a  lumpe  and  avente 
hem  in  ])e  world;  and  ]?an  shulden  \€\  have  good  goost,  for 
})us  did  Crist  wij?  his  disciplis,  and  him  \q\  shulden  suen  in  lyf. 

*  om.  C  ;  I'f ,  E ;  \>anne,  B.         ^  hlehlie,  B,  C ;  hleche,  E.         ^  defotde,  B. 

^   abliden  hem,   that   is,   qualified  A.  S.  masc.  sing,   accus.  ]>one,   the 

themselves.  reading  of  the  Douce  MS.,  \>e,  is 

^  Unless  ])anne  is  to  be  taken  as  preferable, 
representing   the    old   form   of   the 

L  2 


The  evil  of 
endowments 
and  the  suffi- 
ciency of  tithes. 


148 


WrCLIF'S 


Praying  in  the 
name  of  Christ. 


Men  who  go 
to  war  cannot 
riglitly  use  the 
Pater  noster. 


pE    FYF)>E   SONDAI    GOSPEL    AFTER    EeSTIR. 

[SERMON      LL] 

Amen,  Amen,  dico  vobis,  si  quid petieritis. — John  xvi.  [23.] 

Crist  telli]?  in  Jjis  gospel  hou  his  disciplis  shulden  be  helpid 
by  vertue  of  her  preier,  whan  he  was  styed  in  to  hevene.  And 
first  he  seij)  a  general  word,  and  taki])  bojje  his  kyndis  to  witnes, 
])at,  y/pei  axe?i  ou^t  pe  Fadir  of  hevene  in  his  name,  he  shal  ^yve  it 
hem.  But,  as  Crist  seij?,  unto  pat  tyme  his  disciplis  axiden  not  in 
his  name,  and  her/or  aftirward  shulden  pei  axen  pat pere  joie  were 
ful,  and  pei  shulden  take.  Al  ]>e  hardnesse  of  ])is  mater  is  to  cunne 
perfitly  to  axe  in  Cristis  name,  for  he  shal  have  }>at  axi])  jjus. 
But  si)?  oure  Jesus  is  treu]?e  and  hel]?e  of  men  |?at  trowun  in  him, 
|)at  man  axij?  in  Cristis  name,  ))at  axij?  in  treu}?e  his  soule  helj?e. 
Crist  is  moost  lord  of  al,  and  ]?erfore  he  wole  have  dispit,  but 
jif  men  axen  him  a  greet  ]?ing ;  ffor  ellis  his  lordship  and  }>at 
axing  acorden  not  to  his  name.  And  so,  ^if  ]?ou  wilt  axe  in 
Cristis  name,  axe  }?e  blisse  )?at  evere  shal  laste ;  and  si|?  Crist 
is  treu])e  and  resoun,  loke  ]7i  axinge  be  resonable,  and  )?an 
maist  ]?ou  be  sure  to  have  )?e  ]?ing  ))at  )?ou  axist  |?us.  And 
herfore  Crist  in  J?is  gospel  biddi]?  us  to  axe  oure  ful  joie,  and  ]?an 
shal  we  have  it,  if  |?at  we  axen  it  in  resoun ;  for  no  man  haj? 
but  half  joie,  but  ^if  he  be  ful  of  blisse.  And  |)is  greet  lord 
wole  not  be  axid  but  ]?is  blisse,  or  menes  ]?erto ;  and  jif  man 
axe  ]?us  in  resoun  ]?at  he  be  wor]?i  to  have  it,  he  shal  have  it 
wi]?outen  doute  whan  best  tyme  were  |?at  he  hadde  it ;  and  he 
shal  have  on  J)e  best  manere  |?e  )?ing  \2X  he  axij?  ]?us. 

And  herfore  J?e  seven  axingis  })at  Crist  techi]?  in  |je  Pater  noster 
mene]? '  ]?is  forme  of  axinge ;  and  algatis  to  axe  in  charite  ;  and 
]?erfore  men  |?at  lyven  in  werre  ben  unable  to  have  )?er  axinge : 
but  |?ei  axen  ]?er  owne  dampnynge  in  jje  fifte  peticioun,  for 
)7er  j?ei  axen  ]?at  God  for^yve  hem  j?er  dettis  ]?at  )>ei  owen  to 
hym,  rijt  as  |)ei  for^yven  men  j?at  ben  dettours  unto  hem.     And 

*  So  in  B ;  menen,  E,  C  ;  movs)>,  A. 


SERMONS. 


149 


here  we  shal  undirstonde  |>at  ech  man  is  dettour  to  God,  and 
ech  man  owi))  to  eche  o]?er  to  do  him  good  in  charite.  And 
so  failynge  to  love  God  of  al  |>in  herte  and  alle  )?i  wille,  ]?ou 
rennest  in  grete  dette  bo]>e  ajens  God  and  man.  And  so  in 
J)is  fifte  axing  |?es  men  ]>at  werren  now-a-daies,  axen  him  as  ]?ei 
wolden  mene, — for5}'ve  us  for  we  ben  even  wi|)  \ee,  or  ellis  take 
venjaunce  in  ire  of  us,  as  we  taken  vengeaunce  of  oure  bre- 
jjeren.  And  |jis  is  noo  good  praier,  but  more  axinge  of  Goddis 
venjaunce ;  and  for  J)is  cause  many  men  ben  unherd  in  J>er 
praier,  and  turned  in  to  more  yvel  for  j^ere  unskilful  praier. 
And  siche  men  weren  better  to  leve  |)an  to  preien  on  sich 
maner.  For  many  men  preien  for  venjaunce  and  for  worldis 
prosperite,  and  in  j>e  ire  of  God  he  5yve)>  hem  |?at  jjei  axen ; 
but  it  were  beter  to  hem  to  preye  not  J)us,  ne  to  have  )jes  Jjingis. 
And  ]>us  men  of  contrarie  londis  preien  God  in  grete  pro- 
cessiouns ;  and  for  unworjjinesse  of  her  preier  hem  were  beter 
to  sitten  at  home.  And,  for  men  witen  not  for  what  ]?ing  ])ei 
shulden  preie  God  in  siche  causis,  })erfore  good  lyvynge  pro- 
fitij)  more,  and  jie  Holy  Goost  axi]?  |?an  for  hem.  And  who 
ever  stere^  men  to  yvel  lyfe,  ^if  ^  J?ei  ben  freris  J>at  crien  heye, 
God  heerejj  hem  not  to  good,  but  rajjer  to  take  venjaunce  on 
hem.  For  Crist  sei]?,  ])at  not  ech  man  ])at  sei]?  to  him  Lord, 
Lord,  shal  come  in  to  J>e  blis  of  hevene,  but  he  j^at  eendij> 
in  ri5t  lyf,  for  he  preie|>  in  ]?e  name  of  ]?e  Trinite.  And  j?us 
5ebedeus  sones  preieden  for  good,  but  in  yvel  manere.  And 
so  algatis  ry5t  lyf  is  J)e  beste  in  mannis  preier,  for  siche  lyfe 
preiej)  beter  to  God  J^an  hie  voicis  of  ypocritis. 

And  after  sei])  Crist  to  his  apostlis,  J)at  pes  pingis  he  seide 
bifore  to  hem  in  proverbis  and  mystily;  but  fiow  is  come  tyme  whan 
he  shal  not  speke  ])US  unto  hem  in  proverbis,  but  apertly  of  his  Fadir 
he  shal  telle  hem  as  best  is.  In  pat  daie  shal  Cristen  men  axe  in 
Cristis  name  unto  ]?er  blisse.  And  now  he  seip  unto  he??i  pat  he 
shal  preie  his  Fadir  0/^  hefn,  for  |)ei  shal  be  mateer  to  Crist  and 
make  his  rewme.  Wherfore  he  preie]?,  pat  pe  Fadir  love  pes 
apostlis  and  ojjer  men  ])at  suen  him,  for  pei  loveden  Jesus  Crist 
and  trowiden  pat  he  cam  fro  God;  ^he,  }>at  Crist  bi  his  manhede 


Good  life 
better  than 
imperfect 
prayers. 


*  stire\^,  E. 


''  cthif,  E. 


'  for,  E. 


I50 


WYCLIF'S 


came  of  God  in  his  godhede.  Crist  cam  fro  pe  Fadir  and  cam 
in  to  pe  world,  and  now  whan  Crist  haj)  done  his  message,  he 
forsakip  ayii  pe  world,  and  goij)  bi  manhede  to  his  Fadir.  And 
Cristis  disciplis  seiden  to  him,  Lo,  now  pou  spekist  opynly,  and pou 
seist  now  noo  proverbe ;  and  per/ore  we  witen  wele  pat  pou  knowist 
alle  pingis,  and  it  is  to  pe  no  nede  pat  ony  man  axe  pe  ou^t,  for 
]>ou  wost  bifore  |)e  axinge,  what  men  shulde  axen  and  what 
]>ingis  leve.  In  pis  we  trowen  pat  pou  come  fro  God  as  his 
owne  sone. 

And  })is  bileve  is  ground  to  men  to  have  of  God  what  ]?at 
hem  nedi]),  and  to  wite  what  is  best  to  hem,  al  ^if  it  displese 
to  \q  world.  But,  as  men  |>at  ben  in  feveris  desire  not  J)at 
were  best  for  hem,  so  men  here  in  synne  coveiten  not  best 
Jjing  for  hem.  For  |)e  world  seide  ]?at  ]?e  apostlis  weren  foolis 
and  forsaken  of  God,  and  so  it  wolde  seie  todaie  of  men  }>at 
lyveden  lyke  to  hem,  for  worldis  joie  and  eerjjely  good  plesi]> 
to  hem,  wi]?  meenes  ]?erto,  and  |>ei  saveron^  not  hevenly  good 
ne  ri^t  suyng  after  Crist.  And  })is  jugement  now  in  J>e  world 
is  open  witnesse  a5ens  men,  \2X  \€\  be  not  hoole  in  soule,  but 
turned  amys  to  worldely  Jjingis.  For  as  a  mou]?  of  a  syke  man 
distempered  fro  good  mete,  move]?  him  for  to  coveite  jjingis 
contrarie  to  his  helj^e,  so  it  is  of  mannis  soule  ]?at  savoure]?  not 
Goddis  lawe.  And  as  wanting  of  appetit  is  a  signe  dedly  to 
man,  so  wanting  of  Goddis  witt  is  signe  of  his  secounde  dee]>. 
And  jugement  |?at  now  regnej)  of  worldely  prosperite  is  token 
of  men  ]?at  \€\  ben  foolis  and  saveren  not  of  Goddis  lawe. 
For  J>e  world  sei]?  comounly  Jjat  ^if  a  man  have  worldely  blisse 
and  })e  world  lei5e^  to  him  in  killynge  of  his  enemyes,  ]?an  God 
love])  him  and  doij?  miraclis  for  his  sake.  But,  Lord !  where  is 
oure  bileve  J^at  we  shulde  trowe  in  love  of  God,  |>at  it  stondi]) 
not  in  |)is  but  ra]?er  hate  of  God !  And,  as  Gregori  sei|)^  as 
a  bole  )>at  shal  be  kild  goij?  in  corn  at  his  wille,  and  is  not 
pyned^  ne  Irayeilid  wi]?  o)?er  beestis ;  so  a  lyme  of  )?e  fend  is 
left  fro  )je  grace  of  God,  to  figure  his  dampnacioun,  and  suffrid 


^  saveren,  E. 
A  has  pyiidid. 


J 


2  joye,  C.  •"  So  in  B  ;   pynyd,   E  ;    pynde,   C  ; 

"'  I  have  been  unable  to  verify  this  reference. 


SERMONS. 


i5» 


to  do  myche  harme  here,  to  large  his  peyne  aftirward.  We 
shulden  leve  |)es  sensible  signes  and  take  ensample  of  holy 
men,  as  of  Crist  and  of  his  apostlis ;  hou  ]?ei  hadden  not  her 
blisse  here.  But  here  Crist  ordeynede  peynes  and  hate  of  J)e 
world  and  pursuyng  to  men  )>at  he  moost  lovede,  to  teche  us 
}>at  come  after  hem.  And  |>us  signes  of  paciens  and  pursuynge 
in  J)is  er]?e  shulde  be  tokens  of  Goddis  love  and  not  signes 
of  Antecrist. 


PE   SIXTE   SONDAI   GOSPEL  AFTER   EeSTIR. 

[SERMON     LIL] 

Cuvi  venerit  Paraclitus. — John  xv.  [26.] 

Crist  telli]?  his  disciplis  of  comyng  of  Jje  Confortour,  ]?e 
which  is  Jje  Holy  Goost,  and  what  lyf  jjei  shal  after  lede.  And 
ech  man  shulde  cunne  here  |?is  lore,  for  J>an  he  may  be  soulis 
leche,  and  wite,  bi  signes  of  his  life,  wher  his  soule  be  seke  or 
hoole.  Lord !  sij)  a  fisician  lerne})  diligentli  his  signes,  in  veyne, 
in  pows\  and  ojjer  |)ingis,  wher  a  mannis  bodi  be  hool;  how 
myche  more  shulde  he  knowe  sich  signes  ]?at  tellen  hel]?e  of 
mannis  soule,  and  how  he  ha]?  him  to  God.  Al3if  siche  J>ingis 
ben  pryve  and  passen  worldly  witt  of  men,  nejjeles  ]?e  Holy 
Goost  telli])  men  sum  of  siche  signes,  and  makij>  hem  more 
certeyne  }jan  men  can  juge  of  bodily  hel])e.  And,  for  we 
shulden  kyndely  desire  for  to  knowe  \q  soulis  state,  ])erfore  ]?e 
Holy  Goost,  ]?at  techij?  us  to  knowe  jjes  signes,  is  clepid  a  con- 
fourtour  of  men,  passinge  o|)er  confortours.  And  as  a  mannis 
soule  is  beter  ]?an  |)e  bodi,  and  endeles  good  passi})  temporal 
good,  so  J)is  knowynge  of  j)e  soule  passi]?  o|)er  mannis 
cunnynge. 

Crist  sei)>  j^us  to  his  disciplis.  Whan  pis  confortour  shal  come 
pat  Y  shal  sende  '^ou  of  pe  Fadir,  Goost  of  treupe  pat  comcp  forp 
of  hhn,  he  shal  also  here  ivitnesse  of  vie;   and  y  shal  also  here 


The  mission  of 
the  Comforter. 


^  pouie,  E ;  powsey  C. 


152 


WrCLIF'S 


The  doctrine 
of  the  double 
procession, 


a  doubtful 
point : 


other  points 
more  need  to 
be  determined ; 
e.  g.  the  autho- 
rity of  the 
Pope,  and  the 
duty  of  private 
confession. 


On  the 
overgrown 
authority  of 
the  Popes^ 


witnesse,  for  y  ben  wip  me  alwey  fro  pe  bigyjinynge  of  my 
prechinge.  But  here  may  Grekes  be  moved  to  trowe  |>at  |)e 
Holy  Goost  come]>  not  for]?  but  of  jje  Fadir  and  not  of  Crist 
\2X  is  his  sone ;  for  \t  toon  sei]>  Crist,  and  in  |)is  gospel  leve]> 
]>e  to]?er.  And  it  seme]?  to  sum  men,  ^if  jjis  were  treu])e  \2X 
shulde  be  trowid,  God  wolde  li3tly  telle  |)is  treuj)e  as  he  telli)> 
ojjer  |>at  we  trowen;  and  ellis  it  were  presumpcioun  to  charge 
])e  Chirche  \\\\  })is  trujje,  sij?  neijjer  autorite  of  God,  ne  resoun, 
techi)?  |?at  |)is  is  so]) ;  and  al  bileve  nedeful  to  men  is  tolde  hem 
in  }?e  lawe  of  God.  Here  me  ]?inki})  Jjat  Latynes  synneden  sum 
what  in  J>is  poynt,  for  many  o])er  pointis  weren  now  more 
nedeful  to  \q  Chirche ;  as  it  were  more  nedeful  to  wite,  where 
al  ])is  Chirche  hange  in  power  of  ])e  pope,  as  it  is  seid  comounly, 
and  where  men  ])at  shal  be  savyd  ben  nedid  here  to  shryve 
hem  to  preestis,  and  ])us  of  many  degrees  \2X  ]je  pope  ha]>  li5tly 
ordeyned.  But  me  ])inki])  ])at  it  is  so})  \2X  ])is  Goost  come]) 
bo]>e  of  ])e  Fadir  and  of  })e  Sone,  and  ])es  persones  ben  o  cause 
of  him ;  and  me  ])inki]),  to  noon  entent  shulde  Crist  seye,  he 
sendi])  ])is  Goost,  or  })at  })is  Goost  is  his,  but  3if  ])is  Goost  come 
of  him.  And  to  })is  ])at  Grekes  seien,  j?at  Crist  leve])  ])is  word, 
certis  so  doi])  he  many  o])er  for  certein  cause,  and  3it  we 
trowen  hem ;  as  Crist  sei])  his  lore  is  not  his,  for  it  is  principaly 
his  Fadris;  and  3it  we  trowen  \2X  it  is  his,  but  ])e  welle  is  in 
his  Fadir.  So  we  trowen  })at  ])e  wille  bi  which  ])e  Fadir  love]) 
jje  Sone  come])  of  witt  \2X  is  ])e  Sone,  but  principaly  of  Goddis 
power.  And  in  ])is  word  Crist  techi])  us  to  do  algatis  worship 
to  God.  And  ])us  })es  Grekes  may  not  prove  })at  we  trowen 
fals  in  ])is  bileve,  or  Jjat  Crist  lefte  })is  treu])e,  wi])Outen  cause  to 
telle  it  ])us ;  for  bi  })is  })at  Crist  sei]),  ])e  Holy  Goost  came  of  his 
Fadir,  and  leve])  ])us  })e  comynge  of  him,  he  stoppi])  ])e  pride 
of  ])e  Chirche  and  techi])  men  to  worshipe  God.  But  whan  he 
sei])  ])at  he  sendi])  })e  Holy  Goost  to  his  disciplis,  and  alle  ])at 
his  Fadir  ha])  ben  his,  he  techi])  clerely  ])at  ])is  Goost  come]?  of 
him ;  and  o])er  wise  shulde  Crist  not  speke. 

And  ])us  Latyns  ben  to  blame,  for  ])ei  leven  nedeful  treu])e,  and 
depen  hem  in  ojjer  treu})e,  ])at  is  now  not  so  nedeful.  And  ])us 
seien  sum  men  [>at  ])e  bishop  of  Rome,  j)at  ])ei  clepen  heed  of  })e 
Chirche,  and  ]7erto  pope,  and  Cristis  viker,  doi])  more  harme  to  ])e 


SERxMONS. 


'53 


Chirche  of  Crist  ))an  doi}>  vikcr  of  Thomas  in  Inde^,  or  viker  of 
Poul  in  Grees,  or  \e  Soudan  of  Babilon.  For  |>e  rote  of  which  he 
came,  ]?at  is  dowynge  of  \e  Chirche  and  heyng  of  jie  emperoure, 
is  not  ful  holy  ground,  but  envenymed  wij)  synne.  But  ])is 
venym  first  was  htil,  and  hid  by  cautelis  of  ))e  fend,  but  now 
it  is  growen  to  myche  and  to  hard  to  amende.  So)>  it  is  jjat 
ech  apostle  was  obedient  to  ech  oj?er,  as  Petre  obeishid  unto 
Poul  whan  he  reprovede  hym;  and  ))us  ]?enken  sum  men  jiat 
J)ei  shulden  obeishe  to  ))e  pope,  but  no  more  ]?an  Crist  biddij>, 
no  more  Jjan  to  o]?er  preestis,  but  5if  he  teche  bettre  Goddis 
wille  and  more  profitij)^  to  men;  and  so  of  alle  his  ordenaunce, 
but  3if  it  be  groundid  in  Goddis  lawe,  sette  no  more  prys  j^erby 
|)an  bi  law^  of  ])e  emperoure.  Men  shulden  seie  myche  in  J>is 
matere,  and  o]?er  men  shulden  do  in  dede;  but  men  wolden 
holde  hem  heretikes,  as  \e  fendis  lymes  diden  Crist.  And  so 
|>icke  ben  his  m.embris  }>at  who  so  holdi]>  wi}>  Cristis  lawe,  he 
shal  be  schent  many  weyes  and  algatis  wij>  lesyngis. 

And  ]jis  telli]>  Crist  bifore  unto  his  postlis,  to  make  hem 
stronge  and  arme  hem  a^ens  siche  persecuciouns.  \>espingis,  seip 
he,  Y spake  to  you,  pat  y  be  not  sdaundrid.  He  is  sclaundrid  )>at 
is  lettid  by  word  or  by  dede,  so  ])at  his  ri3t  wille  falle  doun  fro  his 
witt ;  and  so  3if  a  man  be  pursued  and  suffre  it  paciently,  he  is 
not  sclaundrid,  al  3if  men  synnen  a5ens  him.  pe  first  pursuyt 
a5ens  Crist  shal  be  of  false  preestis,  not  al  oonly  lettyng  j?e 
membris  of  Crist  to  reule  jje  puple  in  chirchis,  as  curatis 
shulden  do,  but  putte  hem  out  of  chirche  as  cursid  men  or 
heretikes.  And  herfore  sei]?  Crist  jjat  ]?ei  shal  make  30U  ivipout 
synagogis.  But  3it  shal  more  woodnesse  come  after  )?is,  for  ]>ei 
procuren  \q  puple,  bo}>e  more  and  lasse,  to  kille  Cristis  disciplis 
for  hope  of  grete  mede.     And  herfore  Crist  seij)  certeyn  of  ])is 

'  ^.rofite,  E. 


»  The  tradition  of  the  visit  of  the 
apostle  Thomas  to  India  is  of  later 
origin  than  the  time  of  Eusebius, 
being  first  mentioned  by  writers  of 
the  close  of  the  fourth,  and  begin- 
ning of  the  fifth  century,  such  as 
Gregory  Nazianzen,  St.  Ambrose, 
and  St.  Jerome.  The  Christians 
found    in    Malabar    by    St.   P>ancis 


Xavier  certainly  called  themselves 
'  Christians  of  St.  Thomas  ; '  but 
this  is  supposed  by  many  to  have  ■ 
arisen  from  a  confusion  between  the 
apostle  and  a  Nestorian  missionary. 
(Dean  Stanley,  article  'Thomas;' 
Smith's  Bihl.  Diet.;  Kitto's  Cyclo- 
piEdia.) 


Persecution. 


^54 


WVC  LIE'S 


The  wiles  of 
the  evil  one. 


mater,  pat  hour  is  come  pat  ech  man  pat  killip  pus  good  men,  shal 
juge  ht?n  to  do  to  God  medeful  obedie?ice.  And  to  ])is  ende  pro- 
curer! freris,  Antecristis  disciplis,  |?at  wel  ny5e  it  is  J)us  now 
among  Cristene  men.  Sum  men  be  sumnyd  to  Rome  and 
)>ere  putt  in  prisoun,  and  sum  ben  cryed  as  heretikes  among 
])e  comoun  peple ;  and  over  |?is,  as  men  seien,  freris  killen  J)er 
owen  bre])eren,  and  procuren  men  of  J)e  world  to  kille  men  ])at 
seien  hem  treujje.  And  oo  drede  lettij>  hem  ]?at  ]?ei  stirte  not 
to  more  woodnesse,  for  ]jei  defenden  J)at  it  is  leveful  and  mede- 
ful, preestis  for  to  fi3t  in  cause  jjat  J)ei  feynen  Goddis ;  and  so 
5if  ]7er  parte  be  stronger  ]?an  seculers,  |jei  may  move  )>es  preestis 
to  fi5t  a^ens  ]?es  gentiimen.  And  as  ])ei  have  robbid  hem  of 
temporal  goodis,  so  jjei  wole  pryve  hem  of  swerde  as  unable, 
and  seie  ]?at  sich  fi3ting  shulde  best  falle  to  preestis.  pus 
hadden  preestis  jjis  swerd  bifore  J>at  Crist  cam,  and  ]?ei  drowun 
so  ferre  out  of  religioun  of  God  til  J^at  ])ei  hadden  kild  Crist, 
heed  of  holy  Chirche. 

Alle  men  shulden  be  ware  of  cautelis  of  })e  fend,  for  he 
slepi}?  not,  castynge  fals  weies,  and  al  ])es  done  fendis 
lymes ;  /or  pei  knowen  not  pe  Fadir  ajid  his  sone  bi  propertees 
of  hem.  pe  fend  blyndi]?  hem  so  in  worldly  purpos,  Jjat  J)ei 
knowen  not  strengj^e  of  God  ne  wisdom  of  his  bidding ;  for 
fei|)  faili])  unto  hem  ]?at  |)ei  loken  not  aferre,  but  ]jing  |)at  is 
ny^e  ]?er  eye,  as  beestis  wi])0Uten  resoun.  Alle  pis  hap  Crist 
spoke  to  his  disciplis  pat  whaii  tyme  cojnep  of  het?i,  pei  shulden  pan 
have  mynde  pat  he  hap  seid  he?n  pes  perelis  to  come.  And  ]?e 
Holy  Goost  move])  ever  sum  men  to  studie  Goddis  lawe  and 
have  mynde  of  ]jis  witt ;  and  so  love  of  Goddis  lawe  and  sadde 
savoure  jjerynne,  is  token  to  men  J?at  \€\  ben  Goddis  children, 
but  3it  of  jjer  ende  j?ei  ben  uncerteyn. 


M^^-y^^iifr^^^^^^— 


SERMONS. 


^55 


pE  Gospel  on  Witt  Sondai. 

[SERMON     LI  II.] 

Si  quis  diligit  me. — John  xiv.^  [23.] 

In  ]?is  gospel  move]?  Crist  his  children  to  love,  for  charite 
is  ]>e  best  cloi]?  |)at  ony  man  may  have ;  and  herfore  sei]> 
Goddis  lawe  |>at  love  is  stronge  as  dee]?,  for  love  moveJ>  men 
to  suffre  dee|)  gladly,  in  Goddis  cause.  And  where  dej)  is  jje 
moste  J>ing  ]?at  man  dredij>  here,  ]?is  love  passij?  kynde  and 
maki|?  men  to  coveite  siche  dee|>;  and  |>is  wille  is  not  harmful 
but  glorious  to  men,  si|>  bi  siche  love  men  brennen  as  coolis^, 
and  turnen  in  to  Goddis  clo]?is  as  angelis  of  hevene.  First 
seij?  Crist  )>us,  yf  ony  man  love  him,  he  shulde  kepe  his  word,  for 
\2X  is  ]?e  same  treuj)e ;  and  sij)  God  is  kynde  a3en  to  men  \2X 
loven  him  ))us,  Crist  sei|)  jjat  his  Fadir  shal  love  him  ayn;  and 
5if  his  Fadir  love  a  man,  ]>e  two  o|?er  persones  love]?'^  him,  and 
al  siche  love  of  God  mut  nedis  be  evermore.  And  }?e  manhede 
of  Crist  worchi]?  |)us  bi  ])is  love ;  it  shal  brynge  wip  Crist  siche 
membris  0/  him  to  hevene,  and  so  to  clere  si3t  of  Jjc  holy  Trinite. 
A7id  so  Crist  wip  his  membris  shal  make  pere  per  dwellinge  wij>- 
outen  ony  ende,  bi  love  of  ]?e  Holy  Goost ;  for  seintis  in 
hevene  may  not  passe  ]>is  ende,  for  ]?an  ]jei  wxren  foolis 
chesynge  a  worse  eende. 

For  Crist  wolde  shewen  oonhede  to  loven  him  and  to  kepen 
his  wordis ;  ]?erfore  he  sei]?  efte.  He  pat  lovep  him  not,  he  kepip 
not  hise  wordis.  And  herfore  Crist,  discryvynge  a  man  |>at 
love]?  him,  seij>  ]jus  after  in  ]>e  same  gospel.  He  pat  hap 
?ny  comandementis  and  kepip  hem  in  his  lyfe,  he  is  pat  ilke 
pat  lovep  me  weP.  Here  may  we  wite*  where  a  man  love 
God,    for  3if  he    love|>   God,  he  love])  his   lawe    and  wordis 


Christ  moves 

his  children 
to  love, 


which  is  the 
same  thing 
as  to  keep 
his  command- 
ments. 


*  So  in  E ;  both  A  and  B  have  xviii,  erroneously. 
E  and  B ;  A  and  C  give  no  marks  of  quotation. 


colts,  B. 


So 


*  This  is  the  old  phiral  present       proceeding  directly  from  the  West 
indicative  of  the  Southern  dialect,       Saxon  form  lujia'6. 


156 


WYCLI  F'S 


What  these 
command- 
ments are, 


the  Holy  Ghost 
teaches  us, 


through  the 
peace  of 
Christ. 


of  J?e  gospel,  for  alle  ]?ei  comen  to  oon ;  and  3if  he  love]>  not 
Goddis  lawe  he  love]?  not  his  God.  And  herfore  ech  man  \2X 
lovej)  not  Goddis  word,  jjat  he  wolde  not  die  Jjerfore  to  defende 
it,  he  loveJ)  not  his  God  as  he  shulde  love  him ;  for  it  is  al  oone 
to  love  God  and  to  love  his  word,  and  as  myche  as  \ow.  lovest 
God,  shuldist  jjou  love  his  word.  But  for  love  of  J>i  God,  |?ou 
shuldist  lese  jji  lyfe,  and  so  |)0u  shouldist  lese  ]?i  lyfe  for  defence 
of  Cristis  word;  and  in  cowardise  of  ]?is  love  ben  many  men 
smyttid,  but  kny3tis  bi  ))er  ordre  shulden  be  redy  in  J>is  love. 
But,  for  Crist  ha]?  seid  J)at  men  shulden  kepe  hise  wordis,  many 
men  my3ten  muse  what  ]?ing  ben  J>ese  wordis.  But  Crist  sei]?  ]?at 
alle  }?es  wordis  ben  treujjes,  as  ten  treujjis  of  ])e  comandementis, 
and  alle  ben  wi])OUten  ende ;  and  so  he  ]>at  kepi]?  not  J?e  wordis 
of  Crist,  he  kepij?  not  his  o  word/^  7vhich  pei  have  herd,  and  pis 
0  word  which  pei  have  herd  is  not  Cristis,  but  his  Fadris.  For 
it  is  Cristis  persone,  and  Crist  is  not  Cristis  sone,  but  ]?e  Sone 
of  ]?e  Fadir ;  and  ]?us  we  may  see  wor]?inesse  of  Goddis  word. 
Wordis  of  God  ben  many  by  diversite  of  resoun,  but  al  ]>ei 
rennen  to  gidere  in  o  myddil  poynte,  and  so  \€\  ben  alle 
Goddis  word,  ]>at  is  him  silfe.  And,  for  J)es  wordis  ben  mysty 
and  derke  to  ])e  puple,  ])erfor  3yve])  Crist  hem  a  confort  in  ]?is 
matere,  and  sei]?,  pat  he  hap  spoke  pes  pingis  unto  hem  divellynge 
wip  hem,  and  ]?ei  ben  3it  mysty ;  but  pe  Con/or  tour  pat  is  pt 
Holy  Goost,  pe  which  pe  Fadir  shal  sende  in  pe  name  of  Crist, 
shal  teche  hem  alle  pitigis  ]?at  ben  now  hid  to  hem.  And  })us  it 
falli])  unto  men  to  know  rudely  first  a  ]?ing  and  generaly,  as 
philosophris  speken,  and  after  shulden  ]>ei  knowe  more  sutilly 
])e  same  ]?ing;  and  ])us  Crist  bi  his  manheed  told  first  mysty 
wordis,  and  si]?  bi  his  fynger  shewide  sutilte  of  hem.  And  3it 
})is  Holi  Goost  shal  have  order  of  }?is  lore,  for  first  he  shal 
move  mejinis  eris  in  sensible  voicis,  and  si]?  he  shal  be  slyden 
ynne  and  teche  mennis  pou^tis,  in  alle  }?at  Crist  ha]?  spoke  bifore, 
in  general  wordis.  pei  ne  shal  ceese  anoon  to  lerne  more 
sutilly,  but  ever  in  ]?is  lyf  J?ei  wexen  more  rype  til  }?at  ]?ei  comen 
to  hevene,  and  Jjere  knowe  al  fulli. 

And,  for  pees  of  mannis  soule  disposij?  him  to  lerne,  ]?erfore 
Crist  byhoti]?  his  children  ]?is  pees,  and  sei}?  J?us,  Pees  V  leve 
to  you;    and  my  pecs  V  -^yve  -^ou.      Crist   wiste   ]?at  him  silfe 


SER3fONS. 


157 


shulde  soone  passe  fro  his  children ;  ffor  on  jje  pursdaie  at 
ni3t  he  seide  to  hem  )jes  wordis,  and  on  |>e  morewe  at 
noon  he  died  for  j^er  love ;  and  herfor  he  bihi3t  hem  jjat 
he  shulde  leve  hem  pees.  But  Crist  specifie]?  ])is  general 
pees,  whanne  he  sei]?  )>at  he  3yve|>  hem  his  own  pees;  and 
))is  shal  be  first  wi]>  pursuynge  of  body,  but  it  shal  grow 
after  to  moost  ful  pees.  And  herfore  seij>  Crist  pat  not  as  pe 
ivorld  ^yvep,  he  -i^yvep  hem,  but  on  contrary  maner.  pe  world 
3yve))  jjingis  \2X  now  ben  likyng,  but  bi  processe  of  tyme  \t\ 
wexen  more  bitter,  and  so  J>ei  turnen  to  peyne  and  sorewe,  jjat 
first  weren  likynge ;  and  so  pees  of  Jjis  worlde  is  ever  more 
decresynge,  but  pees  of  God  growij)  unto  ful  pees. 

And  bi  ])es  wordis  of  witt  Crist  conforti]?  his  children,  and 
biddi]?  hem,  \2i\.  per  herte  be  not  disturblid  ne  drede;  for  who  ever 
trowe]>  fully  Jjis  sentence  ]?at  is  seid,  and  hopi)>  fully  ]jat  he  were 
of  nombre  of  |)es  children,  he  were  an  untrewe  man  ^if  J?at  he 
drede  ]?us.  Aposdis  dredden  hem  of  perelis  ]?at  weren  ny5e,  but 
|?ei  failiden  not  of  J>is  treu|)e,  )?at  Jjei  ne  shulde  have  a  good  ende, 
and  what  |)ingis  ]?at  felle  to  hem,  it  shulde  falle  to  hem  for  |)e 
betere.  And  so  as  \^  worlde  is  sikir  of  J)ing  ney3e  it,  and  in  doute 
of  ])ing  ferre,  so  in  contrary  manere  ben  Cristis  children  sikir 
of  )>er  ferre  eende,  but  of  |>er  ny3e  menes  ben  \€\  sum  tyme 
in  drede.  And  grounde  of  )>is  sentence  is  Cristen  mennis 
bileve,  and  herfore  seide  Crist,  3^  herden  how  Y  seide  to  •^ou,  V 
go  ajid  F  come  to  '^ou;  and  he  ))at  trowi]?  fully  |>es  witty  wordis 
of  Crist  he  shulde  not  drede  him  of  ])is  for  seid  sentence,  for 
Crist  seijj,  as  God  to  whom  al  ]>ing  is  present,  Y  go  and  Y  come 
to  you,  for  certeinte  herof.  And  as  Crist  was  certeyne  of  his 
dee))  and  his  steiyng  up  and  of  his  comynge  a3en  at  \q  daye 
of  dome,  so  shulden  his  children  be  certeyn  of  his  forseid, 
sentence.  And  3it  Crist  move]?  his  children  to  have  joie  of 
his  goyng,  and  ))is  was  a  point  for  which  jjei  mourneden 
moost ;  and  Crist  seij)  ))us  to  hem  to  abate  Jjer  mournynge, 
Certis,  yf ye  loveden  me,  y  shulden  have  joie  for  Y go  to  my  Fadir, 
sip  he  is  more  pan  Y;  for  |)us  bi  manheed  Y  shulde  encreese  in 
bliss,  and  he  jjat  joie)>  not  herfore,  he  love]?  not  Crist.  And  it 
is  told  bifore  hou  ech  man  shulde  love  him;  And  now  Y seide 
to  you,  bifore  it  is  falle,  pat  ivhan  it  done,  y  troiven  in  my  witt ; 


AVe  are  com- 
manded to  be 
hopeful  and  of 
good  courage. 


'5« 


WrCLlF'S 


The  visit  of 
Nicodemus. 


and  so  shulde  \>q\  trowe  to  alle  ]?ing  jjat  he  hadde  seid,  for  ]?us 
he  is  God  j^at  can  wel  al  ]jing.  And  Crist,  teching  his  children 
to  marke  beter  his  wordis,  sei|>,  pat  he  shal  speke  now  but  /ewe 
pingis  unto  hem,  but  jjei  shulde  have  moost  enemyte  here  of  j)e 
heed  fend  J>at  Crist  ha)?  overcome ;  and  |?erfore  he  telli]?  hem, 
pat  prynce  of  pis  worlde  is  come  for  to  tempte  Crist,  a7id  he  hap 
not  in  him;  and  J)us  in  Jjis  overcomynge  shulde  \€\  not  drede 
)>e  fend.  But  al  pis  is  done  pat  pe  worlde  knowe  pat  Y  love  pe 
Fadir;  and  so  shulde  5e  do,  for  alle  J?ingis  \2X  Y  do  shulden 
be  ensaumple  to  you.  And  her/or  V  do  as  my  Fadir  comandide 
me,  for  wel  Y  woot  in  J)is  may  I  not  faile.  And  al  ])is  sentence 
of  jje  gospel  of  Joon  is  fully  perteynynge  to  comynge  of  ]?e 
Holy  Goost,  and  so  redyng  of  Jjis  gospel  was  wel  ordeyned 
for  |)is  day. 


Pe  Gospel  on  1>e  Trinite  Soneday. 

[SERMON     LI  v.] 

Erat  homo  ex  Phariseeis  Nychodeme. — John  iii.  [i.] 

pis  gospel  undir  a  story  telli]?  of  J)e  Trinite,  and  bo]7e  ]?es 
ben  harde,  as  comounly  is  Jones  gospel,  pe  storye  tellij)  pat 
per  was  a  man  0/  Pharisees  pat  hi^te  Nichodeme,  and  was  priftce 
of  pe  Jew  is  ;  he  cam  to  Jesus  on  a  ny^t  and  seide  pus  to  him; 
Rabi  we  witen  wel  pat  pou  art  come  fro  God;  and  raby  is  as 
myche  as  maister  in  Englishe.  And  Nichodeme  tolde  Jje  cause 
whi  he  trowide  |>is,  for  no  man  may  make,  he  seide,  pes  signes 
pat  pou  makist,  but  yf  God  be  wip  him,  and  so  he  come]?  fro 
God.  And  Jesus  attsweride  Nychodeme,  and  seide  J)us  to  him, 
bi  my  double  kynde  Y  seie  to  |>ee,  but  yf  a  ?Jian  be  born  ayn, 
he  may  not  se  Goddis  reivme.  And  Jjes  wordis  weren  woundirful 
to  Nichodeme,  and  perfore  he  axide  where  a  nian  7ny^te  be  bore 
whan  he  were  an  old  maji,  wher  he  my^te  crepe  i?i  to  his  moder 
wojube  for  tyme  )?at  he  was  olde  and  be  born  ayn. 

pis  Nichodeme  cam  in  }je  ny3t,  \2X  figuride  his  ignoraunce, 
but  to  |>e  literal  witt,  he  dredde  him  for  his  bre}?eren,  to  come 


SERMONS. 


159 


apertly  in  )>e  day,  and  speke  \vi}>  Jesus  Crist;  and  bojje  jjes 
undirstondingis  shope  |)e  Holy  Goost.  And  so  j?is  goostly  birjje 
|?at  Nichodeme  mut  first  have  bilokene]?  )>e  Fadir  of  hevene 
]>at  J)rynge|)  for]>  two  o)?er  persones ;  and  so  Nichodeme  to  Htil 
knewe  ])is  persone  of  God,  and  for  ]jis  unknowinge  he  axide 
j)is  questioun.  For  he  seide  not  Jjat  Crist  was  kyndely  Goddis 
Sone,  ne  j^at  he  was  Goddis  word  and  so  God  him  silfe ;  and  so 
\>\s  Nichodeme  hadde  nede  to  be  cristened  in  fei]?,  and  so  Crist 
lovede  his  persone,  al3if  he  hatide  his  ordre,  for  Crist  savyde 
his  persone  and  distryede  his  ordre.  And  ]jus  Crist  lovede 
Poul,  J>at  sei]>  he  was  a  Pharisee;  but  jje  more  part  of  Pha- 
risees weren  fals  and  heretikes.  And  |)is  nativite  shewij)  Crist 
in  ]jes  wordis  ;  For  sop  ^  for  sop,  V  seie  to  pee,  hut  yf  man  be  born 
ofivater  and  pe  Holy  Goost  he  may  not  entre  in  to  Goddis  rewme. 
And  |)us  bi  ]>is  baptym,  |?is  water  and  \q  Holy  Goost,  Crist 
tolde  him  ]je  Trinite  ^if  he  koud  conseyve  it.  pis  baptym  sei]> 
|)e  Trinite,  in  whos  name  it  is  mad ;  J)is  water  is  J)e  waishinge 
jjat  ranne  of  Cristis  herte ;  and  so  baptym  and  water  and  )?e 
Holy  Goost  tellen  Nichodeme  J)e  Trinitee,  and  jjerwi]?  \q  sacra- 
ment, for  Crist  is  compendious  in  spekynge  of  his  wordis. 

But  Crist  maki]>  distynccioun  of  two  manere  of  bir])is,  and 
sei})  \2X  ping  born  of  fleishe  is  fleish  in  his  kynde,  a7id  ping  pat  is 
born  of  spirit  is  spirit  on  sum  manere ;  2iYidi  perfore,  wounder  pou 
7iot  pat  Y  seide  to  pee,  ^e  moten  be  born  ayn,  and  bi  Goost  made 
children  of  holy  Chirche,  and  so  in  spirit  maad  Goddis  children, 
and  so  his  spouse  shal  be  your  moder,  pis  gendrure  of  J)is 
Goost  is  bo]?e  free  and  wilful,  and  herfor  Crist  sei]?  to  Nicho- 
deme, ])at  pe  spirit  brepip  wher  he  wole,  and  pou  herest  his  vois 
bi  which  he  move]?  ]?ee.  And  on  \m  maner  Jje  Spirit  of  oure 
Lord  ha]?  fillid  ])is  world  wi]>  witt  of  oure  fei]?,  and  |)at  J)ing  jjat 
holdi|)  alle  ha])  science  of  vois.  And  herfore  at  Wit-Sonday 
whan  })is  Goost  apperide  was  a  greet  soun,  and  tungis  of  fier, 
to  telle  ]?at  men  shulden  speke  on  hi3t^  to  J)er  bre]?eren,  and  })ei 
shulden  have  charite,  ])e  which  sei})  })e  Holy  Goost.  And  alle 
3if  we  knowen  ])e  vois  of  |)is  Goost,  nejjeles  we  witen  not 
whennes  ])at  it  come]>  ne   whidir  jjat  it  goi]),  to  men  ])at  ben 


'  beyit,  E ;  hei-^);>e,  B ;  hei^e,  C. 


i6o 


WFCLIF'S 


biside  us;  for  we  knowen  not  ]?e  ordenaunce  of  God,  whi  he 
enspire]>  |)es  men,  and  to  what  ende,  or  whe]7er  he  shal  save 
J)is  man  or  wende  awey  from  him.  And  so  ech  man  pat  is  born 
of  pis  spirit  is  unknowun  to  o]>er  by  many  hid  resoun,  and  so 
ech  man  is  sumwhat  knowun  and  sumwhat  unknowun  for 
wisdome  of  |)is  spirit. 

But  Nichodenie  answerede  and  seide  here  to  Jesus,  How  may 
pes  pingis  be  done?  And  Crist  seide  to  him ;  In  \q  lond  of 
Israel  ben  manye  blynde  maisters,  for  pou  art  maister  in 
Israel,  and  '^it  pou  unhiowist  pes  pingis  :  and  so  it  is  noo 
wounder  ^if  ])is  lond  be  mysled,  ffor  5if  \>e  blynde  leden  \>e 
blynde,  ]>ei  fallen  bojje  into  ]?e  lake.  And  ne|?eles  Y  teche 
hem  as  myche  as  J>ei  ben  worjji;  and  so  sei]?  Crist  to  Nicho- 
deme,  Sopely,  sopely,  Vseie  to  pee,  defaute  is  not  in  me,  in  teching 
of  jjes  puple,  but  in  untrewe  hardnesse  of  it ;  for,  ping  pat  we 
knowufi,  we  tellen  to  hem,  and  pat  we  have  sene  in  Godhede,  ive 
witnessen,  and  y  taken  not  oure  witnesse,  for  50ure  unkynde 
hardnesse.  And  jjerfore  5e  knowen  not  ]?e  gendrure  of  jje  firste 
persone.  '^if  Y  seide  to  ^ou  erpely  pingis  and  y  troiven  hem  not, 
how,  yf  V seide  to  you  hevenly pingis,  shal  y  trowen  hem?  Crist 
tolde  here  of  bodily  birjie,  and  ofte  tymes  of  erj)ely  treu]>e,  but 
J>ei  trowiden  him  not  for  j)er  fole  hard  herte ;  but  ne|>eles  Crist 
telli}?  ]?is  man  knowinge  of  |)e  secounde  persone,  and  in  an 
article  of  bileve,  jjat  is,  his  ascensioun ;  and  no  man,  seip  Crist, 
steiep  in  to  hevene  but  he  pat  cam  doun  fro  hevene,  mannis  sone 
pat  is  in  hevene.  And  in  J)es  wordis  my^t  Nichodeme  undir- 
stonde  bo})e  Jjc  godhede  of  Crist  and  jjerto  his  manhede,  and 
so  shulde  he  knowe  wel  |>e  secounde  persone  of  God.  By  jjat 
))at  Crist  steied  |>us,  and  |}us  is  mannis  sone,  mi3t  he  knowe 
his  manhede  bifore  o}?er  manhedis ;  for  aljif  o])er  men  steieden 
a  litil  in  |>is  eire,  nej>eles  no  man  steie]?  in  to  hevene  ))us  but 
Crist.  And  so  noon  ojjer  man  come|)  to  hevene  but  ^if  he  be 
Cristis  membre,  and  be  drawun  bi  ]?e  Trinite  in  to  ])is  hey  place. 
And  ]>us  seij)  Crist  so]?,  )?at  no  man  steie)?  in  to  hevene,  but 
him  silf  aloone ;  and  seij?  j)ere  ben  foure  manere  of  bryngingis 
for})  of  man,  and  ))e  fourj^e  and  )?e  laste,  apropred  unto  Crist, 
is  ))at  man  come))  clene  of  womman  wijjout  man.  Crist  clepi}> 
I  him  wel  here  a  sone  of  mankynde;  ,and  |)us  bi  })es  two  wordis 

WYCLIF. 


SERMONS. 


i6i 


my5t  he  knowe  Cristis  manhede.  And  by  ojjer  two  wordis  my^t 
he  knowe  Cristis  godhede ;  first  by  )>at  he  sei]>  j>at  |)is  man  cam 
doun  bifore  fro  hevene,  and  j>is  my^t  nevere  be  but  3if  Crist 
were  God  or''^  he  were  man.  pe  secounde  word  jjat  shewi|> 
J)e  godhede  of  |)is  persone,  is,  J>at  Crist  seij?  jiat  he  is  mannis 
sone  )jat  is  in  hevene,  ^he,  after  |>at  he  bycam  man ;  ftbr  jjus 
is  Crist ^  tw^o  kyndes  godhede  for  evermore,  and  evermore^  in 
hevene  drawynge  to  him  whom  him  like}?.  And  })us  Crist 
techi|)  wxl  ynou5  to  knowe  j)e  secounde  person,  boj)  in  godhede 
and  in  manhede,  as  myche  as  he  shulde  ]?an  knowe  him. 

But  to  telle  ])e  ])ridde  persone,  in  pointis  of  bileve,  Crist  teUi])  to 
Nichodeme,  As  Moyses  heied  pe  addre  m  desert  to  hele  J)e  puple 
by  lokynge  on  him,  so  mut  mannis  sone  he  hyed  in  Jje  cros,  pat  ech 
man  pat  trowip  in  hifn,  perishe  not  in  helle,  hut  have  lyf  ivipouten 
eende,  ])at  is  blisse  of  hevene.  Here  mut  we  knowe  ]?e  storye 
of  Jje  olde  lawe  hou  |?e  puple  w^as  hirt  by  stynging  of  addres, 
and  Moses  preied  God  to  telle  him  sum  medecyne ;  and  God 
bade  him  take  an  addre  of  bras,  and  hong  hym  hye  on  a  tree 
to  ]?e  puple  to  loke  on,  and  he  })at  lokid  on  ]?is  addre  shulde 
be  helid  of  ]?is  yvel.  And  al  ]>is  was  figure  of  hanging  of  Crist, 
for  Crist  was  in  forme  of  addris  of  venym,  but  he  hadde  no 
venym  in  his  owene  persone,  as  \q  addre  of  bras  hadde  no 
venym  in  him.  But  as  rijt  lokynge  on  }?is  addre  of  bras  savyde 
J)e  puple  fro  venym  of  serpentis,  so  rijt  lokynge  bi  ful  bileve 
in  Crist  save])  his  puple  fro  synne  of  ]?e  fendis.  And  ))e  fende 
was  ))e  first  addre  ]?at  ever  noyed  man,  and  Crist  was  hongid 
in  tre,  as  jjis  addre  hongide  in  tree.  But  it  were  to  wite  over, 
hou  ];is  story  perteyne))  to  J)e  Holy  Goost,  si]?  al  j>is  was  done 
in  Crist ;  but  we  shal  wel  wite  ]?at  ech  of  ])es  jjre  persones  is 
in  ech  ojjer,  as  ech  bitokene])  ojjer.  And  si]?  ]?at  Crist  sei]?  }>at 
no  man  ha]?  more  love  ]?an  for  to  put  his  lyf  for  his  frendis,  ]?is 
blesside  hanginge  of  Crist  in  \e  crosse  is  J)at  hye  charite  }?at 
God  lovede  man  inne,  and  ]?is  charite  is  ]?e  Holy  Goost ;  and 
|?us  was  Nichodeme  taujt  ]?e  fei}?  of  ]?e  Trinite,  and  in  ]?is  fei]? 
many  o])er  articlis,  and  }>us  is  }?is  gospel  approprid  to  }?is  feste. 


Christ  teaches 

Nicodemus 
the  complete 
doctrine  of 
the  Trinity. 


^  Crist  is,  B,  C. 


SERMONS. 


^  So  E ;  A,  B,  C,  om.  and  evermore. 
^  or=^'  before  that.' 


l62 


WrCLIF'S    SERMONS. 


pere  ben  many  witnessis  and  resouns  to  \q  Trinite,  but  J)is 
manere  of  lore  is  more  plentenouse  and  more  profitable  to 
men;  and  herfore  Crist  sei{>  it  ])us;  and  }jus  eche  man  shulde 
reule  al  his  lyfe  after  ]?is  holy  Trinite,  for  ellis  he  must  faile. 
Loke  first  ))at  he  be  groundid  in  stable  bigynning,  and  sij> 
J>at  he  procede  in  gracious  mene,  and  si))  j)at  he  ende  in  ful- 
nesse  of  charite,  and  J)an  his  lyfe  is  ensaumplid  aftir  ))e 
Trinite. 


•••••••« 


COMMUNE    SANCTORUM. 


M   2 


[The  sermons  which  follow,  on  the  gospels  of  the  office  of  the 
Commune  Sanctorum,  are  thirty-one  in  number.  The  order  of 
the  feasts,  and  the  gospels  themselves,  appear  to  have  been  taken 
by  the  writer  from  the  Sarum  missal.  Every  separate  office  in- 
cluded in  that  missal  is  dealt  with  by  the  writer  of  the  sermons 
except  those  for  ' Many  Virgins '  and  '  Holy  Women  not  Virgins;' 
and  for  this  omission  there  is  an  obvious  reason,  viz.  that  the 
gospels  for  those  offices  are  the  same  as  those  for  '  One  Virgin 
not  Martyr,'  and  '  One  Virgm  and  Martyr,'  and  had  therefore 
already  formed  the  subjects  of  sermons.  "With  one  exception,  all 
the  gospels  correspond  with  those  in  the  Sarum  missal.  This 
exception  is  in  the  office  for  '  One  Apostle.'  Two  gospels  for  this 
office  are  treated  of  by  the  writer,  Hoc  est  praeceptum,  (John  xv.  12) 
and  Haec  mando  'uobis,  (John  xv.  17).  The  latter  one  of  these 
gospels  alone  is  given  in  the  Sarum  missal.  But  the  Hoc  est 
praeceptum  is  the  gospel  for  the  *  Vigil  of  an  Apostle '  in  the 
present  Roman  missal. 

Although  of  course  there  is  a  general  agreement,  the  office  of 
the  Commune  Sanctorum  in  the  Sarum  missal  differs  considerably 
from  that  of  the  present  Roman  missal.  In  one  direction  it  is 
fuller,  in  another  not  so  full.  It  is  fuller,  in  that  it  has  a  greater 
number  of  distinct  offices  or  masses,  there  being  twenty-nine  in 
the  Sarum,  and  only  twenty -four  (including  that  for  the  anni- 
versary of  the  Dedication  of  a  Church)  in  the  Roman.  It  is  less 
full,  because,  though  it  has  more  offices  for  several  of  the  feasts, 
certain  festivals  are  not  represented  in  it  at  all,  e.  g.  those  of  *  One 
Martyr  not  a  Bishop,'  and  of  a  '  Martyr  not  Virgin.' 

Out  of  the  thirty-one  gospels  treated  of  by  the  writer,  twenty- 
one  are  also  found  in  the  Commune  Sanctorum  of  the  Roman 
missal,  and  ten  are  different.] 


HERE    BIGYNNEf    fE 


COMOUN     SANCTORUM, 


pE  SECUNDE  PART  OF  plS  BOOK. 


pE    Gospel    in   Vigil    of    Apostle. 


[SERMON     LV.] 


J^go  sum  vitis  vera. — Joon  xv.  [i.] 

As  comune  ]?ing  is  betere  and  bifore  o])er  |)ingis,  so  J>is  gospel 
|?at  is  red  in  comun  story  shulden  men  knowe  sum  what,  and 
speciali  preestis,  for  it  is  a  foul  ]>ing  ]?at  prestis  speken  as  pies, 
and  knowun  not  her  owne  vois  more  ]?an  doumbe  beestis,  and 
speciali  whanne  \€\  reden  bileve  of  holi  Chirche,  for  ])es  men 
ben  to  ferre  to  preche  |)is  to  ]je  peple.  pis  gospel  of  Joon 
telli])  a  parable  of  Crist,  bi  which  he  tau5te  his  disciplis  for  to 
dwelle  in  him,  and  for  to  love  him,  for  ellis  ]?ei  ben  nou3t. 
Crist  sei]?  ))us :  /  am  a  verri  vyne  and  my  Fadir  is  tylyer  of  ])is 
vyne3erde.  For  Crist  bi  hise  twoo  kyndis  is  a  good  herde ;  as 
anentis  his  godhede,  he  is  ]?e  same  tilier  wi}?  his  Fadir,  and 
as  anentis  his  manhede  he  is  heed  of  holi  Chirche.  And  for  J>is 
seij>  Crist  })at,  ech  braunche  pat  is  in  him,  and  berip  not  fruyt,  his 
Fadir  shal  take  awey,  for  keper  of  a  vyne3erde  falli]?  ))us  to 
dense  it,  and  algatis  kepe  j?e  vynes  ]?at  jjei  beren  grapis.  And, 
for  alle  j^e  Fadir  dedis  doij)  also  ]?e  Sone,  jjerfore  sei]?  Crist  ])at 
ech  braunche  of  pe  Chirche  pat  berip  fruyt,  his  Fadir  shal  purge 
pat  it  bere  more  fruyt ;  and  so  doiJ>  Crist,  for  he  sendi]>  water  of 
wisdom  to  hise  braunchis,  and  herof  comej?  grapis  to  preche  to 


The  parable  of 
the  true  vine. 


1 66 


WFCLIF'S 


Necessity  of 
union  with 
Christ. 


|)e  peple  and  gladen  hem  in  Goddis  lawe.  Sum  men  ben 
braunchis  of  ]?is  vyne,  jjat  dwellen  in  holy  Chirche,  and  311  jjei 
ben  not  Jjerof,  al  if  ]?ei  lyve  of  jjis  vyne,  and  ben  siche  j>at 
gaderen  gredili  Cristis  patrimonye,  as  dymes  and  offringis  and 
rentis,  Jiat  ]jei  seien  weren  50vun  to  Crist ;  and  wi]>  ]?is  ]>t\  done 
not  \qx  office  to  quykene  o|)er  branchis;  and  ]jes  ben  moost 
noious  branchis  J>at  ben  plauntid  in  ]>is  vyne,  for  j^ei  maken 
most  ojjer  men  to  rote  and  drye  and  falle  fro  )?is  vyne  in  to  ]?e 
fier  of  helle.  For  no  men  ben  of  holi  Chirche,  al  if  jjei  ben  J>er- 
inne,  but  J>ese  men  )>at  beren  fruyt  and  han  love  wi|?outen  eende. 

After  sei|>  Crist  to  his  disciplis.  Now  y  ben  dene  for  pat  word 
pat  Y  seide  to  '^ou,  Dwelle  y  in  me  and  Y  dwelle  in  yu,  Bo])e 
goode  men  and  ivel  moten  be  on  sum  manere  in  Crist,  si]?  he 
is  God  |)at  susteyne]?  al  J?ing ;  but  men  shulden  be  in  him  bi 
grace  and  take  moisture  of  his  lore,  and  so  profite  to  o)?er 
braunchis  ]?at  growen  in  j)is  vyne,  and  J)us  ]?ei  shulden  take 
moisture  of  lore  of  ])is  tree,  or  ellis  ]?ei  ben  not  of  ]>is  tree,  al 
if  her  kynde  be  susteyned  in  it,  but  J)ei  growen  in  kynde  to 
make  of  a  fier  in  helle.  And  ]?is  vyne  dwelli)>  not  in  a  man 
as  for  his  membre,  but  if  he  helpe  J)is  man  to  make  here  a 
good  ende,  and  die  in  charitee  to  God  and  to  his  Chirche.  And 
so,  al  if  ech  man  shulde  hope  jjat  he  be  lyme  of  holi  Chirche, 
ne]?eles  he  shulde  suppose  ])is  bine|>e  bileve  and  wij)  a  drede, 
but  if  God  tellde  him  specialy  what  eende  ]?at  he  shal  have.  And 
))is  triacle  haj?  God  ordeyned  a3ens  preestis  and  ypocritis,  |>at 
)jei  shulden  not  disceyve  ]?e  puple,  bostinge  |)at  \>t\  ben  of  holi 
Chirche,  for,  be  ))ei  popis,  be  ]?ei  bishopis,  or  oj^er  preestis  more 
or  lasse,  ]?ei  bosten  and  hewen  above  her  heed,  if  ])ei  ben  proud 
of  jjis  title.  And  herfore  God,  ]?at  lovejj  ))at  ech  man  shulde  be 
meke,  hidi]?  Jjis  point  from  ech  man  jiat  he  woot  wole  not  holde 
mekenesse.  And  to  conferme  ]?is  mekenesse,  sei|)  Crist  after  in 
]?is  gospel.  As  a  sioun  mai  not  here  fruyt  but  if  it  stonde  stable 
in  pe  vytie,  so  no  Cristene  man  7nai  bere  fruyte  but  if  he  be 
dwellinge  in  Crist.  And  herfore  sei]?  Crist  bi  Matheu,  J>at  a  good 
tree  mai  not  make  yvel  fruyte  ne  an  yvel  tree  good  fruyt,  al  if 
mennis  jugement  faile  in  |)is,  for  ]?ese  ]?at  God  woot  jjat  shal  be 
saved,  al  if  jjei  synnen  for  a  tyme,  nejjeles  her  synful  lyf  shal 
turne  to  hem  to  fruyt  of  hevene.     And  so  |?ese  men  jjat  shal  be 


SERMONS. 


167 


dampned,  al  if  |)ei  done  good  for  a  tyme,  3it  jjei  han  an  yvel  maner 
|>at  quenchij?  ]?e  goode  j>at  j^ei  done.  And  so  it  is  unknowun 
to  men  who  dwelli)?  )?us  in  God  ;  but  ech  man  shal  do  good, 
supposinge  J?at  he  dwelli))  in  God.  And  herfore  rehersij>  Crist, 
as  he  ha]j  seid  to  his  apostlis,  /  am  a  vyne,  and  y  pe  braunchis, 
and  so  pat  man  pat  dwellip  in  me  and  I  in  him,  he  berip  moche 
fruyie,  and  upon  )?is  shulden  56  Jjenken,  for  3e  moun  do  nou^t 
\vi|>outen  me.  And  so  shulden  we  lerne  )jat  vynes  ben  trees  \2X 
profiten  not  to  mennis  work  but  in  beryng  of  her  fruyt.  So 
shulden  preestis  in  |>is  worlde  shapen  her  lyf  to  Cristis  Chirche, 
not  to  be  enheritid  here,  ne  to  be  riche,  ne  to  fi3te,  but  to  teche 
Cristis  lore  bojje  in  her  lyf  and  in  her  w^ord.  And  Jjus  shulde 
ech  man  do,  but  sum  more  and  sum  lesse. 

And  aftir  sei)j  Crist,  as  here  is  seid,  pat  who  pat  dwellip 
not  i?t  him  shal  be  sent  out,  as  a  kitt  braunche,  and  so  he  shal 
drye  and  sip  be  cast  in  to  pe  Jier,  and  pere  he  brennep  wi|)OUten 
ende  in  \t  fier  }>at  evere  shal  laste.  For  fendis  of  helle 
shulen  gadere  him  bojje  in  bodi  and  in  soule,  and  witnesse 
a5ens  him  how  he  servede  hem  a3ens  God.  And  over  ]jis 
biheti]?  Crist  Jjis  privylege  to  his  braunchis,  pat  if  pei  dwellen 
ifi  him  and  hise  wordis  dwellen  in  hem,  bi  brynginge^  for]?  of 
hevenly  fruyte,  whatevere  pei  wolen  pei  shulen  axe  and  it  shal  be 
done  to  hem.  pese  hi3e  wordis  \2X  Crist  seij)  here,  tellen  witt 
hid  to  men.  For  many  Jjenken  )?at  summe  ben  fulli  lymes  of  ]?e 
fend,  and  5it  ]?ei  enden  holi  men  and  comen  to  hevene  for  her 
good  lyf;  and  summe  ben  now  holi  men,  as  ancris^  heremytes 
and  freris,  and  efte  }>ei  ben  apostataas  and  dien  enemyes  of 
Crist.  Al  ))is  is  hid  ])ing,  for  if  siche  men  semen  to  do  yvel, 
and  summe  siche  semen  to  do  good,  as  ben  many  ypocritis, 
ne|)eles  ))e  ende  is  hid  of  which  ]?ei  shulden  take  her  name. 
And  so  God  hidij?  jje  qualite  of  siche  workes  of  men  here,  for 
men  shulden  not  dampne  hem  ne  preise  hem  to  li3tli.  And  ))us 
men  maken  hem  over  wise  in  jugement  of  holi  Chirche,  and  in 
demynge  of  mennis  lyf,  )>at  ]?is  goij?  to  hevene  and  ]jis  to  helle, 
for  God  ha|>  kept  to  him  J)e  knowinge  of  an  ende,  \2X  maki|>  al. 
pou  maist  knowe  J>at  ]>is  man  is  o))er  a  bishop  or  in  sich  office, 


The  final 
destinies  of 
individual  men 
are  hidden 
from  us. 


^  So  rightly  E ;  A  includes  the  words  in  the  italics. 


-  ankeris,  E. 


J  68 


WrCLIF'S 


No  perfect 
standard  of 
bodily  health, 
but  Christ 
the  perfect 
standard  of 
charity. 


but  whejjer  he  shal  wende  to  hevene,  God  haj>  hid  pe  knowinge 
fro  J>ee ;  and  sij?  after  ]>at  he  is  man  of  holi  Chirche  or  a  lyme 
of  jie  fend,  it  is  wel  seid  )jou  maist  not  see  J)is  point  of  jji 
bileve,  which  ben  lymes  of  holi  Chirche,  but  ]>o\i  shalt  trowe 
]>e  general.  And  so  |?at  ]>mg  J>at  ]>o\x  trowist  here,  J>ou  seest  not 
here  wi]?  j>i  i^en,  but  )?ou  trowist  it  above  hope,  and  bilevest  it 
bine]>  science.  And  Jjus  ]>ese  wordis  J>at  Crist  seij)  shulden  move 
men  to  lyve  wel,  and  be  meke,  and  leve  pride  of  hi^enesse  of 
her  staat.  And  wolde  God  ]?at  men  lerneden  )>is  lessoun  J>at 
clepen  hem  men  of  holi  Chirche,  and  bi  colour  of  |)is  fendis 
synne  spoilen  men  J>at  be  undir  hem ;  and  in  Jjis  raveyn  jjei 
shewen  wel,  ]?at  j?ei  ben  not  of  holi  Chirche. 


pE  Gospel  in  hE  dai  of  Apostle. 

[SERMON    LVL] 

Hoc  est preceptum  meum. — John  xv.  [12.]. 

pis  gospel  techi]?  Cristis  apostlis,  and  in  hem  al  Cristis 
Chirche,  how  ]>ei  shulden  holde  charite  ech  man  to  o\>qv. 
Crist  seij),  ])is  z's  my  comandemeiit,  pat  y  love  togidere,  after  pat 
forme  pat  Y  have  loved  '^ou.  More  love  pan  pis  hap  no  man,  pan 
pat  he  put  his  lyfe  for  love  of  hise  frendis.  And  ]7us,  as  fisik^ 
techi|>,  )>ei  shal  Jjenke  on  a  man  jjat  is  fulli  hool  wijjynne  and 
wi]?oute,  and  bi  mesure  of  such  a  man  J^ei  shulden  mesure 
mennis  hel])e ;  and  whanne  men  axen,  where  is  he  ]jat  is  on  |)is 
wise  hool,  ]?ei  seien,  ])ere  is  noon  siche,  but  siche  oon  \t\ 
ymagynen;  and  after  mesure  of  ]?is  heljje  \€\  heelen  him  J>at 
jjei  delen  wi]).  But  blessid  be  oure  science,  and  auctour  jjerof, 
for  we  seien  J^at  j^ere  is  a  love  in  jje  heed  of  ]?e  Chirche  jjat  is 
moost  in  dede  of  alle  loves  Jjat  mai  be,  and  after  ]?is  love 
shulden  alle  o]>er  be  mesurid.  But,  for  fisik  shame]?  to  sette  sich 
a  mesure  jiat  \q\  knowen  not,  ne  witen  not  where  ^  it  be,  herfore 
|>ei  seien  J)at  jjer  ben  two  hel})is,  oon  to  ri5twisnesse  and  ano|)er 


'  phhk,  E. 


'■^  whe\>er,  Y,. 


SERMONS. 


169 


to  wei3te.  pe  firste  helj^c  shulde  stonde  in  a  mannis  membris, 
and  in  his  compleccioun,  in  humouris,  and  in  dementis,  which 
in  suche  acord  ben  knettid  to  gider,  jjat  noon  of  j)ese  mai  be 
contrarie  to  ano]?er;  and  si|)  no  man  is  siik  but^  bi  sich  con- 
trarite,  J>is  man  J>at  )?ei  speken  of  mai  nevere  more  be  siik. 
But  hoolnesse  of  wei3te  mai  falle  to  a  man ;  and  Jjat  is  nevere 
more  wi]?outen  greet  sykenesse,  al  ^if  it  be  hid  by  governynge 
of  fisike.  He  is  hool  in  wei3te  ]?at  ha]?  of  ech  element  as  moche 
as  he  mai  worche,  wi]?  dedes  ]jat  fallen  to  men,  and  on  jjis  wise 
momi  \q\  maken  men  hool.  But  blessid  be  oure  mesure,  |?at 
Crist  putti]?  in  charite,  for  |)at  is  moost  rial  and  ground  of  al 
ojjer ;  and  no  man  mai  be  saaf  but  if  he  knowe  ]?is  mesure,  and 
J)is  mesure  helpe  him  to  gendre  in  him  charite ;  and  |?us  shulden 
men  in  dede  practise  in  ]jis  science,  for  veyn  speche  j?erof  pro- 
fiti))  not,  but  harme]?.  pis  love  was  shewid  in  Crist,  whanne  he 
putte  his  lyf  for  love  of  his  brejjeren,  and  brou3te  summe  out 
of  helle,  and  savede  oJ)er  jjerfro;  and  herfore  seij?  Crist,  for 
practisinge  of  })is  love  and  ensaumple  J)erof,  pat  pei  shulden 
love  togidere  as  he  hap  loved  hem'^ ;  and  J)anne  \t\  ben  al  hool. 

And  herfore  moten  we  nedis  lerne  j^e  bileve  of  ]?e  passioun 
of  Crist,  and  of  his  dej?  suwynge,  si]?  after  forme  of  ]?is  love  we 
shulden  love  togidere;  and  wantinge  of  \\s  love  is  cause  of 
ech  synne  and  of  ech  harm  ]?at  falli]?  in  ]?e  Chirche ;  and  J?erfore 
men  shulden  enforce  hem  more  to  lerne  ]?is  love.  And  her- 
fore traveilide  Poul  in  techinge  of  charite,  and  telde  sixteen 
condiciouns,  }?at  shulden  folowe  it.  And  as  many  men  seien 
J?at  ]?ei  ben  hool  in  bodi,  many  men  seien  ]?at  ]?ei  ben  in  charite, 
and  loven  God  over  al  J?ing,  and  her  nei3bore  as  hem  silf,  but 
3it  ]?ei  gabben  opynli,  as  her  lyf  shewi]?.  pis  lore  ]?at  Cristis 
scole  axi]?  love}?  none  gabbingis,  but  ]?at  ]?ei  do  in  dede  as  her 
mou]?  confessi]?.  And,  for  Crist  ha]?  teeld  ]?at  ]?is  hi3e  charite 
techi]?  a  man  to  putte  his  lyf  for  love  of  hise  frendis,  and  J?is 
love  is  oonli  in  persone  of  Crist,  he  telli}?  how  hise  apostlis  and 
o]?er  men  ben  hise  frendis.  3^  beti  ]?anne,  sei}?  Crist,  frendis  of 
me  ]?at  han  ]?is  love,  if  y  done  sadli  pe  pingis  pat  I  bidde  -^ou. 
And  so  it  is  of  o}?er  men  }?at  doen  as  ]>ese  apostlis,  for  ]?ei  ben 


^  om.  A ;  perperam. 


'^  So  E ;  no  italics  in  A. 


The  test  of 
the  love  of 
Christians  is 
obedience. 


I  Cor.  xiii. 


jyo 


WFCLIF'S 


The  apostles 
friends  of 
Christ. 


Apoc.  xxii.  9. 


The  threefold 
office  of  the 
Apostles. 


mesure  after  Crist  to  ojjer  men  j)at  suen  hem.  And  certeyn 
j)ei  ben  not  frendis  to  Crist  J>at  han  not  ])is  love,  but  oonli  ])ei 
Jjat  han  ]>is  love;  and  si]?  J)is  frenship  axi]?  ]?at  bo])e  frendis 
loven  togidir,  and  ]?at  J)e  love  be  shewid  in  dede,  as  philosophris 
seien,  if  we  ben  frendis  to  Crist,  it  is  Jjus  in  dede  bitwixe  him 
and  us. 

And  Crist  sei])  efte  |?is  word  of  love,  Now  shal  Y  not  clepe 
"^ou  servauntisy  for  pe  servaunt  woot  not  in  )?at*  what  his  lord 
doip.  And  ]jus  men  seien  comounly  ])at  \tx  ben  two  manere  of 
servauntis,  servaunt  of  condicioun,  and  servaunt  of  mynysterie. 
And  servaunt  of  mynysterie  may  ben  on  two  maneris.  Sum 
men  be  oonli  servauntis  of  greet  service  outward,  and  sum  ben 
servauntis  of  |?es  two,  boJ)e  of  privy  counceilis  and  to  do  siche 
service.  And  on  ]?is  wise  jje  apostlis  weren  servauntis  of  Jesus 
Crist,  as  ])ey  graunten  comounly  in  bigynnynge  of  her  epistlis ; 
but  on  ))e  former  manere  weren  not  apostlis  now  servauntis,  for 
Crist  tau3te  hem  his  privyte  and  lymytide  hem  to  wor|)i  werkes. 
And  J)us  speki]>  Crist  here;  and  herfore  wolde  not  Jie  aungel 
take  worshipe  of  Joon,  as  seij?  ]?e  book  of  pryvytees,  but  ]?e 
angel  sei)>  to  him  ])at  he  was  his  servaunt,  and  hise  bre])eren 
bo)>e,  si])  Crist  was  man  in  hevene,  and  he  hadde  ordeyned  so 
hi3e  place  for  hise  apostlis,  and  telden^  hem  privytees  unknowom 
to  angels.  And  bi  ])is  equivocacioun  moun  men  li3tli  acorden 
to  Cristis  lawe ;  for,  as  clerkes  witen  wel  ynow3,  contradiccioun 
is  not  oonly  in  wordis.  And  ]?us  sei]?  Crist,  pat  he  seip  hise 
apostlis  to  be  hise  frendis  from  henneforp,  for  alle,  he  seip,  pat 
V  have  herd  of  my  Fadir  I  have  maad  knovoun  unto  ^ou.  And 
J)is  is  soJ>,  si})  Cristis  apostlis  knewen  comunly  \>e  book  of  lyf, 
and  weren  in  lernynge  of  })is  book,  til  ])at  J)ei  knewen  aboven 
aungels;  and  aposths  wisten  ])anne  tru})is  ])at  weren  hid  from 
aungels.  And  cheef  cause  of  ])is  frendship  stondi})  in  Crist  and 
not  in  hem,  for  pei  chesiden  7iot  Crist  her  maistir,  but  he  chees 
hein  unto  })is  office,  and  3af  to  hem  vertue  for  to  do  al  ])e  service 
\2X  he  shope  hem  to. 

Crist  ordeynede  })ree  ])ingis  to  be  fillid  bi  hise  apostlis,  first 
})at  \€\  shulden  go  forth  in  to  ])e  world  and  preche  his  gospel, 

'   teelde,  E. 
*  in  \>at  seems  to  mean,  qxia  servant. 


SERMONS. 


171 


and  ]>at  |?is  shulde  be  fruytous  to  jjus  converte  so  myche 
peple,  and  si)>  jjat  j)is  fruyt  dwelle,  boJ)e  in  jjis  worlde  and 
in  J>e  to)?er.  And  jjes  ]>ree  ben  grete  myraclis  amonge  alle 
jjo  J>at  Crist  dide,  for  it  passi]>  mannis  work  to  make  fruyt 
j)us  to  laste  in  heven.  Men  moun  worche  bi  mannis  craft 
figuris  and  hid  qualitees;  but  jjis  is  more  wijjouten  mesure, 
)>us  to  fordo  synne,  and  bringe  in  blis;  and  J>us  seij>  Robert 
Grostheda  |,at  ])is  craft  passi]?  alkemmye\  for  it  makij?  soulis 
hoole,  ]?at  ben  betere  |>an  sunne  or  moone. 

And  )>es  )?ingis  my5ten  not  ben  do^  but  bi  special  helpe 
of  God;  and  ]?us  tellij)  Crist  to  his  apostlis,  pai  what  evere 
pet  axen  his  Fadir  in  his  name,  he  shal  ^j/ve  to  hem,  for 
]>e  love  of  him.  And  bi  )>is  was  shewide  Jje  frendship 
bitwixe  Crist  and  hise  apostlis,  and  here  moun  we  knowe 
treujje^  J)at  is  nedeful  for  j?is  gospel,  how  })es  men  ben  frendis 
to  Crist  ])at  shulen  be  saved  bi  his  vertue.  And,  as  it  seme]>, 
oonli  ]jes  men  weren  saved  bi  Cristis  de]),  and  oonli  for 
))es  men  Crist  putte  his  lyf  and  bou^te  hem ;  but  wel  Y  woot 
))at  Crist  ^af  ynow^  to  save  moo  men,  if  \€\  wolden  take  his 
medicine  and  ablen  hem  to  vertue  of  it.  And  here  we  moun 
not  putte  foli  to  marchaundi3e  ]?at  Crist  made,  si]?  savynge  of 
his  Chirche  is  betere  |>an  was  lyf  \2X  Crist  lefte,  for  )?is  de])  was 
a  meene  to  betere  lyf;  and  al  was  Cristis.  And  ]?us  Crist  was 
not  peirid  by  his  dej),  but  sum  wey  beterid,  si]?  he  loste  not^ 
substaunce,  but  gat  o  betere  habitude.  But  leve  we  j>is,  and 
speke  of  love,  \2X  it  profite  to  \t  peple ;  for  si]?  \t\  is  no  rewme, 
ne  state  of  men,  ne  persone  here,  \2X  he  ne  faili])  in  holdinge 
of  ])is  love  of  Crist, — for  ellis  shulden  men  not  })us  synne, — alle 
we  failen  in  ])is  love  \2X  Crist  ha]>  beden  to  his  Chirche ;  for 
si})  every  man  in  er])e  is  nei3bore  to  ech  o})er,  how  shewe  we 
in  our  lyf  ful  love  to  alle  })es  nei^boris  ? 


alhemye,  E. 


'  done,  E. 


\>e  treu\>e,  E. 


no,  E. 


=»  I  cannot  find  this  passage  in 
the  Opuscula  of  Grossetete  printed 
in  the  Appendix  to  Brown's  Fasci- 


culus :  it  is  probably  in  one  or  other 
of  his  many  writings  which  exist  at 
present  only  in  manuscript. 


172 


WYCLI  F'S 


The  precept  of 
Christian  love, 
its  compass 
and  scope. 


Repinings, 
how  to  be  cor- 
rected. 


t'E  Gospel  on  t>E  day  of  oon  Apostle. 

[SERMON     LVIL] 

Haec  mando  vohis. — John  xv.  [17.] 

pis  gospel  telli]>  sharpli,  as  Crist  doi]?  ofte  bi  Joon,  how  men 
shulden  love  togidere  and  putte  awei  J)e  lettingis,  for  |)e  bigyn- 
nynge  and  )?e  eendinge  of  Goddis  lawe  is  love.  Crist  bigynne]) 
Jjus  and  comandej)  hise  disciplis  ;  \iese  pingis  I  bidde  to  y)u 
pat  y  love  togidere.  No  |)ing  is  more  beden  of  God  J>an  J>is  love, 
and  jjerfor,  what  man  leve]?  it,  he  despisi]>  God;  but  al  were 
for  to  know  jje  craft  of  ]?is  love,  for  it  is  oon  to  love  a  ]?ing, 
and  to  wille  good  to  \2X  |>ing.  Ech  J>ing  shulde  be  loved  after 
J)at  it  is  good,  and  so  God  shulde  be  moost  loved,  and  betere  men 
more  ]>an  worse  men.  And  we  shulden  for  Goddis  love  love 
yvel  men  and  yvel  comunes,  and  for  his  love  be  bisie  to  jyve 
hem  mater  to  be  betere,  and  as  myche  as  in  us  is,  to  do  good 
to  ech  man,  sum  to  make  betere  and  sum  to  make  lesse  yvel ; 
but  00  firstnesse  of  love  shulde  we  have  to  us  silf,  and  to  oure 
fadir  and  oure  modir,  savynge  ordre  of  Goddis  lawe.  pe  firste 
lettinge  of  jjis  love  |>at  Crist  telli]?  here,  is  hate  of  jjis  world  to 
men  jjat  kepen  ]?is  love,  for  |)e  world  is  so  blyndid  ]>at  it  clepi]? 
hate,  love,  and  love  it  clepi]?  hate,  for  it  errij)  in  bileve.  Al  oure 
love  shulde  stonde  in  \q  love  of  God,  to  kepe  his  lawe  and 
move  ojjere  to  kepe  it;  but  many,  for  defaulte  of  fei]?,  holden 
])is  a  fooly\  for  gooddis  of  J)is  world  fallen  not  to  siche  men. 

And  herfore  sei]?  Crist,  If  pe  world  hate  you,  5e  shulden 
wele  wite  pat  it  hatide  me  hifore ;  and  ]?is  wor])inesse  of  Crist 
\2X  suffride  ]?us  for  man,  shulde  move  trewe  men  in  God  to 
sufFre  for  Crist.  If  jjou  grutche  a3ens  poverte,  and  coveite 
worldeli  worshipe,  wite  |)0u  \2X  Crist  bifore  was  porer  ])an  ]?ou, 
si])  he  hadde  not  bi  his  manhede  place  to  reste  his  heed  ynne. 
If  ])0u  grutchist  ])at  \\  sugetis  wolen  not  3yve  Jjee  goodis, 
]>enke  how  Cristis  sugettis  wolden  neijjer  ^yve  him  mete  ne 
herberwe;  and  3it  herfore  he  curside  hem  not,  but  dide  hem 
moche  good.     And  if  J)0u  grutche  J>at  ])e  world  doi])  Jjee  ony 

'  fob,  E. 


SERMONS. 


173 


injurie,  and  ]?ou  i)roritist  to  j>c  vvorld  a3en  in  love  and  meke- 
nesse ;  ])cnke  how  Crist  biforc  j^ee  profitide  }?us  more  to  })e 
worlde ;  and  3it  Crist  suffride  more  wronge  of  hise  sugettis  jjan 
\)0\i  maist.  And  ])us  if  ]?ou  woldist  ]?enke  on  Crist,  how  he 
suffride  for  love  of  man,  it  were  ]?e  beste  ensample  |)at  jjou 
shuldist  have  to  suffre,  and  to  cese  ]>i  grutching ;  for,  as  Austyn 
seij? ',  no  man  in  ]jis  world  mai  synne  but  levyng  }jat  Crist 
taujte,  or  grutche  a^ens  ])ing  })at  he  suffride. 

And  for  ])is,  sei|>  Crist  after,  If  y  weren  of  pe  world,  pe 
worlde  wolde  love  pat  is  his ;  for  jjis  lawe  lasti]?  in  good  and 
yvel,  |)at  o  man  lovejj  lyk  to  hym,  ^he,  if  |>ei  shulen  be 
dampned  for  |>is,  as  o  synful  love]?  anoj?er  for  ])e  likenesse 
of  her  synne ;  and  jit  Jjei  shulen  bojje  in  helle  suffre  harm 
for  ))is  likenesse.  And  ]?us  it  is  no  kynne^  wounder  if  lymes 
of  |?e  fend  haten  lymes  of  Crist,  for  Jjei  ben  so  myche  con- 
trarie  here,  and  after  ])e  dai  of  dome ;  and  ]?is  meve]?  many 
men  to  hate  ]?es  newe  religiouse,  for  J)is  newe  dyversite 
quenchi]?  love  and  maki]?  hate,  yae,  jit  jjei  han  sum  fendis 
manere,  J)at  \qi  haten  her  owne  brej?eren,  and  turmenten  hem, 
for  ]?ei  holden  wij?  Goddis  lawe  ajens  heris^^;  and  certis  j^ei 
loven  to  litil  oJ?irs,  but  feynen,  to  spoile  hem  of  her  goodis. 
And  ]?us  sei]j  Crist  to  hise  disciplis  \2X,  for  pei  ben  not  of  pis 
world,  but  he  hap  chosen  hem  of  pis  world,  herfor  pe  world  hatip 
hem.  And  if  ]jou  lernest  of  ]?e  world  to  hate  J)us,  |)i  love  is 
quenchid,  but  if  |)0u  hatist  bi  Cristis  lawe  men  of  |)is  world  for 
J>is  synne,  and  wij)drawist  hem  fro  J?e  world,  ]>anne  \o\x  lovest 
jjese  men  in  God.  For  J>e  world  is  takun  here,  for  men  over- 
comen  bi  jje  world,  |)at  loven  more  worldeli  jjingis  jjan  Goddis 
lawe,  or  good  of  vertues.  And  of  ))is  world  sei))  Crist,  ]?at  it 
hati]>  hise  disciplis. 

And,  for  ])is  lore  passith  ojjer  in  profit  and  in  holynesse, 
J?erfore  biddi]?  Crist  hem  to  penke  on  his  word  pat  he  hap  seid 

^  kyn,  E 
=*  The  reference  is  probably  to  the 


treatise  De  Urbis  Excidio,  the  con- 
cluding chapter  of  which  especially, 
in  a  strain  of  eloquent  and  tender 
reproof,  exhorts  the  Christian  people 
of  Rome,  just  after  the  sack  of  the 
city  by  the  Goths,  not  to  repine  on 


^  beres,  E. 

account  of  their  terrible  sufferings, 
remembering  the  unapproachable 
circumstances  of  the  passion  of  their 
Redeemer. 

''  a^ens  heris ;  i.e.  against /(&c«rs, — 
the  friars'  law. 


The  world 
hates  the  elect ; 
application  of 
this  to  the 
friars. 


What  it  is  to 
overcome  the 
world. 


174 


WYCLIF'S 


sin  is  engen- 
dered by 
unbelief 


here  to  hem,  for  ))anne  j?ei  overcomen  ))is  world;  and  herfore 
sei])  Joon  evangelist,  Bre]jeren,  what  man  is  he  \2X  over- 
come]? J)e  world?  Certis  noon,  but  if  he  trowe  )>at  Jesus  is 
Goddis  Sone.  If  we  holden  ])is  ground  in  feij?  \2X  Crist  is 
verri  God  and  man,  and  over  ])is  trowe  wel  his  lyf,  and  alle 
hise  wordis  )?at  he  sei]?,  we  shal  overcomun  ]?is  world  and  alle 
))e  helpers  of  ])e  fend.  For,  as  Crist  sei])  soJ)eli,  per  is  no  servauni 
more  pan  his  lord  is  ;  and  so  Crist  is  more  bo]?e  in  vertue  and 
in  wor]?inesse  ])an  ony  o|?er  man  mai  be ;  and  si]>  Crist  suffride 
))us  and  tau^te  Cristene  men  ))is  lore,  what  man  shulde  we 
trowe  or  sue  in  oure  lyf  but  Crist  ?  And  neijjer  ]>e  world  ne 
|>e  fend  mai  in  J>is  harme  a  man ;  and  so  confortij?  Crist  hise 
membris  bi  two  knyttingis  of  treu]?e,  If  men  of  jjis  world  have 
pursued  Crist,  pane  pei  shulen  pursue  hise  membris  ;  and  if  pei 
han  kept  hise  wordis,  pei  shulen  kepe  hise  disciplis  wordis.  And 
)>is  is  li5t  for  to  knowe ;  for  al  \2X  shal  be  moot  nedis  be ;  for 
it  is  more  hard  to  fendis  to  pursue  )>e  persone  of  Crist  |?an  to 
pursue  hise  membris,  and  ]jus  j>e  li3ter  wolen  \t\  do.  But  oo 
confort  lie])  here,  ]>at  as  Crist  convertide  summe  \2X  weren 
men  of  ])e  world,  so  shulen  hise  disciplis  do.  And  J>us  }?ei 
shulen  not  worche  in  veyn  to  kepe  his  lawe  as  he  biddi}),  for 
ech  man  J)at  shal  worche  mote  have  an  hope  of  sum  good  ende, 
for  dispeire  of  sich  an  ende  wolde  lette  a  man  for  to  worche. 

But  pe  blyndenesse  of  pe  worlde  pat  tur?nentip  Crist  wip  hise 
lymes,  is  unknowing e  in  hileve^ ,  pat  pei  knowe  not  Cristis  Fadir. 
For  if  ])ei  knewe  wel  Cristis  Fadir,  ])anne  after  \€\  shulden  knowe 
his  Sone,  and  ])at  ]?ese  two  ben  o  God ;  but  who  wolde  stryve 
ajens  })is  God  ?  And  so  defaute  of  bileve,  and  uncunnynge  \2X 
men  have,  gendren  al  yvel  dedes ;  and  J)us  ech  synner  is  a  fool ; 
and  if  men  knewen  Goddis  power  and  his  witt  in  Jjes  two  persones, 
how  he  mai  not  for3ete  synne  to  punishe  it  whanne  it  is  tyme, 
))anne  shulden  men  dreden  to  synne,  for  knowinge  of  ])es  two 
persones.  But  J)is  fei}?  is  o])er  weie  in  wakyng^  or  in  slepynge. 
But  Crist  reprove])  ]>is  unbileve,  and  sei}),  if  he  hadde  not  comen 
and  spoke  not  pus  wip  hem,  pis  synne  shulde  not  pei  have  hadde. 
For  si])  Crist  moste  nedis  have  come  in  his  manhede  as  he  cam, 

*  The  wordi>  \>at — bileve  are  excluded  from  the  Italics  in  E. 
^  o)per  ou/ey  in  wantyng,  E, 


SERMONS. 


175 


and  alle  ))e  dedes  j?at  he  dide,  have  do  to  men  as  he  dide  to 
hem,  ])is  greet  synne  shulde  not  have  be,  of  unkynde  untreujje 
of  Jewes.  For  jjis  was  gret  unkyndnesse,  to  )>is  manere  trete 
jjere  broj^er,  ))at  algatis  mekeli  dide  so  grete  kyndness  a^en;  and 
it  was  an  opyn  untreujje,  to  J)is  manere  hate  her  God ;  but  now 
)?ese  Jewes  han  noon  excusinge  of  ]?is  synne.  And  herfore  seij) 
Crist  ])us,  pat  what  7?ian  pat  hatip  him,  he  hatip  also  his  Fadir, 
for  ]?ei  ben  boJ>e  00  j^ing.  And,  for  in  ech  kynde  of  J^ingis  is  oon 
first,  )jat  mesurijj  alle  oj^ere  jjat  ben  in  )>at  kynde,  ]?erfore  in 
maner  of  synnes  moote  be  oon  first  of  alle  ojjer  synnes,  and 
marke  alle  ]?e  ojjer,  and  jjat  is  ))e  synne  of  preestis  a^ens  Jesus 
Crist.  And  herfore  sei]?  Crist  jjat,  if  he  hadde  not  do  werkes 
in  hem,  pat  noon  oper  man  dide,  pei  hadden  ftot  hadde  pis  synne, 
but  now  pei  siyn  pis  feip,  and  "^it  pei  hatiden  hope  me  and  my 
Fadir.  But  )>is  synne  was  not  done  wi]?outen  grete  cause,  si}? 
God  suifri])  noo  synne  wi])OUten  avauntage  \dX  it  doijj.  And 
so  was  verified pe  writinge  in  her  owne  lawe,  pat  pe  Jewes  hadden 
wilfulli  Crist  in  hate. 


On  DAI  OF  ooN  Evangelist. 


[SERMON    LVIIL] 

Designavit  Dominus  Jesus. — Luc.  x.  [i.] 

pis  gospel  tellij)  how  Crist  sente  lesse  disciplis  to  preche  to 
))e  peple,  and  ordeyne  for  J)e  apostlis;  and  Jjes  wordis  helpen 
moche  for  prechinge  of  simple  preestis,  for  grete  apostlis  figuren 
bishopis,  and  lesse  disciplis  lesse  preestis.  But  ])ese  disciplis 
weren  two  and  seventy  in  noumbre ;  and  so  many,  as  men  seien, 
weren  langagis  aftir  making  of  Babiloynea;   and  alle  Cristis 


^  This  very  precise  calculation 
appears  to  be  taken  from  the  De 
Civitate  Dei  of  St.  Augustine,  who, 
(Lib.  xvi.  cap.  3-9),  reckoning  the 
posterity  of  Shem  at  27,  that  of 
Ham  at  31,  and  that  of  Japhet  at 
15,  (Gen.  X.)  considers  that  the 
human  race,  after  the  flood,  was 
divided  into    73,  or   rather,   as   he 


undertakes  to  prove  by  a  particular 
argument,  into  72  nations.  Till 
the  building  of  the  tower  of  Babel, 
these  nations  had  all  one  common 
language  ;  but  after  the  dispersion 
which  followed  as  a  penal  infliction 
upon  that  event,  there  came  to  be 
as  many  languages  as  there  were 
nations. 


The  mission  of 
the  seventy- 
two  disciples. 


176 


WrCLIF'S 


Poor  priests 
forbidden  to 
preach  the 
gospel,  while 
friars  are  free 
to  preach 
fables. 


Gal.  i.  i8 ; 
ii.  7,  8. 


disciplis  traveiliden  to  bringe  to  oon  men  of  ]?e  Chirche,  so 
]?at  |?er  shulde  be  oon  heerde  and  oon  flok.  pis  noumbre  of 
Cristis  disciplis  sente  he,  two  and  two  bifore  his  face,  into  ech 
place  pat  he  was  to  come  to,  for  to  preche  and  to  teche,  as  weren 
citees  and  comune  places.  And  here  moun  Cristene  men  se 
j)e  falshede  of  )?ese  freris,  how  J>ei  letten  symple  presds  to 
preche  ]?€  gospel  to  |)e  folk.  For  as  j^ei  feynen  falsely,  noon 
of  Cristis  disciplis  hadde  leve  to  preche  til  ]?at  Petir  hadde 
50vun  him  leve,  and  bi  ])is  same  skile,  noo  preest  shulde  preche 
to  J)e  peple,  but  if  he  hadde  leve  of  ]je  bishop  or  leve  of  |>e  pope, 
pis  gospel  tellijj  ]?e  falsnesse  of  ])es  freris  lesynge,  for  Crist 
sente  J^ese  disciplis  to  preche  comunly  to  ]?e  peple,  wi]?outen 
lettre  or  axinge  of  leve  of  Seint  Petir ;  and  as  Petir  shulde  not 
graunte  |?is  leve  in  Cristis  presence,  so  preestis  in  Cristis  pre- 
sence have  leve  of  Crist,  whanne  \t\  ben  preestis,  to  preche 
treuli  }>e  gospel.  And  if  ]>ei  prechen  ])us  treuli  j^e  gospel  as 
Crist  biddijj  hem,  Crist  is  amyddis  hem,  and  )>e  peple  ]?at  \€\ 
techen.  And  al3if  prelatis  shulden  examyne  prestis  jjat  prechen 
])us,  nej>eles  it  were  more  nede  to  examyne  ])es  freris,  ]>at 
feynen  hem  to  be  preestis,  for  Jjei  comen  in  of  worse  ground, 
and  ben  more  suspect  of  heresie. 

Lord !  what  resoun  shulde  dryve  herto,  to  lette  trewe  preestis 
to  preche  ]>e  gospel  freeli,  wij)0uten  ony  let,  or  ony  fablis  or 
flaterynge,  and  5yve  leve  to  J>ese  freris  to  preche  fablis  and 
heresies,  and  aftirward  to  spoile  |)e  peple,  and  selle  hem  her  false 
sermouns.  Certis  |>e  peple  shulde  not  suffre  siche  falshede  of 
Antecrist.  Also  Poul,  Cristis  apostle,  techi]?  in  bokes  of  oure 
bileve,  how  God  wolde  jjat  he  prechide  to  J)e  peple  wi])0Uten  sich 
axing ;  for  fro  ]?e  tyme  |>at  he  was  convertid,  Jjree  5eer  after,  he 
preechide  fast,  and  axide  noo  leve  of  Petir  herto,  for  he  hadde 
leve  of  Jesus  Crist.  Siche  novelries  of  pseudo  freris  shulden 
prelatis  and  alle  men  a5en  stonden,  lest  her  falshede  growide 
more  and  largerly '  envenymede  J)e  Chirche.  pus  shulden 
preestis  preche  \q,  peple  freeli  Cristis  gospel,  and  leve  freris 
fablis  and  her  begginge,  for  Jeanne  \t\  preche  wij)  Cristis  leve ; 
and  herof  shulden  prelatis  be  feyn,  sij>  })ei  synnen  moche  on 


Inrgerely,  E. 


WYCLIF. 


SERMONS. 


177 


o|)er  sidis,  but  if  ))ei  ben  Antecristis  preestis  and  shapcn  to 
qiienche  Cristis  lawe.  But  ])e  peple  comunli  trowide  in  Crist 
and  lovede  him,  and  )ms  })ei  obeschen'  to  |ms  tyme,  boj)e  to 
Crist  and  his  lawe. 

And  Crist  shewide  )?e  cause  and  ]>&  nede  of  )?is  prechinge, 
/or  he  seide,  Ripe  corn  is  mocke,  and f ewe  workmen  abouie  it.  But 
for  |)is  work  is  medeful,  and  Crist  sovereynli  performyde  it, 
jjerfore  he  techi]?  his  discipHs,  to  preie  pe  lord  of  pis  ripe  corn 
to  sende  hise  worhnen  perto.  And  here  Crist  techi])  opinH  jjat 
men  shulden  not  bie  jjis  office,  ne  take  no  mede  of  ]?e  peple 
to  traveiie  |)us  in  Cristis  name,  for  jjanne  ]?ei  puttiden  upon 
Crist  ])at  he  sillide  prechyng  of  his  word,  and  ^af  leve  to  do 
symonye;  and  bojje  ])es  ben  blasfemyes.  But  Crist  stiride  his 
men  to  go,  and  tellip  hem  j^e  peril  bifore,  but  he  move}?  hem 
privyly  for  greet  mede  to  traveiie  jjus ;  Go  ^e,  seij?  Crist,  /or  V 
sende  "s^ou  as  lambren  among  wolves.  And  so  we  have  mande- 
ment  of  Crist,  and  autorite  to  go,  and  foorme  of  |)is  perilous 
goinge,  J3at  maki]?  it  more  medeful.  But  Crist  5yve])  his  prechours^ 
foorme  how  |>ei  shal  lyve  in  |)is  work;  Nyle  y,  he  seip,  here  sachil 
ne  scrippe,  ne  hosis,  ne  shoon,  ne  greete  men  bi  pe  weie,  ne  do  |>ing 
j)at  shulde  lette  ]?is  work.  If  ony  siche  helpe  to  ])is  work,  Crist 
wolde  not  ])at  \q\  leften  it.  And  ])us  sei|)  Crist  jjat,  In  to  what 
hous  y  entren,  y  shal  first  seie,  Pees  be  to  pis  hous  ;  and  i/  pere 
be  child  0/  pees,  '^oure  pees  shal  reste  upon  him,  and  ellis  it  shal 
turne  ayn  to  yu,  and  so  ^oure  work  shal  not  be  idil.  But  if 
ypocritis  worchen  here,  al  3if  })ei  seien  sich  wordis,  \q.  housis 
and  ]>Q  peple  ben  worse,  |)at  })ese  false  men  comen  among; 
for  Crist  doi|)  jjese  vertues,  in  whos  name  Jjese  prechours 
speken,  and  if  |>ei  ben  j^e  fendis  lymes,  comunly  j^ei  moven 
to  synne.  But  Crist  wolde  not  )?at  hise  workmen  wenten 
aboute  wijjouten  fruyt,  and  ]?erfore  he  biddi]>  hem  dwelle  in  pe 
same  hous  upon  resoun ;  but  \€\  shulden  be  not  idil  ]?ere,  ne 
curious  in  mete  and  drynke,  but  })e  peple  shulde  gladly  fede 
hem,  and  \€\  shulden  homly  take  |)at  \€\  founden,  and  J)ei 
shulden  take  no  newe  reule  bi  which  j^e  peple  were  chargid. 
And  nei)>er  part  shulde  grutche  here  to  do  |>us  as  Crist  techij), 


'  So  E ;  A  has  oblishen. 
SERMONS. 


2  So  E ;  A  has  telle. 

N 


preciouse,  E. 


Yet  their  mis- 
sion, authority, 
and  rule  of  life, 
are  clear. 


178 


WVCLIF'S 


Various  cha- 
racteristics of 
true  preachers ; 
not  possessed 
by  the  friars. 


for  it  shulde  turne  wi]?oute  charge  to  mede  of  boj?e  partis ;  and 
good  lyf  of  sich  workmen  shulden  move  ]>e  peple  to  do  hem 
good,  and  devocioun  of  \>q  peple  should  preie  hem  to  take  her 
goodis.  But  gredynesse  and  avarice  letten  here  ))es  two  partis  ; 
and  al  if  bojje  ]?es  synnes  letten  moche  fro  Cristis  work,  nejjeles 
coveitise  of  preestis  is  more  perilous  in  ]?is  caas ;  for  avarice 
of  jje  peple  mai  be  helpid  on  many  maners,  o]?er  to  turne  to 
ojjer  peple,  or  to  traveile  as  Poul  dide,  or  to  suifre  wilfulli 
hunger,  and  Jurist  if  it  falle ;  but  coveitise  of  wickide  preestis 
blemyshij?  hem  and  ]>e  peple,  for  comunly  ]?ei  shapen  her  wordis 
aftir  ]>e  ende  Jjat  ))ei  coveiten. 

And  here  jjenken  many  men  Jjat  siche  prechours  shulden 
be  war  j^at  |)ey  come  not  wi]?  myche  peple  ne  many  hors 
to  preche  }>us,  but  be  paied  of  comun  diete,  and  Jjerwi]?  redi 
to  traveile,  for  |>ei  shulden  be  noo  cause  of  synne,  ne])er 
of  hem  ne  of  J^e  peple.  And  here  it  seme]?  to  many  men 
jjat  jjese  newe  ordris  of  freris  shulden  ei]?er  leve  her  mul- 
titude, or  traveile  wi]?  her  hondis,  and  if  ))ei  diden  bojje  jjes 
two  discretely,  it  were  ]?e  betere.  Ne  take  )?ei  not  of  Cristis 
lyf  to  traveile  not,  .as  Crist  did  not,  for  neijjer  ]?ey  can  ne 
moun  be  occupied  ellis  as  Crist  was ;  but  ra]?er  Jjei  shulden 
take  of  Poul  and  oj^er  apostlis  for  to  traveile,  and  leve  her  newe 
tradiciouns,  as  Petir  dide,  wi]?  o])er  apostlis,  and  profitiden  more 
]?an  Jjes  men  done.  We  shulden  ]jenke  how  Petir  lyvede  whanne 
Cornelious  sente  after  him,  how  symply  he  was  fed  and  herborid, 
and  how  he  answeride ;  but  now  freris  reversen  Petir  and  mul- 
tiplien  newe  lawes  ^  and  persones  of  ])eir  ordris,  havynge  more 
})an  Petir  hadde.  And  herwi]?  ]?ei  seien  to  men  ])at  J)ei  passen 
bishopis  and  popis,  and  certis  )>ei  seien  here  J)e  sojje,  if  |>ei 
menen  passinge  in  synne,  for  unleveful  excesse  is  passinge 
to  ]?es  freris.  And  so  as  ]>q\  varien  in  abitis,  so  |>ei  ben 
speckid  in  her  ordris,  for  as  jje  sect  of  Sarasynes  ^  ]jei  han  sum 
good  and  sum  yvele. 


^  So  E ;  lawyes,  A. 


^  Sarascenes,  E. 


SERMONS, 


179 


In  DAI  OF  ooN  Martir. 

[SERMON     LIX.] 

Nisi granum  frumenti. — John  xii.  [24.] 

pis  gospel  move])  men  bi  wordis  of  Crist  to  martirdom. 
And  first  Crist  speki})  |?us  bi  symylitude  in  kynde.  But  if  }>e 
corn  of  whete  fallinge  in  erpe  be  deed,  ellis  it  dwellip  aloone  wipoute 
fruyt,  |)at  springij)  J)erof,  and  if  it  be  deed  in  er])e,  moche  fruyt 
spri7igip  perof ;  and  thus  it  is  of  Cristis  lyf,  that  licnej?  him  to 
whete  corn.  It  is  knowun  |)ing  in  kynde,  and  in  sentence  \2X 
clerkis  tellen,  J)at  |?e  whete  corn  whan  it  is  sowun  and  wel  hilid 
wip  er])e,  it  takij)  not  a  newe  foorme,  but  if  ])e  elde  passe  awei ; 
and  si]7  it  lyvede  sum  tyme,  it  must  nedis  Jeanne  be  deed.  And 
if  j)is  corn  be  |)us  deed,  it  bringi]?  forjj  myche  fruyte,  for  it 
growij)  bi  vertue  of  hevene  first  to  gras  and  after  to  corn,  and 
of  00  corn  comej>  an  eere,  and  in  00  eere  ben  many  cornes. 
So  it  is  in  holi  Chirche  of  Crist,  and  corn  j?at  come]?  of  him. 
Crist  is  bi  sum  proprete  00  wheet  corn  among  alle,  and  Crist 
mote  nedis  die,  and  after  growe  in  hise  aposdis,  and  bi  hem 
growij)  Crist  in  myche  multitude  of  corn.  And  how  ever  clerkes 
speken  jjat  j^e  same  vertue  is  in  ))e  seed  jjat  is  after  in  ]?e  fruyt, 
and  passij)  from  o  fruyt  to  anojjer,  we  bileven  Jjat  in  gendrure  of 
holi  Chirche  it  is  ])us ; — J>e  vertue  of  J?e  firste  corn,  ])at  is  Crist, 
of  whom  come|>  |)e  Chirche,  dwelli]>  in  ech  corn  |)at  comej?  in 
part  of  |)is  Chirche.  But  |)is  vertue  is  not  an  accident  wiJ)Outen 
a  suget,  si]j  j)is  suget  is  ])e  secounde  persone  of  God,  J)at  is  in 
ech  lyme  of  j)e  Chirche,  and  bringij?  wij?  him  a  grace  \2X  clerkes 
clepen  predestynynge.  And  so,  al  3if  Crist  was  bifore  his  man- 
hed  hed  of  J)is  Chirche,  nejjeles  bi  his  manhede  ])is  corn  hadde 
newe  purginge  and  colour. 

After  j)is  mysty  speche,  knyttij?  Crist  ano])er  word  which 
seme|>  woundirful  in  heerynge  of  many  men.  He  pat  lovep 
hys  lyf  seij)  Crist,  he  shal  lese  it,  and  a3en,  he  pat  hatip  his 
lyf  in  pis  world,  he  kepip  it  to  lyf  ivipouten  eende,     A  man  is 

N    2 


Interprt'tation 
of  the  gospel. 


The  true 
following  of 
Christ, 


i8o 


WYCLIF'S 


The  reward  of 
such  following. 


(")ljectio;;s 
iinswered. 


seid  to  love  his  lyf,  |>at  love]?  it  more  ))an  o]jer  I^ing;  and  he 
is  said  to  hate  his  lyf,  jjat  putti]?  o]?er  love  bifore  it;  for  jje 
first  is  a  passinge  love,  and  Jje  to]?er  a  maner  of  hate;  and  bi 
))is  manere  of  speche  many  gospellis  moun  be  knowun,  for  it 
is  a  suynge  jjing  to  love  a  ]?ing  and  to  hate  it  Jjus.  But  in  ]je 
|?ridde  word  of  J)is  gospel  spekijj  Crist  more  speciali,  how  ]?es 
wordis  longen  to  him,  as  to  ground  of  good  religioun.  First 
Crist  sei)>,  If  ony  man  serve  to  Crist,  sue  he  him ;  and  here  he 
techi]?  })at  no  man  mai  mynystre  to  Crist,  but  if  he  sue  him;  and 
jjus  moun  we  se  how  feyntli  we  serve  to  Crist,  for  now  we  leven 
j)e  weie  of  Crist  and  bowun  ^  bi  a  wrong  weie,  and  now  we  gone 
ever  abak  to  synne  Jjat  we  han  first  done.  And  so  fewe  men 
or  noon  suen  Crist  wiJ?outen  defaute,  for  we  speken  of  suynge 
in  vertues,  and  not  of  suynge  of  bodili  weie.  And  ])is  suynge 
stondi]?  most  in  ordynal  love  of  man,  and  herfore  speki}>  J)e 
gospel  of  love,  and  of  hate  next  bifore. 

But  over  J>is,  Crist  seij>  })at,  Where  he  is,  his  mynystre  shal 
be,  and  jjis  is  seid  suyngli  to  ]?e  word  ])at  is  seid  bifore ;  for 
it  seme]?  of  ]7at  word  })at  it  is  hard  to  serve  Crist,  and  her- 
fore telli]>  Crist  \q  meede  \2X  men  shulden  have  J>at  serven 
him ;  for  he  \2X  may  not  lye  biheti])  \2X  his  servaunt  shal  be 
]7ere,  bo}>e  in  blis  and  in  place,  where  Christ  is  wi]?outen 
eende.  And  si))  Crist  is  in  hevene  and  in  blis  bi  bo]?e 
hise  kyndis,  ]?is  biheest  shulde  move  men  to  sue  Crist, 
al  5if  it  be  hard,  for  J?e  mede  of  ])is  suynge  passi)?  gredi 
])e  traveile  herfore ;  for  Crist  mai  not  rewarde  men  but  if  he 
5eve  hem  over  her  traveil ;  as  he  mai  not  5y ve  a  ]>ing,  but  ^if  he 
5yve  it  graciousely;  for  as  he  is  al  grace,  so  he  medij)  and 
ponishi])  bi  grace.  But  Jje  laste  word  here  shulde  move  a  trewe 
man  to  serve  Crist,  for  he  seij>,  If  ony  mati  serve  me,  my  Fadir 
shal  worshipe  him.  And  J>is  worship  mai  not  be,  but  if  it  make 
J>is  man  Goddis  sone,  and  so  eir^  of  God,  and  3yve  him  goodis 
of  all  his  rewme ;  and  ])anne  he  is  maad  worshipful,  as  we 
maken  worship  unto  kyngis.  And  so  alle  eiris  of  Crist  ben 
moche  more  ]?an  er])eli  kyngis. 

In  |>is  shorte  gospel  ben  doutis,  bojje   of  conscience  and 


bowen,  E. 


-'  heyr,  E. 


SERMONS. 

of  o]?er.  First  philosophris  douten,  where  seed  leesi]>  his 
forme,  whanne  it  is  maad  a  newe  Jjing,  as  j?e  gospel  spekij) 
here ;  and  sum  men  jjenken  nay,  for  si|?e  \>e  same  quantite 
or  qualite,  or  vertue,  ]>at  was  first  in  seed,  levej?  aftir  in 
)>e  fruyte,  as  a  child  is  ofte  lyk  to  his  fadir  or  to  his  modir, 
or  ellis  to  his  eelde  fadir,  aftir  ]?at  |)e  vertue  lastijj, — and  si|> 
alle  j>ese  ben  accidentis,  jjat  mai  not  dwelle  wi])Outen  suget, 
— it  seme})  ))at  )>e  same  bodi  is  first  seed  and  after  fruyte, 
and  ])us  it  mai  ofte  change  fro  seed  to  fruyte  and  a^en.  Here 
many,  clepid  filosophris,  glaveren  dyversely ;  but  in  })is  mater 
Goddis  lawe  speki}>  }>us,  as  diden  eelde  clerkis,  )?at  ]?e  sub- 
staunce  of  a  bodi  is  bifore  ))at  it  be  seed,  and  now  fruyte  and 
now  seed,  and  now  quyk  and  now  deed.  And  ])us  many  formes 
moun  be  togidere  in  oo  }^ing,  and  speciali  whanne  ]?e  partis 
of  |)at  ))ing  ben  medlid  togidere  ;  and  ])us  ]?e  substaunce  of 
a  bodi  is  now  of  oo  kynde  and  now  of  anojjer.  And  so  bo]?e 
l^ese  accidentis,  qualite  and  quantite,  moun  dwelle  in  J^e  same 
substaunce,  al  if  it  be  chaungid  in  kindis,  and  |>us  ]?is  same  |)ing 
j?at  is  now  a  whete  corn  shal  be  deed  and  turne  to  gras,  and 
after  to  many  cornes.  But  variance  in  wordis  in  j)is  mater  falli}? 
to  clerkes,  and  shewinge  of  equivocacioun  \  \q  which  is  more 
redi  in  Latyn ;  but  it  is  ynow  to  us  to  putte,  ])at  ])e  same  substance 
is  now  quyk  and  now  deed,  and  now  seed  and  now  fruyte ; 
and  so  ]>at  substaunce  J^at  is  now  a  whete  corn  mut  nedis  die 
bifore  )>at  it  be  maad  gras,  and  si]?  be  maad  an  hool  eer.  And 
)?us  spekij)  holi  writt  and  no  man  can  disproven  it.  Errour  of 
freris  in  ]>is  mater  is  not  here  to  reherce,  for  it  is  ynow^  to 
telle  how  jjei  erren  in  bileve. 

The  secounde  doute  in  J)is  mater  is  of  suynge  of  Crist. 
It  seme]?  J?at  no  man  sue}?  him  but  if  he  be  martrid  as  was 
Crist,  and  si]>  no  man  mai  be  saved  but  if  he  sue  Crist 
in  lyf,  it  seme]?  ]?at  no  man  shal  be  saved  but  if  he  be 
martrid.  Here  men  seien  truli,  ]?at  ]?ere  ben  two  martirdoms, 
martirdome  in  bodi  and  martirdome  in  wille.  Martirdome 
in  bodi  nedi]?  not  ech  man  to  have,  for  many  men  ben 
seintis  ]?at  dien  confessours.     GeneraH  to  speke,  }?at  man  is 


i8i 


Two  kinds  of 
martyrdom. 


'  So  E ;  A  has  equyvacioun. 


iSz  WFCLIF'S 

a  martir  ]jat  is  killid  in  charite  and  })us  goi))  to  hevene,  be  he 
killid  of  just  men  or  ellis  of  })e  fendis  lymes.  pis  secounde 
manere  of  martirdom  shulde  ech  man  have,  si|)  ech  man 
shulde  more  love  his  soule  ))an  his  bodi,  and  algatis  he  shulde 
more  love  God  and  his  lawe ;  and  who  evere  lovej)  jjus,  is  redi 
to  suffre  de]?  of  his  bodi  for  love  of  his  God  And  fewe  seintis, 
or  noon,  ben  here  on  lyve  ]>at  ne  ]?ei  maken  hem  martirs  for 
|?e  love  of  God ;  for  to  chastise  her  fleishe  ))ey  shorten  her  lyf. 
But  Y  speke  not  here  of  martirdom  of  glotouns,  for  ]?ei  shorten 
her  lyf  for  love  of  her  fleish,  and  taken  to  myche  fode,  wherfore 
))ei  dien  sunner ;  but  |)e  firste  men  fasten  for  love  of  her  God, 
and  to  have  pees  of  her  fleish  ))at  ellis  wolde  be  wantoun.  But 
sij)  men  knowun  not  evenly  j^e  mesure  ])at  wolde  leng]?e  her  lyf, 
jjes  men  ben  not  mensleeris,  for  bi  sich  chesinge  of  ]>e  betere, 
jjei  lesen  wysely  |?e  worse ;  and  so  done  bi  Goddis  heeste  ))es 
bodily  martris.  And  )?us  men  shulden  not  folili  slee  hem  silf, 
nejjer  in  fastinge  ne  in  etinge  ne  in  cause  defending,  but  stonde 
for  truj>e  if  her  dee]>  sue,  willinge  to  maynteyne  tru]?e,  and  mekeli 
to  suffre  deej>,  but  not  folOy  desire  it. 


Of  oon  MARxm. 


[SERMON     LX.] 


What  it  in- 
volved in 
taking  up  the 
Cross  and  fol- 
lowing Christ. 


Si  quis  vult  venire  post  me. — Matt.  xvi.  [24.] 

pis  gospel  techi])  as  jje  former  doi)>,  how  a  man  shulde 
ordeyne  him  for  to  suffre  martirdom.  First  seij?  Crist  J)at,  who 
ever  wole  come  after  him,  he  viut  denye  him  silf  and  take  his 
crosse  and  sue  Crist,  pat  man  denye})  him  silf  ]?at  loveJ>  him 
silf  lasse  ]>an  he  loveJ>  his  God  or  lawe  of  his  God.  For  |>is 
principle  of  love  moten  men  suppose,  whanne  |>er  ben  two 
))ingis  put  in  a  mannis  chois,  and  he  mut  nede  leve  ))e  toon  for 
takinge  of  |>e  toj^er.  pat  j^ing  \2X  he  leve)>,  he  love|>  |ianne  J^e 
lesse,  and  J?is  clepi}>  Crist  denyynge  of  j^at  |)ing,  and  in  anoj?er 
place,  hate  of  his  lyf ;  and  Jms  shulden  allc  men  renounsen  her 


SA'RJ/ONS. 


'H 


goodis,  for  goodis  moven  men  to  love  hem  in  ordre,  and  if 
men  tellen  to  pese  goodis  )7at  her  love  passe  ^  resoun,  jjanne  |?ei 
tellen  a3en«'  her  answere  to  ])es  goodis.  But  )>is  synne  is  in 
men  and  not  in  goodis,  and  j?is  tellinge  a3en  is  renounsinge  of 
hem ;  as  if  a  man  be  temptid  to  love  an  er]>eli  |>ing  more  jjan 
his  God,  for  fals  undirstondinge  bi  which  he  can  not  weye  j)e 
ri3t  wei5te  of  love,  Jjanne  he  forsakijj  his  God,  for  love  of  ])is 
erj^eli  J>ing.  And  if  he  staunche  ]?is  love,  and  seie  to  ]>is  J;ing 
{jat  he  wole  not  love  it  so  myche,  for  ]>e  love  of  God,  jjanne  he 
renounsi]?  to  it,  J>at  here  he  wole  forsake  it.  pe  secounde  word 
|)at  Crist  sei]?,  j^at  men  shulden  take  her  crosse,  biddi)?  jjat 
men  shulden  make  hem  redi  to  suffre  for  Goddis  love ;  for 
}>e  crosse  bitokene]?  passioun  in  Goddis  lawe,  and  J>is  purpos 
is  nedeful  Cristen  men  to  have.  And  ^e  ]?ridde  word  ))at 
Crist  techij)  here,  jjat  whanne  a  man  ha])  \>es  two  he  shulde 
sue  Crist,  ech  man  shulde  have  in  mynde  and  do  it  in  dede ; 
for  he  sue])  Crist,  |>at  move]?  himsilf  to  holde  Goddis  heestis; 
for  J)is  weie  wente  Crist  and  failide  in  no  tyme  to  do  his 
Fadris  wille.  And  |)is  word  answeri]?  to  ]>e  Holi  Goost,  as 
two  wordis  bifore  menen  |>e  Fadir  and  ]>e  Sone,  for  pe  name 
of  God  ])at  is  al  my3ti  answerij)  bi  proprete  to  pe  firste  persone, 
and  man  shal  denye  himsilf  for  J>is  name ;  and  so  whanne  we 
preien  to  God  in  oure  Pater  noster,  we  seien  first  to  \>e  Fadir, 
Halowid  be  ]>i  name,  pe  crosse  bitokene])  ]>e  persone  of  Crist, 
for  he  was  done  on  pe  crosse  for  love  of  mankynde,  and  shape 
him  evermore  to  suffre  bi  comun  counceil.  And  here  a3en  ])is 
Trinite  synnen  many  men ;  as,  he  ]?at  bi  mannis  lawe  is  clepid 
to  an  office,  in  which  he  mai  not  kepe  him  silf  in  charite,  and 
answeri])  for  |?is  name  and  taki]?  on  him  |)is  office,  ])is  man 
synne])  a3ens  Goddis  name,  and  denye}>  not  him  silf  for  love 
of  God. 

But  after  Crist  5yve]j  a  reule  to  kepe  ]>es  J>ree   Jjingis,  and 

sei}>.  Who  so  wok  make  his  lyf  saa/,  mui  nedis  lesen  it,  lyvynge 

in  }>is  world,  but  he  pat  lesip  his  lyf  for  pe  love  of  Crist  shal 

fynde  it,  in  pe  to])er  world,     pat  man  lesi]?  his  lyf,  p2X  putti])  it 

'  passi\>,  E. 
^  '  telle  a5en  '  is  meant  as  the  literal  rendering  of  •  re-nuntiare.' 


1 84 


WYCLI  F'S 


The  Trans- 
figuration 
predicted. 


bihinde  and  ]?e  love  of  God  bifore,  whanne  j^e  caas  come]>,  and 
so  it  is  al  oon  a  man  for  to  lese  his  lyf  and  denye  himsilf,  or 
ellis  to  hate  himsilf;  and  who  \2X  leesi]?  not  his  lyf  here  on  })is 
manere,  he  faili]?  in  charite  and  in  ]>e  firste  mandement.  But 
sij)  a  mannis  lyf  is  ordeyned  of  God  evermore  to  be,  it  is  not 
lost  to  God,  but  he,  for  whom  ])is  lyf  is  lost,  kepij)  it  wele  and 
3yve]7  it  him  in  blis  in  ]?e  toJ?er  world.  And  who  wolde  not 
chaffre  J)us  wi]>  his  owne  lyf.?  Clerkis  witen  wele  how  a  mannis 
soule  and  a  mannis  lyfe  ben  boJ)e  oon  in  a  manere,  for  lyf  is 
|)e  firste  acta  ]>at  comej)  of  a  mannis  soule,  and  of  siche  actis 
taken  ]?ingis  names,  as  clerkis  clepen  angels  undirstondingis  ^. 
And  ])us  spekij)  J?e  gospel  of  a  mannis  lyf,  and  Crist  provede 
bi  resoun  J>at  men  shulden  chaffare  J>us,  For  what  profiiip  it  to 
a  man,  if  he  Wynne  al  pis  world,  if  he  suffre  perbi  peirifige  of 
his  soule ;  or  what  chaunginge  shal  a  man  ^yve  for  his  soule. 
Si]>  a  mannis  soule  is  persone  of  ))is  man,  he  shulde  ^yve  al  his 
catel  for  savynge  of  |)is  soule ;  and  sij)  a  mannis  bodi  is  worse 
|>an  his  soule,  ech  man  shulde  more  love  his  soule  \zxi  his 
bodi.  And  so  he  shulde  hate  his  bodi  for  love  of  J)is  soule, 
and  speciali  si]?  sich  chaffare  shulde  turne  him  to  betere.  And 
ground  of  ]>is  speche  stondi]?  in  |?is  bileve,  For  Crist  is  to  come 
fro  hevene  in  his  glorie  at  J)e  dai  of  doome  wip  hise  atmgelis  to 
juge  ech  man,  and  panne  shal  he  ^yve  to  ech  man  after  hise 
workes.  And  si]?  J?is  lore  ^  of  Crist  deserve]?  hevene  blis,  he  is 
a  greet  fool  })at  wole  not  chaffare  here.  Defaute  of  bileve 
letti]?  algatis  J?is  chaffare. 

And  for  ]?is  sentence  is  hard  for  to  trowe,  ]?erfore  tellij? 
Crist  of  his  glorifiyng,  how  he  shal  shewe  him  here  glorious 
in  his  bodi,  so  ]?at  bi  ]?is  shewyng  here  in  ]?is  lyf,  J)ei  ben 
more  stablid  in  ]?is  to  trowe  in  Crist.  Sopeli,  sei]?  Crist, 
V  seie  to  -^ou,  pere  be  simi  of  men  pat  stonden  here,  pat  shulen 
not  taaste  dep,  til  pei  seen  me  comyng  in  my  rewme  in  blis  of 
my  bodi.  And  for  |)is  was  done  in  J?e  kynde  of  Cristis  bodi, 
}>erfore  he  clepi}?  him  here  sone  of  a  man;  and  })is  was  done 
in   dede,  as   Matheu  telli}?  after,   for  Petir,  Johun,   and  James 

'  So  both  A  and  E ;  but  the  sense  evidently  requires  love. 
■'  Or  '  intelligence?  ; '  a  translation  of  the  Latin  intelli'f^entiae. 


S  Jl  R  M  0  N  S. 


185 


weren  here  wi))  Crist,  and  his  face  shynede  as  sunne,  and 
Moises  and  Helye  apperiden  to  him.  And  |)us  Crist  cam  in 
his  rew-me,  or  jjese  discipHs  weren  dede ;  and  j>is  was  a  greet 
skile  to  move  hem  to  trowe  in  Crist,  and  to  traveile  bisily  to 
gete  sich  a  blisse,  for  sich  a  bodiH  lyf  were  wel  chaungid  for 
|>is  lyf.  And  herefore  seid  Petir,  It  is  good  to  us  to  be  here 
and  Jjerefore  make  we  here  |>ree  tabernaclis.  And  |)us  who  so 
trowi])  wele  bi  love  of  J)e  gospel,  he  shal  trowe  to  Cristis  lore 
and  lyve  Jjerafter.  Ne  drede  we  jjes  sophists  ])at  Crist  seide 
here  fals,  whanne  he  seide  |>at  he  cam  here  in  his  ^  rewme,  for 
as  part  of  \e  Chirche  is  treuH  clepid  J?e  Chirche,  so  part  of 
Cristis  rewme  is  treuli  clepid  his  rewme.  And  si]?  many 
aungels  comen  wij?  jjes  J?ree  men,  and  Crist  cam  to  ]?es 
apostlis  in  dowers  -  of  his  bodi,  it  was  sojjeli  seid  ])at  he  cam 
here  in  his  rewme.  For  men  here  j^at  shulen  be  saaf  as  weren 
Cristis  apostlis,  ben  clepid  his  rewme  in  ])e  Pater  noster ;  whi 
not  jjes  seintis  in  which  Crist  cam  here .? 


In  DAI  OF  O  Martir. 


[SERMON     LXL] 


Qui  vos  audit,  me  audit.  —  Luc.  x.  [16.] 

pis  gospel  tellij?  a  lore  of  Crist,  how  he  tau3te  his  disciplis, 
to  holde  hem  in  mekenesse,  and  to  flee  veyn  glorie,  ]7at  is 
a  fendis  synne.  pe  gospel  telli]>  how  lasse  disciplis,  |?at  weren 
two  and  seventy,  comen  a^en  to  Crist  wi|>  joie,  and  seiden,  as 
|>e  gospel  telli])  after,  and  we  shulen  reherce.  Crist  ^yve]? 
autorite  first  to  hise  disciplis,  and  speki}?  to  hise  membris  as 
]?es  ))at  shulen  be  saved,  and  sei|) ;  He  pat  heerip  ^ou,  in  |>at  he 
heerip  me  and  he  pat  dispisip  "ipu,  in  ])at  he  dispisip  me ;  for 
whanne  a  messanger  spekij?  in  name  of  a  man,  he  \2X  heeri]) 
him  or  dispisi]?  him  |)us,  heeri])  or  dispisi]?  him  in  whos  name 
he  speki]).     And  bi  J>is  cause  shulden  men  worshipe  prechours, 


True  preachers 
have  authority 
direct  from 
Christ. 


'  So  E ;  A  has  \is. 


^  doweris,  E. 


1 86 


WFCLIF'S 


On  the  nature 
of  thunder. 


and  dispisen  hem '  ))at  prechen  fablis  or  lesingis,  for  |)ei  comen  in 
))e  fendis  name,  as  her  work  shewi]?.  And  Jjus  if  prechours  holden 
hem  prechinge  in  Cristis  name,  ])ei  han  ful  autorite  more  |)an 
prelatis  moun  yf\e  hem;  and  if  a  man  preche  a^ens  Cristis 
biddinge,  as  in  falshede,  or  for  begginge,  or  for  worldeli  wyn- 
nynge,  )?e  autorite  ])at  he  haj)  come]?  of  j^e  fend,  for  |?e  fend  is 
his  maistir,  in  whos  name  he  prechij),  and  ))is  is  ])e  autour  ])at 
letti]?  prechinge  to  profite.  But  Crist  telli]?  over,  how  hard  it 
is  to  dispise  him,  for,  who  ever  dispisip  Crist,  dispisip  him  pat 
sente  Crist,  and  so  he  dispisi]?  ]>e  Fadir  and  al  J>e  Trinite.  And 
]>us  tellij)  Luke  ]?at  after  J)is  autorite  3yven  to  Cristis  disciplis, 
two  and  seventi  turneden  ayn,  and  hadden  unskilful  yic/*?,  and  seiden 
to  Crist;  Lord,  ^he,  pe  fendis  hen  suget  to  us  in  pe  name  of  pee. 
But  Crist  shewide  j^at  he  was  God,  and  answeride  to  J>es  dis- 
ciplis, not  to  )?e  wordis  ])at  J?ei  spaken,  but  to  jje  caas  Jjat  \t\ 
weren  inne,  and  it  is  propre  to  God  to  wite  J)us  synne  of  J)e 
soule. 

Crist  seip  to  pes  disciplis  pat  he  sail,  Sapanas  fallinge  fro 
hevene,  as  pe  punder  floon  fallip  fro  pe  cloude.  It  is  knowun 
to  clerkes  of  Jjree  J^ingis  in  J)e  J)undir,  |je  li3tning  and  ])e  noise 
and  J>e  ))undir  stoon.  pe  li^tninge  is  first  in  brekinge  of 
cloudis,  as  if  two  stoones  on  a  ny3t  weren  knockid  togider, 
and  J>is  noise  is  maad  of  ]jis  hard  hurtling ;  but  li3t  is  more 
swift  |)an  heeryng  in  perseyvyng,  as  sowne  come]?  softe,  but 
li3t  come])  soone;  and  ])is  is  cause  whi  \2X  \\^\.  is  perseyved 
bifore  soun,  and  ])us  come})  mannis  li5t  bifore  mannis  heering. 
But  })e  ])ridde  propirte  \2X  falli])  sum  tyme  in  ])undir  is  as  it 
were  a  whirlewynd  led  aboute  among  cloudis,  and  comynge 
to  })e  erj)e  and  doinge  ])ere  woundris ;  and  }>es  men  ])at  knowen 
})e  worchinge  of  })e  dementis,  how  manere  of  saltis  and  poudir 
flee])  fier,  and  worchi))  woundir  bi  craft  in  mevynge  of  cur- 
rauntis,  woundren  lesse  of  })is  ])undir  floon.  Sum  tyme,  it 
cleve);  grete  okes  in  sundir,  and  sum  tyme  it  meve])  grete 
stones  fro  her  place ;  sum  tyme  it  molti}?  ]?e  swerd  in  })e  she})e, 
and  3it  })e  she])e  is  al  hool,  and  many  o])ere  woundirs ;  and  al 
j)is   is  maad  bi   a  sutil  mater  ))at   is  moved  fro  ])e  cloudis  bi 


So  E;  om.  A. 


.SA'Jf  J/OMS. 


187 


kynde  of  )?e  elementis.  And  j>us  seijj  Crist,  j>at  SaJ>anas  bi 
pryde,  and  kynde  of  Goddis  justice,  fel  sudenili  fro  hevene, 
and  in  |)is  fallinge  he  dide  woundris,  more  j?an  }?is  jmndir  floon, 
and  he  was  stinkynge  wi|>  synne,  as  |?is  blast  stinki)>  sum  tyme. 
And  jjis  fal  of  j^e  fend  sai  Crist  bi  his  Godhede ;  and  al  ]>is  was 
of  pride,  |)at  God  my3te  not  suflfre  more,  ]?at  ne  ]>e  ^  angel  in 
hevene  was  dryvun  J)us  in  to  helle.  How  myche  shulden  men 
drede  pryde,  j>at  God  wole  )>us  punishe,  and  have  no  vein  glorie 
|>at  jjei  ben  Cristis  aungels,  and  don  woundris  in  his  name  in 
casting  out  of  fendis  !  And  to  be  war  wi]?  jjis  pride  spekij) 
Crist  jjus  ))ese  wordis,  for  Crist  knewe  wel  her  pryde  Jjat  J)ei 
hadden  in  her  hertis,  and  to  remove  J)is  pride  spak  Crist  to  her 
hertis. 

For  as  it  is  ofte  seid,  per  ben  foure  passiouns  in  a  mannis 
soule,  in  which  stondij)  synne  or  mede  after  ]?ei  ben  reulid. 
And  \>es  foure  ben  \>es,  joie  and  sorewe,  hope  and  drede  of 
|?ingis  ])at  shulen  come.  Summe  han  joie  of  sich  manere 
hi5enesse,  and  summe  han  joie  of  synne  or  richesse  of  J)e 
world,  and  sum  men  han  sorewe  of  o]?er  mennis  welfare  or 
lesinge  of  worldeli  goodis,  for  jjei  loven  hem  to  myche,  and 
sum  men  han  hope  of  welfare  of  ])is  world,  and  dreden  of 
fallinge  ]>erfro;  but  men  shulden  have  sorewe  for  her  synne 
and  o))er  mennis.  And  ]jus  Crist  wepte  }?ries,  and  ever  more 
for  synne,  for  synne  is  worse  |?an  ony  peyne  mai  be;  and  sij) 
]>e  worsnesse  of  )iing  is  matere  of  sorewe,  man  shulde  have 
more  sorewe  for  synne  j^an  for  ony  o|>er  J?ing,  and  more  joie 
of  hevenli  blis  j^an  ony  worldeli  welfare  or  hi^ynge  of  mannis 
staat,  were  it  nevere  so  myche.  And  herfore  seiji  Crist,  Lo,  I 
have  y)vun  'ifiu  power  to  defoule  upon  neddris  ^,  for  many  seintis,  as 
Margarete  ^,  hadde  power  of  God  to  defoule  ]>e  fendis  jjat  weren 


Four  predomi- 
nant passions 
in  the  soul. 


'  om.  E. 


w 


hose 


legend 


*  St.  Margaret, 
makes  her  a  native  of  Antioch  in 
the  fourth  or  fifth  century,  was  so 
popular  a  saint  in  England  from  the 
eleventh  century,  that  no  less  than 
338  parish  churches  are  said  to  be 
dedicated  in  her  honour.  According 
to  the  more  popular  version  of  her 
story  here  alluded  to,  the  foul  fiend, 


'■^  adderis,  E. 

in  the  form  of  a  dragon,  visited  her 
in  the  prison  into  which  the  per- 
secuting governor  of  Antioch  had 
thrown  her,  and  swallowed  her  up ; 
but  immediately  burst  asunder,  so 
that  the  holy  virgin  came  forth  un- 
hurt. A  good  general  account  of 
her  may  be  found  in  Mrs.  Jameson's 
Sacred  and  Legendary  Art.     See  also 


i88 


WYC  LIE'S 


in  forme  of  dragouns,  and  sette  her  feet  upon  hem,  and  heeld 
hem  a3ens  her  wille.  And  ]?is  was  grete  peyne  to  jjes  proude 
fendis ;  and  sich  manere  of  power  hadde  Cristis  disciplis  upon 
fendis,  for  Jjei  castiden  hem  out  of  placis  )>at  })ei  wolden  dwelle 
inne,  and  made  hem  to  dwelle  in  placis  \2X  \t\  wolden  not 
dwelle  inne,  and  sich  subjeccioun  is  noious  to  proude  spiritis. 
But  Crist  badde  his  disciplis,  joie  not  ]jus  for  suche  power. 
And  jjus,  to  speke  goostli,  |)is  power  to  defoule  eddris,  and  to 
defoule  scorpiouns,  is  power  to  overcome  ]>e  fendis  whanne  \^\ 
tempten  men  to  synne  bi  stingginge  of  her  venym ;  and  her- 
fore  sei])  Crist,  pat  he  hap  '^ovun  hem  power  upon  al  power  of  her 
enemye  and  he  shal  not  note  hem.  But  nepeles,  joie  y  not  in  pis 
ping  to  vein  glorie,  pat  spiritis  ben  suget  to  '^ou'\  for  ]?is  mai 
falle  to  dampned  men,  as  many  men  moun  reise  ]>e  fend,  and 
make  him  worche  woundris,  and  ^it  in  alle  ]>es  dedis  ]?ei  moun 
be  fendis  as  he  is;  for  bi  vertue  of  Crist  ]>es  fendis  ben  J)us 
suget,  and  pes  names  han  vertue  to  make  ]?e  fend  drede 
kindeli.  But  Crist  techi])  hise  disciplis  to  Joie  more  of  pis,  pat 
her  names  ben  writun  in  hevene,  for  to  come  to  blisse.  Of  ]jis 
shulde  J>ei  have  more  joie,  and  holde  hem  in  mekenes.  And 
Crist  tellijj  not  ]?is  to  men  as  he  dide  to  ]?es  disciplis,  but  if  he 
kepe  hem  in  vertues  and  bringe  hem  to  hevene,  for  ellis  Crist 
tau3te  hem  to  joie  of  J)ingis  ))at  weren  fals.  And  |)us  it  semej> 
)>at  ]?ese  disciplis  weren  confermyd  in  manere,  and  ^it  God  leet 
hem  falle,  to  teche  his  Chirche  to  flee  pride;  and  jjus  Crist 
leet  Petir  falle  ofte,  after  ]>at  he  was  apostle,  and  Jiat,  to  teche 
prelatis  after,  to  joie  not  to  myche  of  her  staat,  for  sich  boost 
is  fendis  synne,  |?at  stynki]?  foule  bifore  God,  and  it  is  maad  in 
feyned  power  to  loose  men  and  bynde.  Men  shulden  loke  ))at 
Jjei  weren  certeyn  ])at  God  wolde  worche  jjus  wi]?  hem,  bifore 
J>ei  spaken  of  |)is  power,  and  of  jje  dedis  of  ])at  to  men,  and 
J)anne  wij)  grete  mekenes,  to  moven  men  to  ]?anke  God;  for 
liynge  in  sich  a  caas  smatchide  a  myche  more  synne,  jjan  was 
in  J)es  disciplis  |)at  Crist  reprevyde  so  sharpli.     For  Jjei  seiden 

^  This  passage  is  rightly  marked  as  a  quotation  in  E,  but  not  in  A. 

Seinle    Marherete     The     Meiden    ant       century),  among  the  publications  of 
Martyr  (a  version  of  the  legend  in       the  Early  English  Text  Society, 
old  English  prose  of  the  thirteenth 


SERMONS. 


189 


so]?  and  herieden  God,  and  in  ))es  bo)je  fallen  prelatis,  for  |)ei 
for  pride  feynen  falseli  and  coveitise  of  wordeli  goodis,  to  do 
jjing  ))at  J?ei  moun  not  do ;  and  ]>is  is  a  greet  synne,  for  it  were 
synne  to  a  pore  man  to  defoule  a  kingis  clojjis,  moche  more 
synne  were  it  to  men  to  putte  falsehede  upon  treu]>e.  For  )?is 
is  a  foul  blasfemye,  |)at  is  a  foul  synne  of  alle  ojjere ;  as,  if 
a  man  putte  on  God  falshede  |>at  he  my5te  not  have,  he  dis- 
piside  in  ])is  his  God  more  ])an  jje  fende  durste  ever  do.  It  is 
no  drede  alle  |?es  popis  ])at  seien  |>at  ])ey  graunten  sich  pardons, 
seien  opinly  ynow3  ]?at  God  grauntij>  hem  bifore,  and  if  God 
knowe  hem  unwor])i  to  have  siche  pardon  of  him,  ]?es  popis 
blasfemen  in  God  more  j^an  evere  j?e  Apostlis  dursten.  And 
|)us  shulden  prelatis  be  war  to  graunt  no  ])ing  in  ]?e  name  of 
God  but  if  ))ei  weren  sikir  bifore  |)at  Goddis  justice  grauntide 
it,  and  J)is  my^te  ]>ei  not  knowe  but  if  j>ei  hadden  revelacioun ; 
and  if  oure  prelatis  abiden  ever  sich  revelacioun,  ])ey  shulden 
disseyve  fewe  men  or  noon  in  grauntinge  of  suche  pardons; 
but  as  Petir  held  his  pees  in  grauntinge  of  siche  |)ingis,  so 
shulden  ]?ei  holden  ]?er  pees,  si]?  |jei  ben  lasse  wor]?  }>an  Petir, 
and  |)e  comun  peple  shulde  not  trowe  hem  in  siche  casis. 


In  DAI  OF  ooN  Martik. 

[SERMON    LXI  I.] 

Si  quis  venit  ad  ??ie, — Luc.  xiiii.  [26.] 

pis  gospel  telli]?  men  how  |)ei  shulen  dispose  hem  to  be  dis- 
ciplis  of  Crist,  and  certis  ellis  ])ei  shulen  not  come  to  hevene ; 
for  be  he  kny^t,  be  he  clerk,  but  if  he  be  Cristis  disciple  J^enke 
he  not  to  come  to  hevene;  and  so  it  were  good  to  lerne  jjis 
lore.  Crist  sei]?  at  jje  bigynnynge,  1/  ony  man  come  to  him  and 
hate  not  pes  seven  pingt's,  he  mat  not  be  Cristis  disciple,  and  so  he 
mai  not  be  saved,  for  ech  man  jjat  sue)>  Crist  is  disciple  of 
Crist ;  and  ]?us  kny3ttis  in  Cristis  tyme  weren  his  privy  disciplis, 
as  Joseph  of  Arma|)ie,  and  centurio  also,  and  Nichodeme,  and 
ojjer  moo,  as  ]?e  gospel  tellij?  us.      First  mut  a  man  hate  his 


Papal  indul- 
gences. 


Conditions 
annexed  to  the 
discipleship  of 
Christ. 


190 


wr  CLIP'S 


Objections 
answered. 


Against  the 
new  orders. 


fadir  and  sij>  hate  his  modir ;  ]?€  )>ridde  tyme  mut  a  man  hate 
his  wyf  and  \q  four]?e  tyme  hise  children  ;  |)e  fif])e  tyme  he  shulde 
hate  his  hreperen  and  )>e  sixte  tyme  his  sisters  ;  jje  sevente  tyme 
moost  of  alle  he  moste  hate  his  owfie  lyf.  First  men  shulden 
wite  here  what  were  to  hate  in  J)is  gospel,  for  Crist  move]) 
algatis  to  love,  and  no  tyme  to  envye ;  but  here  it  is  seid  bifore 
J>at  J)is  hating  is  denying,  and  J)is  is,  lovynge  in  ordre  as  jie  |>ing 
shulde  be  loved.  And  so  Jjes  sevene  jjingis  shulden  be  loved, 
but  lasse  ])an  Crist  or  his  lawe;  and  ]?us  puttinge  bihinde  of 
love,  is  hating  J)at  Crist  speki]?  of. 

But  3it  sophistris  replien  here  and  seien  )?at  many  men 
comen  to  Crist  |>at  han  not  ])es  sevene  jjingis,  and  no  man 
hatij)  but  |)ing  ])at  is.  But  here  men  moten  lerne  to  speke 
to  \2X  witt  ))at  Goddis  lawe  speki]?.  Here  fewe  men  or  noon 
comen  to  ordre  of  Crist,  but  if  ]?ei  have  fadir  and  modir 
o])er  next  or  fer.  Sum  men  have  fadir  and  modir  jiat  geten 
hem  into  J>is  world,  and  sum  men  han  eldris  bifore  \2X 
gaten  sich  fadirs  and  modirs,  and  alle  Jjes  ben  clepid  fadir 
in  Goddis  lawe  ]?at  is  trewe.  Adam  and  Eve  hadde  noon 
sich  fadris,  but  jjei  hadden  er])e  and  erjjeli  J>ing,  and  Jjes 
my^ten  be  clepid  here  modirs,  and  her  fadir  was  mannis 
kynde ;  and  as  \€\  mosten  nede  be  saved,  so  God  was  her 
fadir.  And  si]?  ech  word  jjat  Crist  sei})  is  trewe  to  his 
entent,  and  he  seij?  jjat  who  evere  doi]?  \q  wille  of  his  Fadir 
in  hevene,  he  is  his  broJ>er  and  his  sister,  and  his  modir 
also,  no  man  wanti)?  here  ]?es  frendis,  al  if  \€\  wanten  sich 
for  a  tyme ;  and  if  mennis  eldris  ben  dede,  Jeanne  \€\  han 
suche  for  sum  tyme\  And  mannis  fleishe  is  his  wyf,  and 
her  workes  ben  hise  children ;  and  so  ech  ha]?  such  a  wyf,  and 
sich  children  of  his  wyf;  and  so  siche  sevene  ]?ingis  ben  long- 
inge  to  ech  man,  and  alle  })es  sevene  shulden  men  love  lasse 
J>an  \€\  loven  Crist  her  God.  And  })is  is  })e  reule  of  Crist,  \2X 
passi])  alle  ])es  newe  ordris,  and  who  evere  love]?  not  Crist  more 
])an  alle  ];es  sevene  wanti])  charite,  and  breki])  alle  Goddis 
hestis.  And  J)is  is  veyn  religioun,  and  so,  as  we  seiden  bifore, 
who  erer  berip  not  his  crosse  and  come})  in  lyvynge  after  Crist, 

^  a  tyme,  E. 


SERMOXS. 


191 


viai  not  wij>  )jis  be  his  disciple.  And  |)is  is  li3t  for  to  prove,  for 
man  shulde  hate  his  own  lyf,  and  so  suffre  for  Cristis  sake,  and 
ellis  he  brekijj  Cristis  ordre;  and  |?es  newe  religiouse  moten 
nedis  breke  ])is  reule  of  Crist,  for  ])ei  loven  more  )>es  newe 
ordris  ])an  |)ei  done  reule  of  |)e  gospel.  And  j)us  Jjei  feynen 
ofte  tyme  to  stonde  mi]?  lawe  of  ]>q  gospel ;  and  if  men  axen 
whi  j)ei  done  so,  ])ei  seien  J>at  ellis  here  ordre  were  loste,  but 
God  cursij)  alle  sich  ordris  ])at  neden  men  to  hate  her  God. 

And  to  printe  )jis  in  mennis  hertis  Crist  tellij)  two  hard  parablis. 
First  he  sei]j,  ]?at,  £ch  of  hem  pat  ivolde  make  an^  nedeful  tour, 
shtilde  sitte  first  and  acounte  dispensis  nede/ul  her ef  ore  pat  he  have 
to  make  pis  tour,  test  he  faile  aftirward  whanne  he  hap  sett  pe 
foundement,  and  alle  men  pat  seen  pis  bigynen  for  to  scorne  him  ; 
and  seiefi,  pis  man  bigan  to  bilde  but  he  my^te  not  make  an  ende. 
pis  tour  is  ful  nedeful  to  ech  man  |>at  shal  be  saved,  pis  toure 
is  gedringe  of  vertues,  and  ]>e  ground  is  mekenesse,  grounded 
in  Crist,  J)at  is  mene  persone  of  God ;  and  as  no  |?ing  mai  be 
lower  ]?an  is  the  myddil  of  Jje  world,  so  no  man  mai  meker  be 
J)an  is  Crist,  ]jat  is  ]?is  ground.  And  si])  ]>is  tour  mute  reche  to 
hevene,  men  moten  nedis  take  ])is  ground  ;  and  herfore  sei]?  Poul, 
})at  no  man  mai  sette  o])er  ground  ])an  is  sett,  ])e  which  ground 
is  Jesus  Crist,  for  no  man  is  meke  but  in  his  vertue.  pe  hi3est 
part  of  ])is  tour  is  briteysing^  of  charite  J)at  lasti]?  into  hevene, 
for  charite  falli])  not  doun,  but  lasti])  bo])e  in  })is  worlde  and 
after  ]>q  dai  of  dome.  0]>er  vertues  put  in  ordre  maken  J)e 
myddil  of  \>\?>  tour ;  and  ])us  we  shulde  avise  us  what  staat  or 
religioun  were  most  acordinge  to  ])is  makinge,  and  reste  Jjcrinne, 
and  make  ]>\s  toure.  And  bileve  techi]?  us  ]>at  ]?e  staat  of 
Cristis  sect  is  moost  certein  and  nedeful  to  men,  ])at  wolen 
arere  ])is  tour,  for  no  man  mai  arere  it,  but  if  he  be  of  Cristis 
ordre.  And  ])us  bo])e  aungels  good  and  yvel  scornen  men 
])at  kepen  ])is  ground,  and  after  wenden  fro  Cristis  ordre,  to 
newe  ordris  ]?at  ben  worse,  for  bi  ])is  weye  mai  no  man  eende^ 
|)e  laste  bretais*  of  ])is  tour,  pis  tour  is  algatis  sure  to  men  Jjat 
putten  hem  wel  upon  ]>is  ground,  and  holden  hem  wel  J^eron, 
and  reulen  hem  bi  ]>e  firste  reule,  J^at  ]?ei  baggen  not  J>erfro; 


The  parable  of 
the  unfinished 
tower. 


I  Cor.  iii.  11. 


'  a.  E. 
*   britayse,  E. 


britasyng,  E. 


for  eende,  E  reads  wende  but  vf  he  have. 


iy2 


WVCLI  F'S 


The  parable  of 
the  two  kings. 


Job  xli.  34. 


for  none  enemyes  mai  anoie  ]?at  man  |>at  bildi]?  ])us  his  tour, 
for  ]>e  fend  and  o])er  enemyes  moun  not  meve  a3ens  J>is  ground. 
And  ])us  a  man  in  ]?is  tour  dredij)  not  arwis  ne  dartis,  but  arwis 
of  Goddis  Word  overcomen  enemyes  |)at  ben  wijjoute.  Traveil 
J?at  men  hav  in  vertues,  ben  dispensis  to  make  ]>is  toure,  and 
suyng  after  Cristis  lyf,  as  many  gospels  techen  bifore,  is  \q 
hi5inge  of  ]?is  toure,  and  growinge  into  charite.  And  ]?us 
shulde  ech  man  chese  his  staat,  and  do  J)e  traveil  ]>at  falli]? 
to  vertues,  and  algatis  reule  his  waP  after  Crist  and  his  lawe; 
and  if  he  have  endeles  iastinge  here,  he  mai  not  faile  of  )jis 
makinge. 

But,  for  it  falli]?  to  a  werriour  sum  tyme  to  go^  out  and  fi3te, 
J)e  secounde  parable  of  Crist  telli]?  of  |)is  fi3tinge,  and  seij> : 
What  king  shulde  ivende  to  do  batel  ayns  anoper  kyng,  pat  he  ne 
wolde  sitte  bifore  and  penke  wiseli,  wheper  he  my^te  wip  ten  poiisynd 
fi's,te  wip  him  pat  cam  ai,ens  him  ivip  twenti pousand ;  ellis  whilis 
he  ledip  afer  his  oost,pe  lesse  kyng  preiep  him  of  pees.  Dyvers 
men  undirstonden  ]?is  text  to  dyvers  wittis  binejje  bileve,  but 
we  weren  wont  to  telle  it  jjat  ech  man  shulde  be  a  kynge  and 
governe  ])e  rewme  of  his  soule  bi  keping  of  ten  comandementis ; 
and  good  keping  of  jjes  ten  ]?ousynd  is  ynow^  to  ech  man.  pe 
to))er  kyng  wi]>  twenti  Jjousend,  is  comunli  seide  Jjc  fend,  for 
Joob  seij)  \2X  he  is  kyng  upon  alle  children  of  pride,  and  he 
doublij)  ten  Jjousynd  of  werriours  a^ens  Crist ;  for  he  passij?  fro 
unyte,  as  doi|)  |>e  noumbre  of  two,  and  a^ens  ech  comandement 
he  ha]?  cautil  of  double  entent.  And  if  Jjese  ten  jjousynd  ben 
alle  \o  Jjat  helpen  Goddis  part,  and  ])es  twenti  ])Ousynd  alle 
|>o  ]?at  loven  doublenesse  to  helpe  \q  fend,  it  semej)  not  a3ens 
Goddis  witt,  si]?  his  wordis  ben  plentenouse.  If  ]jis  first  king 
wexe  coward  and  traitour  to  his  God,  and  love  richesse  of  ]?e 
world  and  worldeli  frendship  of  men,  and  lustis  of  his  bodi, 
and  pees  fro  pursueris  here,  he  sendi]?  message  to  ))is  fend,  and 
many  tokenes  of  cowardise,  and  preie])  him  of  his  pees,  and 
he  wole  serve  unto  him ;  and  ])us  fallen  many  men  from  hardy- 
nesse  in  Goddis  cause  and  bicomen  |>e  fendis  servauntis,  for 
\€\  seien  )?e  world  axij?  jjis,  and  so,  )>at  |>at  her  enemye  axij?, 
J>ei  graunten  to  him  cowardli. 

'  walle,  E.  -  So  E ;  goene,  A. 

WYCLIF. 


SERMONS. 

0{:er  wiuis  of  |>ese  wordis  for  shortnesse  we  leven  here. 
But  Crist  seijj  in  jje  eiide  oo  word  of  greet  hardynesse;  ])us 
ech  of  y^u  pat  reiiounsip  not  to  alle  phigts  pat  he  hap^  mai  not 
be  my  disciple.  For  jjanne  he  teUi)?  a3en  to  j?e  fend,  to  |)e 
world,  and  to  his  fleish,  j^at  his  hi^este  charite  is  stabli  sett  in 
God,  and  he  love]?  noon  o|)er  Jjingis  but  in  ordre  of  ]?is 
love ;  and  })us  j^e  world,  ]jat  ha])  lest  ^  colour,  is  overcome 
bi  Goddis  clerk,  and  \q  fend,  wij;  mannis  fleishe,  ben  also 
overcomun  \\\\  jiis  word^.  For  if  a  man  have  no  desire  ne 
no  lust  regnynge  in  him,  }>at  ne  he  telli])  ])e  same  tale  how 
he  moost  love])  his  God,  alle  his  enemes  ben  discumfitid  bi 
l^e  first  ]?ousynd  of  his  oost.  And  here  men  seien  soj^eli  |>at 
men  renounsen  on  many  maneres;  as  Crist  wi]?  hise  apostlis 
forsoke  ])is  world  wi}?  lastinge  havynge,  for  he  hadde  no  more 
of  |)is  world  but  as  him  nedide  to  his  lyf;  and  })us  shulden 
preestis  do,  \2X  entren  in  to  Cristis  ordre,  for  ellis  goode  and 
yvele  wole  scorne  hem  of  her  folie.  But  ech  man  j^at 
shal  be  saved,  renounsij?  alle  ])ese  worldeli  goodis,  whan  he 
levej?  alle  hem  bihynde  to  love  more  God  and  his  lawe.  But 
|>is  is  ])e  fouleste  synne  J)at  falli]?  here  to  ony  preest,  to  love 
more  jjese  newe  ordres  j^an  to  love  Cristis  lawe.  Bi  j)is  )?e  fend 
overcome])  manye  wi])  ])e  dart  of  ypocrisie,  whanne  he  maki]? 
hise  servauntis,  |)at  ben  oblishid  to  serve  him,  to  seme  holi  to 
[)e  peple,  and  seme  hooli  to  lyve  so.  And  herfore  Crist  lyvede 
comun  lyf,  and  hise  apostlis  after  him,  and  weren  not  weddid 
wi])  ]>ese  newe  signes,  as  now  ])es  ypocritis  ben.  And  herfore 
Crist,  to  purge  his  Chirche,  distriede  })es  ])ree  sectis,  Phariseis, 
Saduceis,  and  Essees  also,  but  ]?e  fend  bi  his  cautel  ha]?  brou3t 
inne  now  ojjer  J>ree,  as  monkes,  chanouns,  and  freris,  and 
many  braunchis  of  hem.  And  sich  fals  religioun,  bi  })e  lawe 
of  Antecrist,  is  bitwixe  prelatis  now  and  preestis  J?at  ben  her 
sugettis,  but  reule  of  Cristis  lawe  wolde  ^  Jjat  alle  men  shulden 
renounsen  to  hem  obedience  or  o]>er  service  but  as  J^ei  shulden 
obeishe  to  Crist. 


193 


Against  monks, 
canons,  and 
friars. 


^  lost,  E. 


-'  world,  E. 


^  So  E ;  ivolden,  A. 


SERMONS, 


O 


194 


WFC  LI  F'S 


The  true  rule 
for  preachers. 


pE  Gospel  on  feeste  of  oon  Martir. 

[SERMON    LXIIL] 

Nihil  ope r turn  quod  non  reveletur. — Matt.  x.  [26.] 

pis  gospel  conforti]>  martirs,  and  tellij?  hid  syne  |?at  is  in  fies 
newe  ordris,  biside  |)e  ordre  of  Crist.  Crist  sei|?  J>at,  noi^t  is 
hilid,  pat  ne  it  shal  be  shewid  and  no  ping  is  so  pryiy,  pat  ne  it 
shal  be  knowim.  pes  wordis  ben  of  bileve,  for  alle  ])ingis  ben 
knowun  of  God,  and  )?at  myrrour  shewi]>  for]?  J^e  moost  pryvy 
|)ing  in  jjis  world ;  and  at  J^e  dai  of  dome,  whanne  bokis  shulen 
ben  opin,  \q  whiche  bokis  ben  mennis  soulis,  and  conscience 
of  hem,  |?anne  shulen  bojje  gode  and  yvele  knowe  mennis  Jjou^tis 
and  her  werkes.  And  herfore  shulden  alle  men  hardeli  stonde 
bi  treujje,  and  speciali  bi  Goddis  lawe,  for  l^erinne  liy]>  no 
shame  ;  and  herfore  biddij)  Crist  ]?at,  pat  he  hap  seid  in  derknes, 
pei  shulden  seie  eft  in  li'^t,  more  comounli  and  more  clereli, 
bo]je  in  lyf  and  in  word.  And  ]?is  reule  of  Cristis  ordre  shulden 
men  kepe,  but  algatis  preestis,  and  to  ])is  entent  biddij?  Crist 
|)at  ])at  ])ei  have  herd  in  her  eere,  J^ei  shulden  preche  opinli  upon 
platrowes  of  housis,  for  ])us  shulde  Jje  comunte  of  men  betere 
undirstonde ;  and  jjus  wole  Crist,  ]?at  alle  }?ingis  ]>at  God  speki]? 
to  eeres  of  soule,  shulden  |)ese  heereris  speke  for]?,  and  drede 
no  worldeli  muk  in  housis.  And  |?anne  men  prechen  aboven 
hilingis,  lyvynge  comun  lyf  as  briddis,  and  taken  noon  heede  to 
worldeli  goodis  ]>at  ben  closid  wijjinne  housis.  But,  for  sich 
prechinge  axi]>  hardynesse  and  martirdom,  J)erfore  Crist  con- 
fortijj  hise  to  drede  not  sleynge  of  bodi ;  Nyle  y,  sei]?  Crist, 
drede  pese  men  pat  sleen  pe  bodi,  and  viai  not  after  slee  pe  soule, 
ne  lette  God  to  quyke  Jiat  J)ing  j^at  J)ei  killen,  and  to  make  |)at 
betere ;  but  rapere  drede  him  pat  hap  power  to  leese  bope  pe  bodi 
and  soule  into  helle  for  evermore,  for  to  dwelle  j^ere  in  peyne. 
Ne  ben  not  two  sparowis  sold  for  ]?e  leste  moneie  in  chaffar- 
inge, — for,  as  Luk  tellijj,  fyve  ben  sold  for  two  ferjjingis, — and 
3it  God  ordeynej)  for  alle  ))es  foulis.     And  si]?  ])es  foulis  ben 


SERMONS. 


i95 


litil  of  prys  and  uncertcyn  in  jjeir  mevynge,  and  3it  God  or- 
deync})  for  hem  whanne  ever  j)ei  listen  upon  }>e  er})e,  more  God 
shulde  ordeyne  for  ech  man,  ))at  ha]>  a  soule  to  Goddis  ymage ; 
and  speciali  for  such  men  j>at  serven  truli  to  her  God  more 
l^an  ony  foul  may,  for  jjei  ben  not  able  to  serve  ]?us.  And  si)) 
God  ordeyne]?  ])us  for  fouHs,  o]?er  men  moten  graunten  God 
unwise,  or  moche  more  he  shulde  ordeyne  for  men,  ))at  ben 
hise  trewe  servauntis.  And  ]?is  resoun  J)at  Crist  maki}?  move]? 
trewe  men  J)at  han  witt,  to  be  hardi  in  Goddis  cause,  and  for 
him  to  suffre  martirdom ;  and  no  man  can  avoide  J)at  ojjer  men 
shulden  \ms  suffre,  or  ellis  be  untrewe  to  God,  as  ben  jjes 
heretikes.  And  ])us  sei]?  Crist  of  Goddis  wisdom,  |?at  alle  jje 
heeris  of  hise  disciplis  ben  noumbrid  to  Goddis  knowinge,  and 
noon  of  hem  mai  fulli  perishe ;  and  si])  ])es  heeris  of  mennes 
heedis  ben  leste  wor])i  of  ony  part  of  man,  and  noon  of  ])ese 
mai  perishe  ])us,  how  shulden  betere  partis  perishe  ?  And  ])us 
ben  martirs  confortid  to  putte  her  bodies  for  Goddis  lawe, 
for  no  part  of  her  bodi  mai  ])us  perishe  to  harme  of  hem ;  and 
myche  more  soulis  of  siche  men,  and  alle  vertues  of  her  soule, 
mai  not  perishe  fro  hem,  for  ])e  soule  mai  not  be  quenchid. 
And  nedli  after  J)e  soule  moten  sue  ])e  vertues  ])erof,  as  aftir 
a  mannis  bodi  suen  quantite  and  figure ;  and  no  drede,  as  God 
wole  ordeyne,  whanne  he  restori]?  a  mannis  bodi,  noumbre  and 
quantite  and  figure  ])at  is  moost  acordinge  to  ])is  bodi,  moche 
more  God  ordeyne])  to  the  soule  vertues  ])at  it  shulde  have. 

And  trewe  we  not  to  foolis  here  ])at  seien  J)at  ])is  ben  accidentis 
which  God  mai  putte  bi  hem  silf,  and  freeli  take  J)es  fro  men, 
so  ])at  nei])er  in  bodi  ne  in  soule  man  hadde  ony  siche  acci- 
dentis ;  as  who  seide,  men  moun  be,  al  if  ]>e\  hangen  not  on 
God,  for  siche  a  dependence  of  men  is  accident  unto  hem. 
pese  foolis  moten  lerne  predicamentis  and  ten  kyndis  of  ])ingis, 
and  ])anne  ])ei  moun  se  her  foli,  and  folic  of  heresie  ]?at  groundi]) 
hem.  And  of  ])is  concludi])  Crist  treuli  to  hise  apostlis,  ])at 
])ei  shulden  not  wille  to  drede,  si])  ])ei  ben  betere  ])an  many 
sparewis;  and  oure  bileve  techi])  us  ])at  God  kepi])  ])ingis 
after  her  valu,  for  if  ony  ])ing  be  betere,  God  maki])  it  to  be 
betere. 

And  so  Crist  speki])  here  a  word  ])at  shulde  move  men  to 

0    2 


196 


WYCLIF\S 


Auricular,  as 
opposed  to 
open,  con- 
fession. 


stonde  wi]?  him;  Ech  man  pat  shal  knoivelich}  me  bifore  men  bi 
boj>e  my  kyndis,  I  shal  know  eliche  pat  man  bifore  my  Fadir,  to  J>at 
mannis  worshipe.  Here  we  shulen  undirstonde,  |?at  confessioun, 
Jjat  Crist  namep  here,  is  not  rownynge  in  preestis  eere,  to  telle 
him  synne  j?at  we  han  done,  but  it  is  grauntinge  of  treu|?e, 
J)e  which  is  apertly  seid,  wi]?  redines  to  sufFre  J^erfore,  what  ever 
man  denye|>  it.  And  so  }?at  man  confessi]?  Crist  j^at  graunti]? 
]jat  he  is  God  and  man,  and  al  Jjing  |)at  wole  sue  herof;  and 
J)ese  ben  ful  many  tru}?is,  for  al  |)e  gospel  ]>at  Crist  sei|),  such 
a  man  mut  confesse,  and  al  jjat  sue|?  of  ]>&  gospel,  and  }>is  dis- 
plesij?  to  sinful  men.  And  certis  a  man  confessij?  not  Crist, 
jjat  he  is  boj^e  God  and  man,  but  if  he  confesse  of  Crist  jjat  he 
may  no  weie  synne,  ne  gabbe,  ne  bere  fals  witnesse  of  no  word 
|)at  Crist  ha]?  seid.  And  so  ech  word  of  Goddis  lawe  is  trewe, 
sij?  Crist  witnessi|>  it,  and  ech  treu]?e  jjat  is  |>erinne ;  and  so  ech 
prest  confessijj  Crist  bifore  men,  ])at  tellen^  to  hem  ]jat  Crist  is 
bo|)e  God  and  man  ;  and  )>us  Crist  sei]>  and  mai  not  lie.  Certis 
if  a  man  seie  |>us,  and  faile  not  for  cowardise  to  telle  Goddis 
lawe  to  men  ]>at  synnen,  he  puttij?  him  wel  to  martirdome  ;  and 
every  sich  man,  seij)  Crist,  he  shal  confesse  to  his  Fadir.  And 
Jjanne  Crist  wole  confesse  |)is  man  to  be  trewe  in  Goddis  cause, 
and  wor]?i  to  have  mede  after  worpinesse  of  his  traveile,  and  to  be 
crownyd  wi|?outen  eende  in  hevene  bifore  Hs  greet  lord,  ]?at  falli]> 
not  to  3yve  such  servauntis  but  if  he  ^yve  hem  blisse  of  hevene  ; 
for  gretnesse  of  siche  a  lord  rewardi]?  not  lesse  his  kny3tis. 
O  Lord,  if  a  man  })at  traveilij?  in  werre  wi}>  a  capteyne,  wolde 
telle  myche^  })at  \\s  capteyne  wroot  of  him  to  his  kyng  and 
seide  ]jat  he  were  a  good  werriour,  and  worJ)ili  and  hardili 
traveilide  in  ]?e  kingis  cause,  and  herefore  ]jis  er]?eli  kyng 
shulde  have  him  and  hise  comendid ;  how  mouche  more  were 
it  wor]?  ])at  j^e  persone  of  Jesus  Crist  comendide  bi  his  owne 
word  a  trewe  servaunt  unto  God,  and  telde  |jat  God  shulde 
jjenke  on  him  and  5yve  him  blisse  wi|)OUten  ende  !  And  as 
confessioun  of  treujje  is  to  be  loved  of  Goddis  kny3tis,  so  con- 
fessioun  of  cowardise  is  to   drede  of  men  in  er|)e  ;    and  }ms 


'   knowleche,  E. 


2  telli\>,  E. 


•^  That  is,  '  would  esteem  it  a  great  gain.' 


SERMONS. 

defaute  of  bileve  lettij>  men  to  traveile  in  Goddis  cause.  But 
wordis  of  })is  gospel  ben  yvel  undirstonden  of  manye,  jjat,  bi 
logik  ]jat  })ci  han,  grauntcn  |>at  alle  {>e  heeres  of  seintis  be 
knowen  wel  of  God,  but  God  woot  not  how  many  |)ei  ben, 
for  noon  lieeris  ben  j^es  alle,  si]>  J>anne  }jei  weren  \vi|)Outen 
noumbre,  and  ech  greet  ]>ing  in  er})e  were  maad  of  partis 
indevysible.  And  siche  errours  j?at  men  han  in  logik  and  in 
kyndeli  science,  bryngen  men  yn,  as  heretikes,  to  graunte  after 
many  fals  )>ingis.  So]?  it  is  ]?at  God  knowi])  alle  |)e  partis 
of  a  man,  and  how  many  |;es  partis  ben,  for  jjei  ben  fewe 
to  Goddis  witt ;  and  so  ech  ]?ing  |)at  God  contynnej?  ^  is  maad 
of  partis  indyvysible,  and  o  gretter  |)ing  haj?  mo  siche.  But 
jjis  is  hid  to  mennis  knowyng,  but  after  j)ei  shal  wite  it  wel, 
whanne  God  shal  shew  it  hem  in  hevene. 


197 


Of  0  Martir  and  Bishop. 


[SERMON     LXIV.] 


Circuibat  Jesus  civ  Hates. — Mathew  ix.  [35.] 

pis  gospel  telli})  of  \q  office  [)at  shulde  falle  to  Cristis 
disci plis.  And  so  it  telli]?  how  prestis  shulde  now,  bo]je  more 
and  lasse,  occupie  hem  in  ])e  Church  in  servise  of  God.  And 
first,  Jesus  dide  in  dede  ]>q  lore  }?at  he  tau5te.  pe  gospel  sei]? 
how,  Jesus  wente  aboute  in  pe  cmitre,  bo}?  to  more  places  and 
lesse,  as  citees  and  casiellis,  to  teche  us  to  profete  general!  to 
men,  and  not  to  lette  to  preche  to  a  peple  for  })ei  be  few,  and 
oure  fame  shulde  be  litil,  for  we  shulden  traveile  for  God,  of 
whom  we  shulde  hope  oure  ])ank.  Castels  ben  undirstonden 
litil  touns,  but  wallid,  as  Jerusalem  is  clepid  a  cite  bi  Mathew; 
and  sich  grete  castels  ben  clepid  citees.  And  no  drede  Crist 
wente  to  smale  uplondishe  touns,  as  to  Bethfage  and  to  Cana 
in  Galile ;  for  Crist  went  to  j?ese  places,  where  he  wiste  to  do 


How  Christ 

preached  his 
gospel, 


conteyne\>,  E. 


198 


WFC  LIF'S 


and  sent  his 
apostles  to 
preach  it, 


good  and  he  traveilide  not  for  wynnynge  of  moneie ;  for  he  was 
not  smyttid  wij)  pryde  ne  wi]?  coveityse.  He  cheese  him  places 
to  teche  in  ])e  peple  J^at  were  moost  able,  as  synagogis  among 
Jewis.  For  synagogis  weren  among  hem  as  churchis  ben 
among  us ;  and  Crist  was  not  lettid  ]?anne  bi  feyned  juris- 
diccioun,  to  preche  among  ]je  folk,  al  if  he  wra]?])ide  |)e  prelatis ; 
for  ]?is  use  in  iurisdiccioun  was  not  ^it  brou^t  in  by  cautel  of 
\e  fend,  as  it  now  is,  to  lette  trewe  prechinge.  Crist  prechide 
not  fables,  but  pe  Gospel  of  God,  pat  was  good  tipingis  of  pe 
kyngdom  of  hevene.  And  Crist  was  not  occupied  al  oonli  in  |)is 
prechinge,  but  in  heeHng  of  syke  men,  and  men  ])at  were  in 
languishe.  For  two  men  hav  nede  of  bodili  heele.  Sum  men 
hav  sykenesse  or  hurtinge  in  her  bodi  J?at  men  moun  see  at  i3e, 
and  J?is  is  clepid  sykenesse.  Sum  men  have  languishe,  and  jjat 
on  two  maneris;  as  sum  men  ben  syke  wi])innefor]?,  but  |?is 
sykenesse  is  hid  to  men,  as  men  })at  ben  in  fevers  or  o]>qy  syke- 
nesse of  herte ;  and  sum  men  ben  syke  bi  sorewe  of  herte,  and 
of  discounfort  of  Jjingis  ]?at  fallen  hem.  And  ]?ese  men  were  in 
languishe,  and  ofte  weren  heehd  by  Crist;  and  if  we  hav  not 
virtue  to  hele  |)ese  two  sykenessis,  5it  we  moun  have  wille 
to  do  J>at  is  in  us,  and  conforte  and  preie  for  men  J?at  we 
delen  wi]?. 

And  Crist  ceeside  not  here  to  do  good  to  men,  but  he 
ordeynede  hise  disciplis  many,  to  traveile  among  men,  J>at  ])e 
people  weren  not  alle  traveilid  in  heering  of  00  man.  For,  as 
})e  gospel  telli]),  Crist  sate  pe  peple  traveilid  in  pis,  and  hadde 
mercy  on  hem,  for  pei  weren  traveilid  and  ligginge  as  sheep  wip- 
outen  heerde;  and  panne  he  seide  to  hise  disciplis,  \)ere  is  myche 
ripe  corn  and  f ewe  workmen  pereaboute,  and  perfore  preie  y  God 
to  move  his  prechours,  boJ>  in  bodi  and  in  soule,  to  traveile  among 
pe  puple,  as  gospelleris  shulden.  Crist  bade  hem  wende  forp 
and  preche  to  pe  peple  pat  pe  kyngdom  of  hevene  shal  come,  al  if 
hem  ])enke  J)at  it  dwelle  longe ;  for  many  peplis  shal  turne  to 
God  fro  \€\x  synful  lyf,  and  afterward  come  to  hevene  whanne 
)?at  \€\  be  dede.  3he,  \q,  dai  of  dome  come]^  ful  fast,  si]?  no 
tyme  mai  come  faster  |)an  })is  dai  come)?.  For,  as  clerkis  seien, 
tyme  passij?  as  swiftly  as  ony  tyme  mai  passe,  or  come  into 
))is  world. 


SFJ^MONS. 


199 


cumnussion 
of  healing. 


And  herfore  Crist  ^ive})  power  to  hise  disciplis  of  )?is  1  |>7;;^^f.,^};[ 
ofllce,  to  heele  special!  foure  manere  of  siikenessis.  First,  he 
3yve)j  hem  power  to  heele  men  wi}>ynne  for}) ;  but  ]>e  moste 
power  in  J)is  was  of  her  wordis,  j^at  Crist  wrou3te  wi]?  hem, 
and  heelide  J>e  peple  in  soule ;  and,  for  Crist  wolde  not  j)at  his 
power  were  idil,  j^erefore  he  biddi]?  hem  /leek  siike  men.  After 
he  biddi]?  ]jese  disciplis  7-eise  up  dede  men;  j>at  mai  be  undir- 
stondun  upon  two  maneres.  For  j^ese  disciplis  hadden  power 
to  reise  up  dede  men  in  bodi,  and  to  quykene  bi  Goddis  grace 
dede  men  in  soul ;  and  J)is  virtue  is  more,  si|)  jje  soule  is  betere 
jjan  ])e  bodi.  pe  jjridde  tyme  Crist  5yve|>  hem  power  to  hele 
mesele  men  ;  and  bo]?  siche  syknessis  and  ordres  of  hem  shulde 
be  more  to  charge  in  soule  of  a  man,  j)an  jjei  shulde  be  of 
a  mannis  bodi.  Meselrie  is  comunli  figure  of  heresie,  or  of  ony 
ojjer  synne  J)at  foule]?  men  wiJ?outenfor]>,  for  Jjus  done  bodili 
meselis  to  men  ])at  dwelle  among  hem ;  and  herfore  in  jje  eelde 
lawe  shoulden  meselis  stond  afer.  And  al  if  many  synnes  de- 
foulen  men  biside  hem,  nej?eles  heresies  done  myche  harme. 
And  ]?erfore  men  shulde  bisili  distrie  sich  heresies ;  as  a  greet 
heresie  is,  in  dowinge  of  J)e  Church  wi])  lordship  of  jje  world,  as 
it  is  now  dowid.  And  breejj  of  |)is  heresie  foulij)  many  clerkes, 
for  it  is  seied  in  o]>er  placis  ]?at  Goddis  lawe  forbedij)  sich  lord- 
ship to  clerkes,  for  alle  \q\  shulden  lyve  in  mekenesse  and 
povertie.  And  to  distroie  ])is  heresie  shulden  lordis  traveilen 
Disili,  for  ])is  my^ten  ]?ei  do  li3tly  and  leve  fulli  to  draw  awei 
her  owne  goodis,  by  which  |>ei  harmen  clerkes.  For  it  were 
inow3  to  us  to  have  offringis  and  dymes,  sij?  Crist  and  hise 
apostlis  holden  hem  paied  on  lesse.  pe  fourj^e  and  ]?e  laste 
dede  Jiat  Crist  bad  hise  disciplis  do  was,  to  caste  out  fendis  pat 
dwelliden  in  men.  And  as  God  ^af  hem  power  to  cast  hem 
out  bodili,  so  he  ^af  hem  power  to  caste  hem  out  of  J^e  soul, 
whanne  he  3af  virtue  to  his  wordis  to  converte  |)e  peple,  and 
of  a  soule  |?at  first  was  nest  of  ])e  fend,  to  make  a  nest  of 
God,  to  dwelle  by  grace  and  by  virtues. 

And  after  jies  foure  vertues  Crist  telle])  hem  a  maner  })at 
J)ei  shulen  algatis  kepe  in  worchinge  of  Goddis  work.  For 
Crist  seij)  ]>us  :  3^  token  of  God  freely^  and  per/ore  '^yve  f recti 
youre   traveile    to  ]?e    peple ;    and   ])anne    shal   it    be  medeful, 


The  present 
endowment  of 
the  church 
amounts  to  a 
heresy. 


How  to  cure  it. 


200 


WrCLIF'S 


The  mendi- 
cancy of  friars 
is  indirect 
simony. 


2  Thess.  iii.  lo. 


Bad  priests  are 
like  wolves 
among  sheep. 


and  ellis  is  it  symonye.  And  here  is  begginge  of  prechours 
forfendid  of  God,  si]?  it  is  an  hid  sillinge  ^  of  prechinge 
of  Goddis  word.  And  for  it  is  a  privy  synne,  covered  wi]? 
ypocrisie,  ]>is  synne  is  the  more  and  foulir  before  God ; 
and  herfore  techej?  Poul,  to  be  siker  of  }>is  syne,  \?X  preestis 
shulden  be  paied  wij?  mete  and  wij?  hilinge.  It  is  leeflful 
us  to  take  j^ese  two,  )?at  ben  nedefuP  to  j^is  service  of  God, 
and  jjere  wiseh  ceesse.  But  freris  and  preestis  ]>at  gadren 
hem  tresure,  and  maken  riche  churchis  and  housis  wi})  ojjer 
gere,  and  algatis  fynden  a  peple  superfine  and  charginge, 
passyn  Goddis  lawe  bi  a  cursid  ground,  for  Seint  Poul  biddij) 
J)at  he  \2X  traveilijj  not,  shulde  not  ete  by  colour  of  )?is  office. 
And  preisynge  of  preier  J)at  is  now  brou3t  in,  is  a  foule  synne 
among  many  preestis. 

And  Christ  tellij)  after  how  hise  disciplis  shulen  bere  hem 
among  yvel  peple  ]?at  ]?ei  traveilen  among,  and  so  moun 
]?ei  li3tlyer  dele  wif?  good  peple.  Christ  sei]?,  /  send  -^ou 
as  sheep  amo?ig  wolves,  and  per/ore  loke  ye  be  prudent  as 
neddris'^,  and  symple  as  dowves,  for  warnesse  of  Jjes  two  is 
ynow3  to  30U  to  dwelle  among  men.  And  it  is  comunli  seid 
]7at  wolves  be  beestis  of  raveyne,  and  yvele  for  to  daunte  fro 
spoilinge  of  meke  beestis;  and  whanne  \q.\  bigynen  to  30ule, 
))ei  turnen  her  snowte  to  hevene  ward.  And  so  pseudo-clerkes, 
for  her  greet  covertise,  spuylen  symple  men  as  wolves  doone 
sheepe ;  and  Crist  clepi})  trewe  m.en  in  God  sheep  for  many 
enchesouns ;  and  as  ]>e  wolf  wi|)  30ulinge  makij?  sheep  to  flokke 
for  drede,  so  prelatis  bi  cursinges  maken  men  to  gadere  hem 
and  3yve  ])ese  prelatis  goodis  Jjat  \t\  wolen  have.  And  3it  ]?ei 
hav  anoJ)er  cautel  |>at  ))ese  ypocritis  usen  :  ]?ei  seien  ]?at  ])ei 
wolen  3yven  suffragies  goostli  to  menis  soulis  |)at  passen  al  })is 
worldis  good;  and  to  coloure  al  ))is  ypocrisie  J^ei  turnen  her 
snowte  to  hevene,  and  seien  ]>at  God  ha|>  30vun  hem  power  to 
5yve  pardone  as  |>ei  wolen.  And  here  ])ei  50ulen  comunh, 
and  blasfemen  in  God,  and  where  Crist  biddi))  hem  be  sheep 
dwellinge  amonge  wolves,  oure  prelatis,  by  )>e  fendis  lore,  ben 
turned  to  )?e  contrarie,  whan  )>ei  stranglen  and  killen  men  and 


*  sellyng,  E. 


levefiil,  E. 


eddres.  E. 


SERMONS. 


201 


spoilen  hem  of  her  goodis  ^\  And  occupiyng  })at  Crist  bad  hise 
prestis  traveile  inne  is  put  al  bihynde,  and  fendis  service  is 
putt  before ;  and  |)us  flokkis  of  sheep  ben  maid  of  lewyde  men, 
and  flokkis  of  wolves  ben  maid  of  preestis. 

But  Crist  biddij?  hise  disciplis  be  prudent  as  eddris.  An 
eddre  haj?  ]>\s  witt;  whanne  charmeris  come  to  take  him,  Jjc 
toon  of  hise  eeris  he  clappiji  to  jje  er]?e,  and  wi}?  J^e  eende 
of  his  tail  he  stoppij?  )>e  toj?er.  And  so  Goddis  children, 
whanne  J^ei  be  temptid  to  synne,  Jjei  ]?enken  mekeli  how 
freel  ])ei  ben  maid  of  }>e  erj)e,  and  wi]j  greet  |>ou5t  of  her 
de)?,  jjat  shal  come,  ]>e\  witen  not  whanne,  and  drede  of 
her  jugement  lest  ]?ei  ben  demyd  to  helle,  jjei  stoppen  her 
o|?er  eere  and  kepen  hem  wel  fro  synne.  And  })us  \>e\  hav 
prudence,  Jjat  God  ha)?  30vun  to  serpentis.  And  symplenesse 
of  douves  stonde])  in  ]?is;  jjei  hav  no  clawis  to  fi^te  as  ojjer 
foulis,  but  whanne  jjei  ben  assailid  of  foulis  of  raveyne,  ])ei 
tristen  not  to  her  owne  strengjje,  but  fallen  on  stones,  and 
j?ese  haukis  dreden  jjanne  to  smyte  at  hem,  lest  )?ei  frushen^ 
her  owne  brest  at  ]?e  hard  stoone.  So  Cristis  disciplis  knowen 
mekeli  her  freelti,  and  li3ten  on  ]?e  corner  stoon,  jjat  is  Jesus 
Crist;  and  ]>anne  fendis  of  helle  dreden  hem  to  swippen^  at^ 
hem,  lest  jjei  harmen  hem  silf  at  j^e  stoone  of  hurtinge.  And 
))us  Cristis  disciplis  ben  goostli  dowves.  But  ]?is  lore  is  foi-^ete*, 
and  jje  fendis  lore  take^. 


In   feestis  of  many   Martiris. 

[SERMON    LXV.] 

Elevatis  Jesus  oculis. — Luke  vi.  [20.] 

pis  gospel  telle]?  foure  confortis  of  martiris,  in  whiche  J?ei 
shulden  have  joie  for  pursuynge  of  Crist,  pe  gospel  telli]> 
how,  Jesus  lifte  up  hise  iyn  on  hise  disciplis^  and   seide   |?us ; 

^  flusche,  E.         2  assayle,  E.         ^  om.  E.         *  fonefun,  E.         ^  taken,  E. 

*  The  bearing  of  this  passage  on       sermons  has  been  already  discussed 
the    authorship    and    date    of   these       in  tlie  Introduction. 


Christian 
prudence, 


and  innocence. 


The  joys  of 
martyrs. 


202 


WFCLIF'S 


Attack  on 
the  friars. 


Blessid  he  pore  men  in  spirit^  for  ^e,  |)at  |>us  be  pore  men,  kan 
pus  certeinli  pe  kyftgdome  of  heve7ie.  pis  poverte  is  a  virtue 
])at  men  shulden  first  sue  Crist  inne,  and  it  is  hard  for  to  use, 
and  Jjerfore  telle]?  Crist  |)us  |>e  meede.  And  |)ese  men  j^at  hav 
]>is  virtue,  as  weren  Cristis  aposdis,  hadden  here  Jje  rewme  of 
hevene,  for  jjei  hadden  here  Crist ;  and  Crist,  heed  of  ])is  rewme, 
is  ofte  tymes  clepid  J)is  rewme ;  for  he  is  J)e  moste  jewel  of  al 
]jis  rewme,  in  which  ech  part  of  ]?is  rewme  is  many  weies  con- 
teyned.  And  ])us  he  mai  by  many  causis  be  clepid  al  |)is 
rewme.  In  \2X  he  is  God,  he  is  ende  of  al  j^ing,  and  in  him 
we  lyven,  we  moven,  and  we  ben;  and  for  him,  as  ende,  we 
done  alle  our  dedis.  For  in  virtue  of  him  al  his  Chirche 
worche}?,  and  by  ])is  moun  men  se  wher  men  ben  lymes  of 
Holy  Churche ;  for  Jjanne  \€\  ben  groundid  in  his  lyf,  and  his 
worchinge.  And  if  J>ei  ben  in  stait  or  werkes  ungroundid  ^ 
in  Cristis  lyf,  it  is  licly  to  men  J)at  ]?ei  ben  Antichristis  disciplis ; 
for  Crist  sei]>  and  mai  not  lye,  ]?at,  Who  is  not  wi]?  me,  he  is 
a3ens  me ;  and  so  he  is  wi]?  Anticrist.  And  so  if  stait  of  jjese 
freris  be  not  groundid  in  Crist,  and  \t\  gabben  many  maneres 
upon  j^e  lyf  of  Crist,  as  in  begginge,  and  asoilinge,  and  o|)er 
feyned  lesyngis ;  ]janne  it  is  a  tokene  ]jat  \€\  ben  not  of  holy 
Chirche,  but  Sa]?anas  children  whos  dedis  \€\  done.  For  if 
\€\  ben  more  bisie  aboute  worldeli  goodis,  ]?an  Jjei  ben  of  dedis 
]>at  vertu  techi]?  to  do,  J>anne  ]?ei  ben  wi])  Mammon,  and  he  ledij> 
hem.  For  worldeli  goodis,  \^  which  Crist  clepid  Mammona  of 
wickidnesse,  ben  moost  sou5t  of  sich  men.  And  so  J)is  fend 
ledi|)  hem,  and  si]?  uneven  departinge  of  suche  worldeli  goodis 
maki]>  dissencioun,  3he,  jje  mooste  ]>at  here  is,  it  semej>  ]?at  sich 
freris  ben  cause  of  |)is  dissencioun.  But  J>ei  have  goodis  in 
comun  unevenly  departid ;  3he,  more  ]jan  hem  nedide  ech 
man  to  have  ynow3;  and  ))us  ]>is  nest  of  Mammon  genderij? 
many  strives,  and  3it  ]?e  fend  techi]>  hem  to  seie  |)at  jiei  have 
nou3t,  but  ben  more  pore  in  spirit  ))an  weren  Crist  and  hise 
apostlis.  But  certis  |?is  is  not  poverte  of  which  Crist  spekij? 
here,  sij)  Crist  spekej)  here  of  poverte  in  spirit,  to  mekeli  holde 
men  in  havynge  of  wordli   goodis,  as  moche  as  nedi])  to  sus- 

'  \>at  hen  not  groundid,  E. 


SER3I0  N S. 


203 


teyne  her  office.     And  he  ))at  forsake]?  ])us  for  )>e  love  of  Crist 
worldeli  richesse,  and  fame  ])at  come))  to  jje  world  for  havynge 
of  siche  goodis,  is  a  pore  man  in  spirit,  as  Crist  spekij?  here. 
For  |)anne  he  synnej?  not  in  havynge  of  goodis  for  to  make 
feestis,  ne  to  make  riche  housis,  ne  noo  costli  ornamcntis  })at 
fallen  to  men,  but  it  is  inow5  to  him  to  hav  foode  and  hilinge. 
And  al  his  bisynesse  is  to  helpe  Cristis  Chirche,  and  he  dis- 
seyve]?  not  men  in  multitude  of  coventis,  but  loki]>  how  fewe 
prestis  moun  profite  to  Cristis  Chirche,  and  how  he  mai  holde 
jje  office  ]7at  Crist  ha]?  bedun  in  his  lawe ;  for  his  desire  stondej? 
in  j)e  kyngdome  of  hevene.     And  |>us  ben  vertues  knyttid  oon 
wi]?  anoj^er,  and  algatis  in  preestis,  ])at  hi3er  suen  Crist.    And, 
for  suche  poverte  bringi))  ofte  tymes  in  hunger,  J^erfor  in  \t 
secounde  blyss  seij?  Cn?,i^ ,  pat  J?ei  ben  blessid  now.     And  it  is  no 
drede  Crist  spekij?  of  sich  hunger  ]>at  is  vertuousli  take^  after 
j)e  Trinite;   for  a  |)eef  mai  hunger  a^ens  his  wille  in  prisoun, 
and  a  werriour  mai  hunger  for  an  yvel  ende;    but  loke  who 
ha|>  power  to  robbe  mennis  goodis,  and  5it  he  spare]?  upon 
resouns,  for  ]?e  love   of  God,   and    ])at  man  hungri]?  as  Crist 
speki]?  here.     And  ])us  alle  J)ese  comunes  of  J)es  newe  religiouse, 
J)at  ^  wasten  Goddis  goodis,  for  farne  of  ])e  world,  or  love  of  her 
belye,  synnen  a5ens  ])is  virtue ;  and  J)ei  shulden  hungre  now  to 
dej?,  as  done  ])ese  martirs,  or  ])ei  wastiden  ])us  ]?ese  pore  mennis 
goodis.     And  if  ])ei  han  greet  wille  to  do  J)is  for  Goddis  sake, 
])ei  han  now  a  maner  of  blis,  delitinge  in  Goddis  lawe;  and 
it  is  no  drede  Jjcs  men   shulen   be   fillid,  whanne  ])ei   shulen 
have  full  joie  in  pleyn  ffiling  of  Goddis  wille.     For  after  ])e  day 
of  dome  no])ing  shall  displese  hem,  for  ])ei  shulen  wel  wite  ])at 
God  ordeyne]?  al  ]?ings  Jeanne,  ri^t  as  it  shulde  be,  by  resoun 
of  Goddis  wille.   And  ]?is  ordenaunce  is  so  faire  and  so  plesinge 
to  seintis,  ])at  ])ei  shulden  be  fulfillid  in  wille  of  her  soule,  and 
J)at  shal  be  inow^  to  hem  to  bo])e  her  kyndis.     For  ]>anne  |>ei 
shulen  have  no  hunger  of  ])ing  ])at  Jjei  desiren,  for  ]?ei  shulen 
be   fulfillid  in  bodi  and  in   soule,  and  J)us  trowen    seintis   ])at 
hungre  endi]?  here. 

pe  }>ridde  blisse  is  seid  to  ])e  same  entent.     Blessid  be  y  pat 


*  So  E  ;  A  includes  '  sei)?  Crist '  in  the  italics. 
E;  om.  A. 


^  taken,  E. 


So  in 


204 


WFCLIF'S 


Prov.  i.  26. 


Persecution 
of  Christ's 
servants. 


wepen  now,  for  y  shulen  leiy.  It  is  knowen  jjat  whoso  lasti)> 
fulli  in  Goddis  lawe  he  mut  nedis  wepe  here,  for  enemyes  to 
Crist;  for  suche  Goddis  proctours  shulen  be  pursued,  for  re- 
prevyng  of  synners  ]?at  ben  Goddis  enemyes,  and  he  is 
a  coward  a5ens  God  ]jat  speki]?  not  boldly  a^ens  synne.  And 
herfore  Joon  Baptist  and  Cristis  apostlis  token  ensaumple  of 
Crist  to  ))us  repreve  synne ;  and  ]>us  j^ei  wepten  for  pursuyte, 
and  algatis  for  synne,  si|>  Crist  in  all  hise  j^re  wepingis  wepte 
for  o]?er  mennis  synne.  For  he  love]?  now3t  wel  Crist  and  his 
Modir  ]?at  sorowi]>  not  for  her  injurie,  and  despite  ]?at  is  done 
to  him.  And  sich  men  of  chaiite  shall  lei^e  at  ^e  dai  of  dome, 
for  Salomon  sei|),  ]?e  Churche  shall  lei5e  in  )?e  last  dai;  and 
sich  gostli  gladness  is  clepid  here  lei3yng\  for  bodili  lei^yng  is 
fer  fro  |>is  purpos.  And  of  |>ese  ]?ree  pursuyngis  jjat  comen  to 
J)e  Chirche,  jje  firste  is  leste  of  alle,  )?e  secound  is  myddil,  and 
jje  |>ridde  is  moost ;  and  |?us  it  is  of  ]?e  ^  |jree  rewardis. 

pe  four])  word  j^at  Crist  sei})  conteyne])  ])re  pursuingis;  y 
shulen  be  blessi'd,  sei]?  Crist,  whajine  men  shulen  hate  yu,  and 
whanne  pei  shulen  departe  yu,  and  after  repreve  yu.  Cristis 
servantis  on  many  maneris  ben  departid  here.  Worldeli  men 
fleen  hem,  and  leven  hem  by  hemsilf;  J)ei  ben  cursid  of  Anti- 
crist,  and  put  out  of  chirchis,  and  |>ei  ben  partid  in  prisouns  fro 
ojjer  men  of  J^e  world.  And  in  alle  jjcs  statis  ])ei  suifren  re- 
proves, and  if  j^ei  ben  certeyn,  bi  lore  of  her  bileve,  |?at  ]?ei 
suffren  in  all  ]?is  fro  cause  of  her  God,  ])ei  moun  be  blessid  and 
joiful  for  hope  of  Jjc  ende,  as  a  syk  man  gladli  wole  suffre 
peyne  whanne  he  hopi]?  jjcrbi  to  come  aftir  to  hele.  And  joie 
))at  seintis  shulen  have  whanne  J?ei  suffren  Jjus  is  a  manere  of 
blisse  J>at  \q.\  han  here,  for  it  is  more  joie  ])an  all  J^ese  worldli 
lustis.  And,  as  Crist  telli}),  jjese  ])at  stonden  in  Cristis  cause, 
han  her  names  cast  out  as  cursid  men  and  heretikes,  for  her 
enemyes  ben  so  blynde,  and  so  depe  in  her  synne,  j?at  |)ei 
clepen  good,  yvel,  and  yvel,  good.  But  woo  be  to  suche. 
And  Crist  biddij)  his  servantis  to  Joie  pat  dai  in  her  lierte,  and 
shewe  a  glad  county naunce,  to  men  j^at  ben  about  hem,yY?r  certis 
her  niede  is  ?noche  in  pe  blisse  of  hevene.     And  ]>is  word  coun- 


'   ley^inge,  E. 


om.  E, 


SERMONS. 


205 


fortij)  symple  men,  j?at  been  clepid  eretikes,  and  enemyes  to  )?e 
Chirch,  for  j^ei  tellen  Goddis  lawe  ;  for  j^ei  ben  somynned  and 
reprovyd  many  weies,  and  after  put  in  prison,  and  brend^  or 
kild  as  worse  ])an  ]>eves''*.  And  maistris  of  ])is  pursuyng  ben 
preestis  more  and  less,  and  moost  pryvy  freris  wij>  lesingis 
\2ii  |)ei  feynen,  as  Crist  was  pursued  wi]>  Caiphas  and  o|?er 
preestis,  but  privyli  wi{>  Pharisees  ]  at  weren  hise  falsseste^ 
enemyes.  And  pis  gospel  is  confort  to  alle  }>at  ben  ]>us 
pursued. 

But  certis  as  tradiciouns  maid  biside  Goddis  lawe,  of  preestis 
and  of  scribis  and  of  Phariseis,  blyndiden  hem  in  Goddis 
lawe  and  made  it  dispisid,  so  it  is  now  of  Goddis  lawe  by 
newe  mennis  lawis,  as  decretals  and  decres.  And  J^e  Sixte, 
wi|?  Clementyns^,  done  myche  harm  to  Goddis  lawe,  and 
enfeblen  bileve.  And  jjus  done  j^ese  newe  reulis  of  |)ese  |?ree 
ordris,  as  ])ei  harmen  rewmes  and  cuntreis  jjat  |?ei  dwellen  inne. 
But  remedie  agens  })is  is  used  of  many  men,  to  dispise  all 
))ese  lawis  whanne  ])ei  ben  aleggid,  and  seien  unto  men  |)at 
aleggen  hem,  J^at  falsehede  is  more  suspect  for  witnesse  of  siche 
lawis,  si|)  Goddis  lawe  tellij?  al  trujje  ]?at  is  nedeful  to  men. 
In  |?is  laste  pursuyng  of  our  modyr,  j^at  is  greet  and  perilous, 
haj?  Anticrist  moche  part  a^ens  Jesus  Crist,  and  feyneb  bi 
ipocrisie  )>at  he  ha]?  |)e  ri3t  part.  And  defaute  of  bileve  is 
ground  of  all  })is  errour. 


^  brent,  E. 

*  See  note  on  p.  201. 

^  The  compilation  of  the  Sixth 
Book  of  the  Decretals  was  made  by 
order  of  Boniface  VIII,  and  pro- 
mulgated by  him  in  1297.  It  is 
entitled  Sextus,  or  the  Sixth,  as 
following  and  being  supplementary 
to  the  five  books  of  Decretals 
published  by  Gregory  IX,  in  1234, 
(on  which  see  Milman's  Lalin  Chris- 
tianity, vi.  163) : — 


^  fcdseest,  E. 

GreiJforii  noni  post  libros  quinque,  vocatur 
Sextus  ;  nomen  habeus  ordinis  a  nuniero  *. 

The  Clementines  were  first  pub- 
lished by  Clement  V  at  the  Council 
of  Vienne  in  1 3 1 2  ;  they  were  after- 
wards given  out  in  a  fully  digested 
form  by  John  XXII  in  13 16.  They 
treat  of  vaiious  points  of  canon  law 
and  church  discipline,  and  are  sup- 
plementary to  the  Sextus. 

*  These  lines  are  in  a  fine  copy  of  the  Sextus 
in  the  Bodleian  Library,  edited  by  Giles  Perrin, 
1572- 


2o6 


WrCLIF'S 


pE  Gospe[l]  of  many  Martris. 


How  the  true 
patience  of 
Christ's  mar- 
tyrs is  to  be 
shown  in  the 
present  strug- 
gle between 
Christ  and 
Antichrist. 


[SERMON    LXVL] 

Cum  persequeniur  vos  in  una  civitate. — Math.  x.  [23.] 

pis  gospel  telli]?  a  medicine  of  Crist,  how  hise  martirs  shulen 
do  in  tyme  of  her  pursuynge.  Crist  biddi]?  hise  disciplis  to  flee 
from  her  enemyes ;  for  vertuous  pacience  and  sich  manere 
cowardice  ben  armes  to  Cristene  men  to  overcome  her  enemyes. 
For  hope  of  our  victorie  is  in  Jesus  Crist,  and  })erfor  we  trustyn 
in  him  ]?at  he  doe]?  J>e  dedis.  And  so  ^  Crist  and  Anticrist 
striven  togidere,  and  oon  sei]j  \2X  he  haj?  Jjc  just  part  and  ]?e 
hooH;  and  \q  to}>er  reversi]?  him  and  sei]?  \2X  he  ha]?  Cristis 
part.  And  as  anentis  Cristis  lawe  |jat  men  shulden  grounde 
hem  inne,  Anticrist  ha]?  foundun  ])is  cautel,  to  seie  ])at  it  is 
myche  fals.  And  if  men  seien  \2X  Goddis  lawe  mut  nedis 
be  so})  to  Goddis  entent,  ]?ei  graunten  })at  }?is  is  so}?,  but  }>e 
entent  lie]?  in  hem.  So,  as  princes  of  prestis,  and  Phariseis 
joyned  wi}?  hem,  wolen  interprete  Goddis  lawe,  aff"  hem  shal 
it  be  taken;  and  so  her  exposicioun  is  more  in  auctorite  })an 
is  text  of  Goddis  lawe ;  for  by  ])e  firste,  men  shulen  be  demyd. 
And  by  ]?e  cautel  of  ]?e  fend  }?ese  ben  maid  my5ti  to  ]?e  world, 
and  by  3iftis  ]?at  }?ei  ^yven  to  seculer  men,  and  to  sum  clerkis, 
}?ei  hav  many  comunes  wi]?  hem,  and  of  all  manere  of  men, 
and  crien  })at  })us  sei]?  holi  Churche,  to  which  we  shulden  algatis 
trowe,  and  do  worshipe  to  it,  and  reve  it  nou3t  but  3yve  it  more. 
And  })us  is  Cristis  cause  feld  doun  for  a  tyme,  but  5it  ]?ere  ben 
many  men  stondinge  ]?erewi]?,  as  }?ei  doren.  And  ]?is  reule  han 
many  men  to  juge  wel  in  }>is  mater ;  if  a  man  lyve  ri^t  lyf  bo]?e 
to  God  and  to  man,  and  have  for  him  text  of  Goddis  lawe,  and 
witt  ]?at  sowne})  to  charite,  and  symplenesse  in  lyvynge,  wi]? 
forsakinge  of  worldeli  liif,  it  is  tokene  ]?at  ]?is  man  ha}?  \q  x^i 
part  of  Jesus  Crist.     For  Anticrist  drawi]?  evere  to  pryde  and 


^  So  E;  A  reads /or,  which  gives  neither  sense  nor  syntax. 


SERMONS. 


207 


to  coveitise;  and  herbi  moun  men  knowe  what  man  holdij? 
wi})  Anticrist.  But  beware  with  ypocrisie,  for  })at  bigili)>  many 
men  to  trowe  jjat  men  ben  Cristis  children,  al^if  \q\  ben  |?e 
fendis  lymes.  And  so  bi  loore  f^at  Crist  techij?  men  shulden 
trowe  to  sich  mennis  workes  more  ]?an  to  her  wordis,  for  |)ei 
speken  ofte  in  striif,  and  Poul  sei)?  j^at  he  and  hise  brej^eren 
have  noon  custum  to  speke  }?us. 

pe  first  biddinge  ])at  Crist  biddij?  here  stondi)?  in  j^ese 
wordis,  |)at  we  shulen  kepe.  And  ivhanne  many  enemy es 
shulen  pursue  you  fro  oon  citee^  jjat  ^e  have  dwelt  inne,  fle 
y  into  anoper ;  but  ever  wi|>  discrecioun,  for  if  |>is  were  ever 
kept  no  men  nedide  to  be  martris,  for  |)ei  my3t  fle  fro  toun 
to  toun,  and  nevere  countre  wi}>  her  enemyes  ;  and  })us  Crist 
\vi])  hise  disciplis  hadde  do  agens  his  owne  lore.  And  here 
men  studien  wij)  rulis,  whanne  |)ei  shulden  flee  jjus,  and 
whanne  |>ei  shulden  stonde  and  suffre.  In  bojje  jjese  tau3te 
Crist,  and  it  is  no  doute  to  men  ]?at  ofte  it  profiti]?  on  bo]?e 
sidis  to  fleen  from  00  toun  to  ano|?er,  for  bi  |?is  fleinge  ofte 
tymes  hav  bo])e  j^e  partis  space  to  turne  to  Crist  and  profite, 
more  |)an  |)ei  shulden  to  suff're  dej?,  abidinge  in  00  place. 
And  here  Y  can^  not  grounde  of  God,  J>at  we  shulden  fle  oure 
enemyes,  ri3t  whanne  \e\  folowen  us  and  seen  us  in  mennys 
presence,  for  |?is  were  yvel  cowardice,  to  feere  men  ]jat  saien 
]>is  fli3t ;  but  Crist  speki]?  here,  as  we  jjinki]?,  of  hid  removynge 
before.  And  ])us  Crist  fledde  ofte  tymes,  and  hidde  him  among 
|)e  peple.  And  if  ]jou  axe  whanne  men  shulden  flee,  and  whanne 
stonde  in  Goddis  cause,  certis  sum  tyme  men  ben  constreyned 
to  come,  and  to  answere  for  Crist;  and  so,  if  we  lyven  good 
lyf  and  lette  not  Jjc  love  of  Crist,  he  shal  teche  us  for  to  flee 
and  to  answ^ere  as  we  shulden. 

But  algatis  be  we  war  jjat  we  confesse  not  falsehede, 
and  denye  not  Cristis  lawe,  for  no  cais  ]?at  mai  falle.  If  we 
undirstonden  not  |>e  wdtt,  graunte  we  ]>q  forme  of  ])e  wordis, 
and  confesse  we  ]>e  tru}7e  of  hem,  al  if  we  witen  not  which 
it  is.  And  J)us  faile  we  not  God  in  liif,  and  he  wole  not 
faile  us  in    loore;    for    ]>us    he    biholij?   |)at   we    shal   have   in 

*  kan,  E. 


I  Cor.  xi.  16. 


208 


WrC  L  I  F'S 


Persecution 
the  writer's 
party. 


of 


sich  hour  what  we  shulden  speke.  But  here  it  is  good  to  us, 
if  we  ben  in  myche  pees,  to  knowe  and  love  Goddis  lawe, 
for  bi  |>is  we  moun  betir  lyve,  and  wite  how  we  shulen  answere 
men  whanne  we  ben  opposid  of  fendis.  But  5it  men  mi3ten 
replie  here  ]?at  Cristis  lore  w-ere  not  ynow3,  for  men  my3ten 
li3tli  take  a  citee  where  alle  weren  enemyes  and  noon  trewe 
men.  But  lyve  w^e  w^el,  and  Crist  v;ole  teche  to  what  a  citee 
we  shulen  go;  and  herfore  seij)  Crist  after,  SoJ?lt,  I seie  to  '^ou, 
y  shulen  not  ende  pe  citees  of  Israele  til  pat  fuannis  sone  come,  at 
pe  laste  dai  of  Jiiqeiyient,  A  flok  of  treue  men  is  citee  of  Israele, 
for  |)ese  men  seen  God,  and  ben  redi  to  helpe  hise  lymes, 
whanne  \€\  be  ]?us  pursued,  and  suffre  Cristis  disciplis  to  tra- 
veile,  and  lette  Anticristis  bi  her  power ;  and  such  flokkis  shulen 
not  faile,  bo]?e  to  worche  and  to  helpe.  And  in  ]je  dai  of  dome 
it  shal  be  no  nede  to  axe  help,  for  |janne  shal  Cristis  baner 
be  rerid,  and  alle  hise  enemyes  shulen  lurke. 

And  herfore  seiJ)  Crist  after,  ^er  is  no  disciple  aboue  his  maistir 
ne  servant  aboue  his  Lord.  But  }>us  was  Crist  himsilf  pursued, 
and  J>is  forme  kepte  Crist,  in  fleyinge  and  in  answerynge.  A7td 
it  is  ynow^  to  pe  disciple  pat  he  be  as  his  maistir,  and  to  servaunt 
pat  he  be  as  his  Lord.  In  ]?is  |)ing  and  bi  ]?is  weie  shulden  Cristis 
servauntis  kepe  mekenesse  and  hope  in  God,  and  wite  wel  bi 
her  bileve  \2X  ]?ei  moun  not  do  wijjouten  him.  And  herfore 
sei]>  Crist ;  Ifpei  clepiden  pe  good  Lord  Belzabub,  moche  more  pei 
shulden  dorre^  mysseie  pe  servantis  of  pe  Lord.  And  oj^er  pur- 
suytis  and  bodili  de]?  shulen  sue  aftir,  sij)  Crist  hadde  hem,  and 
jjerfore  Crist  telli)>  ofte,  how  hise  shal  be  sikir  of  }?ese.  And 
jjerfore  Cristis  armure  is  good  to  ech  to  Cristen  man  to  hav, 
for  it  noie|>  not  hevely,  ne]jer  in  pees  ne  in  werre,  and  it  makij? 
Cristen  men  hardi  a3ens  )je  fend  and  alle  hise  lymes.  And  her- 
fore seij?  Crist  to  hise  ;  pe/fore  drede  y  hem  not ;  for  we  have 
betere  ground  ]>an  ]>ei,  and  more  helpe  jjan  \€\  have ;  but  oure 
helpe  is  spiritual,  hid  to  ]>is  world  and  for  ^  jje  to|>er.  And  jjis 
lore  is  nedeful  now  in  )jis  world,  for  Anticrist ;  for  he  ha)> 
turned  hise  clerkes  to  coveitise  and  worldli  love,  and  so  blindid 
|)e  peple  and  derkid  |>e  law-e  of  Crist,   ))at  hise  servantis  ben 


^  dore,  E ;  meaning  dare. 


fro,  E. 


WYCLIF. 


SERMONS. 


209 


))ikke,  and  fewe  ben  on  Cristis  side.  And  algatis  |)ei  dispisen 
]>at  men  shulden  knowe  Cristis  liif,  for  bi  his  liif  and  his  loore 
shulde  help  rise  on  his  side,  and  prestis  shulden  shame  of  her 
lyves,  and  speciali  |?es  hi^e  prestis,  for  ]?ei  reversen  Crist  bo|)e 
in  word  and  dede.  And  herfore  00  greet  Bishop  of  Engelond, 
as  men  seien,  is  yvel  paied  j^at  Goddis  lawe  is  writun  in  Englis, 
to  lewide  men;  and  he  pursue]?  a  preest,  for  he  \vriti}>  to^  men^ 
)jis  Englishe,  and  somonij)  him  and  traveilij?  him,  ]>at  it  is 
hard  to  him  to  rowte^.  And  Jjus  he  pursue]?  ano]?er  preest  bi 
]?e  helpe  of  Phariseis,  for  he  prechide  Cristis  gospel  freeli 
wi]?outen  fablis.  O^  men  ]?at  ben  on  Cristis  half,  helpe  ^e  now 
a^ens  Anticrist!  for  ]?e  perilous  tyme  is  comen  |?at  Crist  and 
Poul  telden  bifore.  Butt  00  confort  is  of  kny5ttis,  ]?at  }?ei 
savoren  myche  }?e  gospel  and  han  wille  to  rede  in  Englishe 
]?e  gospel  of  Cristis  liif.  For  aftirward,  if  God  wole,  ]?is  lord- 
ship shal  be  taken  from  preestis ;  and  so  ]?e  staaff  ]?at  maki]? 
hem  hardi  a^ens  Crist  and  his  lawe.  For  J?ree  sectis  fi^ten  here, 
a5ens  Cristene  mennis  secte.  pe  firste  is  ]?e  pope  and  cardinals, 
bi  fals  lawe  ]>at  ]?ei  han  made;  ]?e  secounde  is  emperours^ 
bishopis,  whiche  dispisen*^  Cristis  lawe ;  ]>q  ]?ridde  is  ]?es  Pha- 
risees, possessioners  and  beggeris.  Alle  ]?es  ]?ree,  Goddis 
enemyes,  traveilen  in  ypocrisie,  and  in  worldli  coveitise,  and 
idilnesse  in  Goddis  lawe.  Crist  helpe  his  Chirche  from  ]?ese 
fendis,  for  ]?ei  fi^ten  perilously. 


pE  Gospel  of  many  Martris. 

[SERMON    L  X  V  I  I.] 

Ponite  in  cordihiis  vestris. — Luc.  xxi*^.  [14.] 

pis  gospel  telli]?,  as  o]?er  bifore,  how  Crist  helpi]?  his  martris, 
whan  ]?e  fend  and  hise  lymis  pursuen  hem  for  Cristis  lawe. 
For  Christ  suffride  for  ]?is  lawe  al  ]?e  peyne  })at  he  suffride,  and 
hise  martris  aftir  him  suffriden  for  ]?is  same  law.     Crist  taujte 

^  om.  E.  "^  om.  E.  ^  route,  E.  *  So  in  E ;  A  has  00. 

**  So  E ;  emperonr,  A.         ^  dhpemen,  E.         '^  So  in  E ;  xix.  A,  perpeiam. 

SEBMONS.  P 


There  is  a 
j^^reat  bishop 
who  is  dis- 
pleased that 
God's  law 
sliould  be 
written  in 
English. 


Christ's  help  to 
his  martyrs. 


2IO 


WFCLIF'S 


Plenary  indul- 
g^ences  granted 
to  those  who 
fight  against 
the  Antipope. 


opinli  his  lawe  to  J^e  peple,  and  ]>q  \i^Q  preestis  of  \e  temple, 
wijj  Scribis  and  Phariseis,  |)0U5ten  ]?at  J?is  was  a3ens  hem ;  and 
jjus  |)ei  weren  a^ens  him ;  and  speciali,  for  Cristis  wordis  weren 
ajens  J)ese  |?re  mennis  pride,  and  a5ens  her  coveitise,  in  which 
]?ei  disseyveden  ]>q  peple,  but  not  bi  so  opyn  blasfemye  as 
prelatis  use  to  daie.  For  ]>q\  seien,  ]?at  ]>ei  han  power  of  Crist 
to  assoile  alle  men  |)at  helpen  in  her  cause,  for  to  gete  ])is 
worldli  worshipe,  to  assoile  men  of  peyne  and  synne^'*,  boj^e  in  ]?is 
world  and  in  j^e  tojjir,  and  so  whanne  }?ei  dien,  flee  to  hevene 
wijjouten  peyne.  And  ]?us  durst  not  j^e  fend  feyne  for  j^e  tyme 
jjat  Crist  was  here ;  and  siche  blynde  leden  blynde  men,  and 
maken  falle  bo|)e  in  J>e  lake.  And  ]?us  |)is  is  a  perilous  tyme, 
for  many  men  ben  dryvun  to  helle,  and  jjat  is  more  perilouse 
]?an  ony  dee|>  jjat  |?e^  bodi  ha]?  here,  and  ]?e  peril  is  ])us  more 
for  feynynge  of  ypocrisie ;  and  we  moun  not  see  ])is  peril,  ne 
fele  it  in  \\s  liif.  And  many  witnessis  ben  a^ens  ]?is,  and  seien 
})at  it  is  fals ;  but,  as  ]>ei  seien,  we  han  J?e  fals  part,  and  )>ei  han 
J)e  goode  religion.  And  so  ))is  is  more  perilous  jjan  sectis  de- 
partid  fro  Crist,  as  Jewis  or  Sarasines,  or  oj^er  he})ene  men; 
for  j?ese  worchen  bi  ypocrisie  and  ben  my3ti  heretikes,  and 
medlid  among  trewe  men,  and  ]?us  her  fi3ting  is  feller. 

But  ne]?eles  Crist  supposij)  ]jat  hise  disciplis  shulden  sue  him, 
and  lyven  wel  after  his  lawe,  and  ]?ei  shulen  be  sure  ynow^,  for 
])anne  God  shal  fi3te  for  hem  a3ens  enemyes  of  Crist.  And 
herfore  bigynni])  Crist  and  biddi)?  hem,  putie  in  peir  hertis,  not 
to  penke  hifore  wip  bisinesse,  how  pei  shulen  answere  to  her 
enemyes,  for  Crist  shal  answere  ]?anne  for  hem,  and  '^jyve  hem 
panne  moup  and  witt,  to  which  alle  her  adversaries  moun  not 
aynstonde  ne  aynseie.  And  si}?  J>ei  ben  not  \o  ))at  speken,  but 
j)e  Holi  Goost  spekij?  in  hem,  it  is  soj)  |?at  God  himself  shal 
answere  for  his  part.  It  is  seid  ofte  tymes,  j^at  maner  of 
speche  of  Goddis  lawe  is  to  denye  J^e  instrument,  and  to 
graunte  Jjc  principal,  and  )7us  seij?  Crist  J)at  )?ei  speken  not  but 
]?e  Hooli  Goost  in  hem.  But  Crist  prophecie]?  of  betraying  |>at 
hise  shal  hav  :  ^e  shulen  he  betrayed^  he  seip,  of  your  owne  eldris, 

^  So  in  E;  om.  A. 
*  See  page  136,  note. 


SERMONS. 


211 


of  y)iire  hreperen,  and  y)iire  cosyns,  and  ^oure  owne  frendis.  pis 
lettre  was  verified  of  martiris  of  Crist,  for  alle  |?es  foure  con- 
sentiden  to  dej)  of  jjese  martiris,  for  \€\  j^ou^ten  obeishe  to 
God  in  killinge  of  Cristene  men.  And  as  Cristis  lawe  seij) 
)>at  sevene  |)ingis  shulden  be  hatid  for  Crist,  as  fadir  and  modir, 
wyves  and  children,  bre])eren  and  sistren,  and  mennis  owne  liif, 
so  feynede  jje  fend  j^at  Jjese  foure  frendis  shal  be  hatid  of  man, 
for  |)e  love  of  Anticrist.  And  ])us  many  fadris  killiden  her 
owne  children,  for  ]?ei  confessiden  Crist ;  and  ]?us,  as  we  sup- 
posen,  ]?e  Jev/is  diden.  And  to  speken  generali  of  Anticristis 
scole,  |?ese  popis  ben  fadris,  and  her  churches  ben  modirs,  j^ese 
bishopis  ben  bre)>eren,  and  ojjer  prelatis  ben  cosyns ;  seculer 
men  for  muk  ben  to  j^ese  prelatis,  frendis,  and  alle  J>ese  be- 
traien  Cristene  men  to  turment,  and  putten  hem  to  dee)?  for 
holdinge  of  Cristis  lawe.  And  ))is  is  more  perilous  for  her 
fals  feyning,  for  |?ei  seien  J)at  her  Chirche  mai  no  weie  faile 
}?at  ha]?  lastid  so  longe  in  truj?e  and  in  holinesse.  And  J?us  as 
Crist  was  pursued  and  kild  of  ]>ese  foure  folk,  so  bi  cautels 
of  Anticrist  ben  men  kild  to  dai.  And  3it  |?e  pope  is  clepid 
holyeste  fadir,  and  |?e  bishopis  hise  bre|?eren,  and  abbotis  his 
cosyns,  and  seculers  ben  frendis  ]?at  helpen  to  J?is  pursuyte ; 
and  |?ese  foure  goostU  frendis  ben  most  perilous.  And  Crist 
telli}?  hise  disciplis  how  pei  shulen  be  hatid  of  alle  worldli  men, 
for  pe  name  of  him ;  and  )?us  ben  men  hatid  now  bi  lesengis 
ot  freris,  for  ]?ei  holdin  |?e  gospel  and  lawis  of  Crist.  But  Crist 
comforte]?  hise  and  tellej?  hem  |?at  no  part  of  her  bodi  shal 
perishe  at  |?e  dale  of  dome;  so  pat  an  heere  of  her^  heed  shal 
not  panne  perishe.  And  armer  to  fi^te  wi]?  in  Criste^  men 
is  pacience,  for  wij?  |)is  fou^te  Crist,  and  alle  hise  gloriouse 
lymes ;  and  in  pis  pacience  bihetij?  Crist  to  hise,  j?at  |?ei  shulen 
hav  her  soulis  in  pees,  as  Crist  hadde  his  soule. 

And  here  moven  many  men,  si|?  Cristis  lawe  is  opyn,  and  his 
part  is  knowun  good,  and  Anticristis  wickid,  and  many  devoute 
men  holden  wij?  Crist,  what  move)?  Cristene  men  to  move  hem 
not  to  fi3tinge  ?  For  si)?  )?e  fend  ha)?  but  )?ree  partis  for  his 
side,  Cristene  men  my5te  soone  meve  to  fle  j?es  )?ree  partis. 


The  hierarchy 
and  many  of 
the  laity  united 
in  persecuting 
Christian  men. 


^  om.  E. 


^  Cristen,  E. 


Armed  re- 
sistance not 
advisalile. 


P  2 


212 


WFCLIF'S 


He  appeals  to 
the  laity. 


For  popis  and  bishopis  and  prestis  of  her  sort,  and  ]jese  new 
religiouse,  possessioneris  and  beggeris,  and  seculer  men  |)at 
ben  disseyved  wi])  hem,  ben  J?e  moste  enemyes  to  Crist  and 
his  lawe.  Whi  wolen  not  holi  seculers  risen  a3ens  J^ese  J>ree, 
sijj  \>Q\  moven  seculers  to  fi5te  a^ens  her  enemyes  ?  Here  men 
}?enken  J?at  Cristene  men  shulden  algatis  loven  pees,  and  not 
procure  to  fi3te ;  for  Crist  is  a  pesible  kyng,  and  he  seij?  in  his 
gospel  |>at  in  oure  greet  pacience  we  shulen  have  oure  victorie ; 
and  Crist  shal  fi5te  for  us.  But  many  men  jjenken  |?at  seculer 
men  shulden  helpe  here,  not  to  fi^te  bodili  a5ens  Cristis  enemyes, 
but  wi}>drawe  her  conceil  and  consent  fro  ]?es  |>ree  folk;  and 
|)is  dede  were  sure  before  God  and  man. 

And  si]?  |)ese  false  freris  camen  last  into  ]>q  Churche,  it  seme]? 
|;at  at  hem  shulden  men  begynne  to  practise,  for  ]?ei  semen  leste 
groundid  or  rotid  in  malice,  al  if  her  malice  be  sharpest,  as  fevere 
of  a  dale,  pe  rote  of  possessioners  seme]?  harder  to  overcome, 
for  ]?ei  ben  rotid  in  richessis  and  frendship  of  ]?e  world ;  but  li3tli 
mitten  trewe  men  discomfite  ]?ese  freris,  not  but  wi}?draw  her 
defence  and  consente  to  hem ;  and  ]?ese  fendis  shulden  faile,  as 
|?ei  began  wi}?outen  ground.  And  here  moun  men  li^tli  se 
whe]?er  seculers  ben  trewe  men,  for  ]?ei  confessen  communii 
]?at  ]?ei  loven  Crist  moost,  and  wolen  stonde  bi  his  lawe,  and 
also  bi  his  ordenaunce,  for  to  suflfre  de]?,  but  j^ei  fallen  in  J?es 
wordis.  Hem  nedi]?  ne]?er  to  fi3te  ne  dispende  ne  traveile, 
but  consent  not  wij?  ]?es  fendis,  ne  defende  hem  a5ens  Crist, 
and  }?ei  shulden  soone  be  destryed  among  hemsilf  Wei  Y 
woot  ]?at  begging  holdij?  hem  up,  and  o}?er  lesingis  upon  Crist 
and  his  Churche.  Comune  not  wi]?  hem,  ne  ^yve  hem  noon 
almesse,  bifoore  ]?ei  hav  declarid  ]?ese  ^  gabbingis  a3ens  bileve, 
and  li^tH  shulde  be  an  ende  of  ]?ese  false  prophetis.  Her 
preieris,  and  her  massis,  and  o]?er  false  signes,  ben  signes  }?at 
}?ei  chaffaren  wi]?  disseyvynge  |?e  peple.  But  dwelle  we  in  ]?is 
bileve,  and  tell  hem  boldli  ]?at  ]?ei  witen  never  ^  wher  ]?ei  ben 
fendis ;  and  if  ]?ese  ypocritis  ben  fendis,  her  preiris  doi]?  harm, 
^he,  bo]?  to  hemsilf  and  to  o})er  men ;  and  no  man  ]?at  hadde 
witt  shulde  chaffare  wi]?  her  preiris.     And  herfore  biddi]?  Crist 


RE. 


2  not,  E. 


SERMONS, 


213 


flee  from  false  prophetis  jjat  come  in  clo|)ing  of  sheep,  but 
jiei  ben  wolves  wi|)  men,  and  her  comyng  is  moost  to  ravyshe 
bi  ypocrisie. 

As  anentis  her  massis,  a  man  j)at  hackle  Cristis  hert  shulde 
seie  hem  so]?eli,  |>at  he  wolde  not  truste  |>erynne,  but  if  }>ei 
purgiden  hem  of  heresie,  of  which  ]?ei  ben  suspect.  It  was 
taken  as  bileve,  longe  bifore  )?at  freris  cam  ynne,  jjat  ]?e  sacrid 
ost  ]?at  men  seen  at  i3e  is  verrili  Goddis  bodi,  bi  vertue  of  hise 
wordis.  Freris  seien  |)at  Jjis  is  fals,  but  it  is  an  accident 
wij^outen  ony  suget,  and  ])ei  gilen  ])e  peple.  If  a  man  charge 
Goddis  lawe  more  ]?an  fals  in  name  of  sich  lyeris  in  J^e  world, 
}>at  doijj  myche  harm.  Comune  he  not  wi|>  hem,  ne  ^yve  hem 
no  goodis,  before  he  have  asaied  whe]?er  |?ei  ben  here  heretikes ; 
and  seie  he,  |)at  Crist  taki]?  not  service  of  man  but  if  he  3yve 
betere  a^en,  and  ])us  shulden  prestis  done;  and  herfore,  but 
if  ))e  frere  bringe  under  his  comune  seel,  what  is  |)e  sacrid  oost, 
jjei  wolen  not  comune  wi]?  him.  For,  as  Seint  Joon  sei]?,  who- 
ever gretij)  an  heretike  shal  hav  of  his  synne,  what  man  ever 
he  be.  And  j^us,  if  a  trewe  man  love  more  Crist  jjan  ]?e 
worldis  fame,  he  mai  li^tli  wi])  worship  avoide  sich  fals  freris. 
And  certis  ]?is  dede  were  unsuspect  bo]?e  to  God  and  man. 
For  if  ]7ei  hav  a  ri3t  bileve,  \e\  shulden  telle  it  for  charite, 
and  if  her  bileve  were  fals,  |?ei  shulden  wille  l?at  it  were  dis- 
troied.  And  algatis  ]?ei  witen  wel,  ]>at  ]?ei  varien  in  bileve  fro 
\>Q  gospel  and  comun  peple,  and  many  weies  disseyve  men. 
For  ]?ei  tellen  not  what  is  |?at,  but  ))at  J?is  is  Goddis  bodi.  But 
|?ese  idiotis  shulen  wite,  Jjat  bo])e  j?ere  and  everywhere  is  betere 
)>ing  j?an  Goddis  bodi,  for  |;e  holi  Trinitie  is  in  ech  place.  And 
so  men  axen  what  is  |?at,  ])at  Jjc  prest  sacri|>,  and  aftur  breki)?, 
and  |>at  men  worshipen  as  Goddis  bodi,  but  not  accident 
wi|)OUten  suget.  And  J?us  defaute  of  ri^t  bileve,  practisid  among 
)>es  freris,  shulden  dampne  hem  as  heretikes,  and  take  hem  in 
her  owne  falshede. 

And  so,  bi  alle  o]?er  signes  |)at  jjei  feynen  in  religioun, 
aspie  how  ))es  freris  camen  inne,  and  by  whos  auctorite ; 
for  if  l^ei  camen  not  in  bi  Crist,  |?at  is  dore  of  his  Churche, 
|)ei  ben  |>eves  and  heretikes,  and  stien  up  by  j^e  roof  And 
]iis   proof  were    not  costli,  ne    chargious,  ne    shameful;    and 


The  doctrine 
of  friars  con- 
cerninj^  the 
Eucharist. 


:  John,  II. 


214 


WFCLIF'S 


How  Christ 
deals  with 
those  that 
love  him. 


Five  causes 
why  men  fol- 
lowed Christ. 


for  levyng  of  siche  proofe  synnen  men  ful  grevousely  bo}>e 
a3ens  Crist  and  his  Churche,  3he,  ajens  freris  ]>at  men  j^enken 
])ei  helpen.  And  ]?is  shulden  alle  men  do  in  dede,  and  stire 
oJ?er  men  J>erto,  sum  bi  love,  sum  bi  drede ;  and  Jjus  shulden 
oure  bileve  be  shewid,  and  rotyn  heresie,  hid  now,  shulde  come 
to  proof  wi]>  false  lesingis.  And  here  moun  men  wel  assaie 
\vhe])er  clerkes  and  kny5tis  wij?  her  comunes  love  God  as  |>ei 
confessen,  and  doren  stonde  bi  his  lawe ;  for  he  |?at  is  necligent 
in  so  litil  ]?ing  for  to  do,  wolde  soon  be  necligent  in  harder 
J)ing  of  more  charge. 

pE  Gospel  of  many  Martris. 

[SERMON     LXVIIL] 

Descendens  Jesus  de  monte. — Luc.  vi.  [17.] 

pis  Gospel  telli]?,  as  we  hav  seid,  how  J>e  peple  lovede  Crist, 
and  how  Crist  5afe  hem  loore  J^at  was  betir  )?an  al  J)is  world. 
And  so  Crist,  as  a  good  kny3t,  stood  now  in  hil,  and  now  in 
pleyn,  now  in  water,  and  now  in  erjje,  to  telle  j^at  he  was  Lord 
of  alle.  But  here  he  stood  in  the  pleyn  feld,  for  ]?er  men 
mi5ten  betere  heere  him;  and  |>us  he  techij),  j?at  he  love]? 
all  men  J^at  holden  his  lawe,  be  J?ei  clerkis,  be  ]?ei  kni3tis, 
or  laborers  J)at  maynteynen  til]?e.  And  pus  Crist  cam  doun  of 
pe  hill,  and  stood  in  a  feldi place,  and  to  him  cam  dyverse/olkis, 
as  sum  men  pat  weren  hise  disciplis,  and  a  great  multitude  of 
o\qx folk  fro  fyve  places.  Sum  men  camen  fro  fer  countrees 
of  ]7e  lond  of  Jude,  and  sum  camen  fro  ferusalem,  and  sum 
C2iTi\QY).fro  pe  see,  and  sum  mQnfro  pe  lond  of  Tire,  and  sum  fro 
))e  lond  of  Sidon. 

And  men  seien  comunli  }>at  men  sueden  Crist  for  fyve 
causis.  Sum  men  camen  to  sue  Crist,  to  lerne  of  him  Goddis 
lawe ;  and  )>us  sueden  ]>e  aposdis  Crist  j?at  speciali  sueden  him, 
and  oj^er  trewe  men,  bi  ri3t  entent  to  be  informed  in  Goddis 
lawe,  and  speciali  at  J>is  tyme ;  for  now  3af  Crist  his  lawe,  and 
so  he  ordeynede  many  folk  to  here  alweie  |)is  newe  lawe.  pe 
secounde  cause  jjat  men  sueden  Crist  for,  was  to  be  heelid  of 


SERMONS. 


ZJi^ 


Crist.  For  alle  manere  of  sykenessis  of  men  he  helid  wi|>outen 
hire;  and  so  scij?  ]>q  gospel  here  J)at  many  folkis  camen  to 
Crist,  io  hcere  him^  and  to  be  helid  of  syknesse  \2X  \€\  were  inne. 
])e  ])ridde  cause  whi  folk  sueden  him  was  for  to  se  wondris  of 
Crist,  as  men  traveilen  in  fer  weie  to  se  pleies  ^  in  )?e  world ; 
and  more  woundris  J>an  Crist  dide  was  not  seen  bifore  ne  aftir. 
pc  four|)e  cause  whi  sum  folk  cam  to  Crist  was  cumpanye,  )>at 
o|)er  men  cam  to  Crist,  ojjer  for  oo  cause  or  for  o]>er.  And 
})us  j?ei  camen  to  se  Crist  for  sum  cause  ]>at  here  is  seid.  pe 
fifte  cause,  and  |>e  worste,  J^at  sum  men  camen  to  here  Crist 
was  to  take  him  in  wordis,  as  ofte  tymes  camen  hise  enemyes, 
as  Pharisees  and  ojjer  servauntis  of  hi5e  preestis  of  ])e  temple. 

And  ])us  sei])  jje  gospel  here; — -pat  men  travelid  of  pe  fendis 
wereii  heeh'd,  a7id  al  pe  peple  covetide  to  touche  Crist,  for  vertue 
wente  out  of  him,  and  helide  alle  men.  And  Crist  cast  up  hise 
iyn  in  hise  disciplis,  and  seide  foure  wordis,  as  it  is  told  bifore 
in  J)e  firste  sermoun  of  martirs^.  First  sei]?  Crist,  Blessid be pe'^ 
pore  men,  for  '^oure  is  pe  kyngdom  of  God ;  and  comunli  such 
men  ])at  ben  pore  of  goodis  here,  ben  also  pore  in  soule, 
as  sei]?  |?e  gospel  of  Matheu.  For  sum  men  ben  proude 
in  her  herte  of  fair  chirchis  and  hi3e  steplis,  and  sum  of 
faire  5ate  housis,  and  sum  men  of  hi^e  kycchynes  ^ ;  and  so  if 
pryde  were  fulli  layd  doun,  few  or  noon  wolden  hav  sich 
housis.  And  if  all  \>q  good  were  weied  |?at  come}>  of  sich 
costli  }nng,  it  were  but  pure  fantasie,  and  worldli  pryde  |>at 
come]?  jjerof.  And  if  we  ]?enken  how  Crist  was  pore,  more 
|?an  ony  of  us  mai  be,  we  shulden  not  bolue  for  richesse  of 
)?e  world,  for  no  good  }>at  come]?  J^erof.  And  so  we  shulen 
understonde  ]?ese  ]?ree  wordis  ])at  come  after; — Blessid  be  y 
pat  hungren  now,  for  y  shulen  aftir  be  fillid.  Blessid  be  y 
pat  ivepen  now,  for  y  shulen  leiy  aftir ;  and  blessid  shukfi 
y  be  whanne  pat  men  shulen  hate  yu,  and  whanne  pei  departen 
yu  fro  Cristene  men  pat  pei  loven,  and  ivhanne  pei  shulen 
reprove  yu,  and  caste  out  yur  name  as  ivel,  for  y  holden  wip 
Cristis  lawe,    al   if   it    displese   to  |?e  world,     /;/  pat  dai  joie 


^  for  to  see  pleyes,  E. 


ie,  E. 


kychyties,  E. 


»  See  Sermon  LXV,  p.  201. 


2l6 


WrCLIF'S 


Against  monks 
arid  canons. 


y  wipine,  and  make  36  glad  countynaunce  wi}70uten,  for  lo 
y)ure  neede  is  moche  in  hevene  ;  and  by  |)is  weie  56  deserven  it. 

As  it  is  seid  bifore,  God  ha)?  many  enemyes  ]?at  feynen  bi 
her  professioun  J)at  ]?ei  ben  pore  as  was  Crist,  and  3it  ]>q\ 
han  worldi  goodis,  boj?  meblis  and  unmeblis,  and  J)ei  disturblen 
Cristis  ordre,  and  contreis  J>at  |)ei  dwellen  ynne,  as  monkis  and 
chanouns  wi]?  her  degrees,  and  o)>er  possessioneris.  Crist  teche]) 
hem  to  be  pore  for  love  of  him,  but  wilfulli ;  and  J>ei  crepen 
ynne  to  be  riche,  bi  falsenesse  of  ipocrisie;  and  })us  ben  lordis 
and  rewmes  poorid,  to  whos  stait  shulde  ^  richesse  falle ;  and 
3it  bo]>  prelatis  and  lordis  and  oj^er  folk  ben  so  blyndid,  ]?at 
]>e\  holden  up  J)is  fendis  cause  and  cursen  trewe  men  ])at  letten 
it.  And  it  is  con  to  do  ]>us,  and  to  curse  Cristene  men,  for  f^ei 
holden  on  Cristis  side  a^ens  ]?e  fend,  and  his  helpe ;  for  he  ha]> 
so  blyndid  men  bi  unbileve  of  Goddis  lawe,  ]?at  dedis  ]?at  ben 
a5ens  it  ben  holden  good  and  nedeful :  as  twelve  lawis  ben 
aleggid  how  God  ordeyne]?  clerkes  to  lyve,  and  confirmede 
hem  bi  his  Sone,  and  bi  liif  of  hise  apostlis,  and  5it  men 
seien  |)ei  ben  acursid,  Jjat  traveilen  to  kepe  ])ese  lawis.  But 
as  j)ei  feynen,  |?ei  han  prelatis,  and  ]>q  hi3este  is  |)e  pope ;  and 
but  if  men  have  leve  of  hem  no  man  shulde  take  jjes  goodis 
aweie.  And  heron  ben  lawis  ordeyned  and  cursingis  wi])Outen 
nombre,  and  lordis  ben  undermyned  wi))  sutiltees  of  the  fend ; 
and  but  if  God  send  a  gretter  ^  grace,  ])is  heresie  wole  not 
be  amendid,  but  if  some  conquest  come,  or  ))e  laste  dai  of 
dome. 

Bi  many  causis  move]?  the  fend  to  holde  ]?is  cause  a3ens 
a3ens  Crist,  for  herbi  he  haj>  foundun  pley  in  clerkis,  kny3tis, 
and  in  comunes ;  for  clerkis  herbi  ben  proude  and  worldh, 
and  leve  ])e  office  jjat  God  ha]?  bedun  clerkis  do  to  profite 
of  his  churche.  For  herbi  clerkis  ben  o]?er  lewid  or  occupied 
aboute  ]?e  world,  so  ]?at  prechynge  and  techinge  ben  aweie 
for  J)e  more  part ;  and  ]?es  prelatis  above  seen  ]?at  bi  ]?e  same 
skile  ]?ei  shulden  wante  her  worldli  richesse,  as  wantide  bo]? 
Crist  and  Pelir,  and  herfore  for  to  flee  ]?is  eende  J>ei  maken 
meenes   in   weie    bifore.     And   si]?    averise  ^   drie]?    more,    J?es 

^  So  E  ;  shulden,  A.  ^  grete,  E.  ^  aver  ice,  E. 


SERMONS. 


217 


prelatis  ben  jms  coveitous,  and  seculer  lordis  bo|)e,  for  lordship 
is  taken  fro  hem.  And  |)us  ]?e  pore  comuns  bien  ^  ]>q  trespas 
of  Goddis  lawe,  but  not  so  myche  as  jjes  two  o|?er ;  for  Jjei 
bien  it  more  in  helle.  pe  fend  traveilej)  bisili  to  holde  |>is 
nest  a3ens  Crist,  and  ypocrisie  of  preestis  is  |)e  beste  mene 
]>at  he  hajj;  and  ])us  officeris  of  Cristis  hous  ben  so  turned 
in  her  service,  ]>at  if^  Peter  were  now  alyve,  and  saie  how 
preestis  w-eren  occupied,  he  wolde  seie  J)ei  weren  not  prestis 
of  Crist,  but  proctours  of  Anticrist.  But,  for  ]?e  fend  dredi]?  him 
|)at  Cristene  men  shulden  knowe  ]?is  wille,  to  ^  fordo  ])is  fendis 
falsehede,  and  turne  a^en  to  Cristis  lawe,  and  algatis  jjat 
Cristis  preestis  shulden  lyv  in  povertie  as  he  dide,  he  ha)) 
cast  anojjer  weie  to  preise  preiyinge  of  sich  preestis,  and 
telle  |)at  it  is  more  worj?  jjan  al  j^e  lordship  of  |)is  world  bojje 
to  lordis  and  to  her  eldris,  and  specialy  at  mydny^t,  as  jjese 
religiouse  preien.  But  here  men  speken  ajen  ]>e  fend,  and 
seien  he  blyndij?  here  but  foolis,  for  men  wilen  ]?at  God  love]? 
more  just  liif  J^an  siche  preier,  and  it  is  a  fendis  folic  to  chaunge 
oflice  of  Cristis  servauntis.  Crist  ha]?  ordeyned  hise  preestis 
bo]?e  to  teche  and  preche  hise  gospel,  and  not  for  to  preie 
J>us,  and  to  be  hid  in  sich  ciosettis ;  and  J)us  a  liif  of  00  just 
man,  ]?at  held  wel  Goddis  lawe,  were  worthi  many  such  preieris 
as  now  ben  procurid  folily.  And  if  ])e  fend  alegge  ]>e  Psalm, 
]?at  Davi]?^  roos  at  mydny^t  to  confesse  to  his  God;  whi 
shulden  not  we  now  do  so  ?  But  here  we  axen  \q  fendis 
clerk,  si]?  Crist  dwellide  at  ny^t  in  his  preier,  and  in  ]?e  dai 
tau3te  ]?e  peple,  and  dide  hise  workes  privyly  for  to  flee  ypocrisie, 
why  shulden  not  preestis  now  do  J)us  ?  and  si]?  ]?e  same  Psalm 
sei]?.  Lord  how  Y  have  loved  ]?i  lawe ,  al  J?e  dai  it  is  my  ]?ou5t, 
whi  shulde  we  not  holde  ]?is  more?  sij?  it  is  moche  betere  ]?an  to 
rise  at  mydny3t.  And  if  Baal  preest  feynen  ]?at  ]?anne  God  mai 
here  wele,  and  ]?anne  lordis  of  J?e  worldlyven  in  lustes  in  hers 
bedde,  and  good  it  is  J?at  God  be  sued  ech  hour  of  sum  men ; 
wite  J)ei  wele  J?at  God  loki]?  betere  to  goode  dedis  ]?an  to  sich 
preieris.  But  ne]>eles  devoute  men  J?at  be  disposed  to  preie 
j?anne,  God  forbede  ]?at  ]?ei  shulden  be  lettid;  but  make  we 


Ps.  cxix.  55. 


Ps.  cxix.  97. 


'  by  en,  E. 


"'  lif,  E. 


^  and,  E. 


Davyt,  E. 


2i8 


WFCLI  F'S 


The  signs 
which  shall 
precede  the 
Day  of  Judg- 
ment. 


Seven  perils  to 
the  Churches : 

The  first  peril. 


no  general  reule  to  undispose  men  on  j^e  dai,  whanne  ]?ei 
shulden  do  workes  of  li3t.  Wei  I  woot  Jjat  J>eves  usen  to 
worche  on  ny3t  and  slepe  on  |)e  dai,  and  so  usen  jjese  neue 
jjeves  ]?at  comen  in  abov  ]?e  dore ;  for  Crist  koude  have  tau3t 
J>is  preier  if  it  hadde  more  plesid  him,  as  he  koude  hav 
tau3te  to  preie,  and  lefte  to  preche  his  gospel  to  men.  And 
si]?  sich  religiouse  moun  not  preie  God  for  hemsilf  to  come 
to  hevene,  for  J)ei  shulen  be  dampned,  how  moche  wole  God 
here  sich  fendis  preier  for  ojjer  men!  However  ])e  fend  sei]> 
here,  |)e  office  j^at  Crist  ha|)  ordeyned  of  hise  servantis  in 
his  hous  is  |?e  beste  of  alle  oj^er. 


pE  Gospel  on  feeste  of  many  Martris. 

[SERMON      LXI  X.] 

Cu7Ji  audieritis  proelia. — Luc.  xxi.  [9.] 

pis  gospel  telli]?  to  Cristis  martris,  what  peril  shal  falle 
on  his  house  bo]?  bifore  and  aftir  here,  er^  ]?e  dai  of  dome 
come.  And  j^us  shulden  martris  be  confortid  bi  witt  and 
ordenance  of  Crist,  and  suffre  wij?  good  wille,  ri3t  as  })is 
Lord  ha]?  ordeyned;  for  certis  he  ordeyne]?  for  ]?e  beste,  to 
his  worship  and  to  his  Churche. 

First  speki]?  Crist  to  hise  disciplis ;  and  biddi]?  hem,  pat 
pei  shulden  not  be  adred,  whanne  pei  shulden  here  hatels  and 
contekes  wip  men  ^ ;  for  pes  piiigis  7noien  nedis  be^  but  3//  is 
not  anoon  ende.  And  J?anne  Crist  seide  to  hem  of  sevene 
perils  \2X  shulden  come,  pe  first  peril  of  ]?ese  sevene  is, 
]?at  00  folk  shulden  rise  ayns  ano]?er,  as  Cristene  men  fi3ten 
wi]?  Sarasynes,  and  00  secte  wi]?  ano]?er;  and  ]?us  bo|?e 
eldir  men  and  3onger  hatiden  divisioun  in  ]?e  peple,  for  suche 
divisioun  is  cause  of  bateilis  and  strives  among  men ;  ne 
it  is  not  00  peple,  but  for  oonhede  of  lord  and  lawes. 
And   ])us  alle  Cristene  men  shulden   holde  of  Crist  and  his 


or,  E. 


wi\>ynne,  E. 


SERMONS. 


219 


lawe,  and  obeisshe  to  hise  bailies,  in  as  myche  as  Crist  biddi]> 
obeishe  to  hem. 

The  secounde  harm  |>at  shal  come  to  Cristis  Chirche  for 
synne  of  men,  is,  pat  00  I'civme  shal  rise  ayns  anoper  for 
wantinge  of  charite,  and  cause  hereof  shall  be  defaute  of 
keping  of  Cristis  ordenaunce.  For  Crist  ordeynede  his 
Chirche  to  stonde  in  sich  an  evene  mesure,  |>at  ech  part 
shulde  profite  to  o|?er,  and  noon  reverse  o|)er  in  liif;  as 
partis  of  mannis  bodi  }>at  is  hoole  fi^ten  not  togidir,  but 
ra|>er  oon  helpij?  ano))er,  and  kepi|>  it  fro  many  harmis. 
And  |>us  partyng  of  lordships  among  preestis  must  nedis 
make  fi3tinge :  and  so  sectis  ])at  soutren  })e  peple  o)?er  weie 
}?an  Crist  ordeynede,  as  )?ese  newe  religiouse,  moten  disturble 
hel]?e  of  rewmes. 

pe  |>ridde  peril  J?at  Crist  tellij?  here,  is  grete  erpe-denes^ 
bi  places ;  for  as  ]?e  er]?-denes,  as  clerkis  seien,  come]>  of 
wyndis  closid  wij^inne  \q  erj>e,  so  wyndis  closid  in  proude 
preestis,  and  o]?er  men  of  \q  world,  ben  figurid  by  erjje- 
dene.  And  \€\  distrien  countreis  and  citees,  for  prelatis 
more  and  lesse  here  bosten  more  ]>an  Goddis  lawe  techi]?, 
and  ]?ese  wyndis  be  algatis  closid  wij?inne  ]?e  boundis  of  Goddis 
lawe,  for  \€\  ben  evene  as  grete  as  Goddis  lawe  wole 
suffren  hem.  And  as  it  wole  close  hem  or  ponishen^  hem, 
so  it  is;  and  whanne  \€\  ben  aventid,  bi  conquest  or  o]?er 
manere,  Goddis  lawe  lymyte])  how  Jjcs  wyndis  shulen  passe 
aweie. 

pe  fourj^e  and  \q.  fif|)e  peril,  shal  he  pestilencis  and  hun- 
gris,  for  as  distempour  of  })e  eir  shal  sle  men  and  unable 
J)e  er|)e,  so  distempour  of  wyndis  of  pride  shal  lette  preching 
of  Cristis  word,  and  jjanne  come]?  pestilence  of  soule  worse 
J>an  pestilence  of  bodi,  as  hungre  of  Goddis  lawe  is  worse 
j)an  bodili  hungre.  And  si|?  hevene  worchij?  in  er})e,  after 
|?at  er]>e  is  disposid,  |>ere  mut  come  into  er|?e  pestilence  and 
hungre.  Pestilence  shal  come  of  distempour  of  dementis, 
and  of  o]?er  medlid  bodies  |)at  ben  unkyndeli  temprid ;  for  j^e 
fumes  of  ])ese  blowun  wij?  ]?e  wyndis,  and  drawun  in  to  man. 


er\>edones,  E. 


puny sc he,  E. 


The  second 
peril. 


The  third  peril. 


The  fourth  and 
fifth  perils. 


220 


WFCLIF'S 


The  sixth  and 
seventh  perils. 


An  invective 
against  the 
prelates. 


distemperen  his  bodi,  and  maken  hise  humours  and  alle  hise 
lymes  to  wante  her  kyndeli  tempour ;  and  j>us  come]?  pestilence, 
bo]?e  to  man  and  beste.  And  sij?  corn  and  o])er  fruytis  ben 
nurished  by  jjis  eir,  and  ]?is  is  so  distemperid  bi  causes  ])at  ben 
bifore  seid,  J^e  blewinge  ^  of  ]?es  fruytis  mut  faile  for  jjis  same 
cause,  and  so  hungre  mut  come  for  defaute  of  sich  fruyte. 
But  Crist  spekijj  more  here  of  spiritual  veniaunce  ]?at  is  more 
to  drede  jjan  bodili  peynes. 

And  so  ))e  sixte  and  ]7e  sevenjje  perils  Jjat  Crist  telli]? 
ben,  /eringis  fro  hevene  and  oper  grete  signes ;  and  as  ))es 
muten  come  bi  kynde  for  variance  of  ])e  erjje,  so  mut  oo 
synne  bifore  bringe  in  anojjer  synne,  and  |>us  shal  Goddis 
veniaunce  ^  be  varied  after  ]?es  synnes.  As  it  is  distempour, 
]?at  er]7eh  men  shal  calengen  here  to  be  evene  wi]>  Crist, 
and  do  more  j)ingis  J^an  he  wole  do, — so  after  siche  signes 
moten  come  to  men  peyneful  wondris,  as  it  is  an  hidouse 
|?ing  ])at  men  contrarien  to  Crist  bojje  in  word  and  in  dede, 
and,  ledinge  of  o|?er  peple,  seien  ])at  ])ei  moun  do  wi]j  })is 
as  myche  as  j^e  manhede  of  Crist,  and  wi|?  ]?is  senden  out  signes 
to  witnesse  |)is  blasfemye.  pese  ben  more  hidous  signes  ]?an 
bodili  comynge  fro  hevene.  But  Crist  telli}?  to  hise  disciplis 
pat  bifore  alle  pes  sevene,  pe  ferventeste  enemy es"^  to  Crist  shal 
caste  hondis  upon  hem^  and  pursue  he?}i,  and  ^yve  hem  in  to  hojtdis 
of  false  preestis  ;  and  \e\  shulen  putte  hem  in  to  feyned  holdis, 
and  punishe  hem  many  weies,  and  after  ]?ei  shulen  drawe  hem 
to  kyngis  and  to  justices,  |)at  ben  my^ti  in  ]?is  world.  And  ]jus 
for  Crist  shulen  ]?ei  be  ponished ;  and  liche  to  ])is  fallij?  now  by 
ponishing  of  Anticrist.  But  Crist  sei]?  to  hise  disciplis  pat  it 
shal f alle  in  to  hem  into  witnesse,  Jjat  J)ei  ben  on  ]>t  trewe  %\dQ,pat 
pei  shulen  have  clere  answer e,  to  ivhich  alle  her  adversaries  shal 
not  moun'^  aynstojide ;  and  ]?is  shal  be  Goddis  loore  comynge 
to  hem  so  privyli.  And  Crist  seij?  as  he  dide  bifore  how  he 
shal  5yve  hem  alle  )?is  wisdom,  to  J)e  witt  |>at  is  seid  bifore. 

And  here  men  noten  comunli  how  prelatis  weren  disposid  by 
Crist  to  take  of  him  wisdom,  to  cunne  reule  his  Churche;  and  so 
o)7er  Cristis  bileve  faile]?,  or  prelatis  be  undisposid  now  to  take 

^  blmvyng,  E.         ^  vengeaunce,  E.  •''  f>e  moste  eneiny,  E.         *  moive,  E. 


SERMONS. 


221 


wisdom  of  Crist  to  reule  his  Churche  wel.  And  si}?  a  prelat  mai 
not  do,  but  if  he  hav  keies  of  \q  Churche,  j?e  which  ben  power 
and  science  to  dispence  Goddis  tresour,  it  seme])  )>at  prelatis 
now  failen  in  bo})e  |)es.  For  bi  mannis  traveile  |>ei  hav  not 
passingli  geten  |;is  witt,  si]?  ))ei  hav  ben  occupied  in  \q  world,  and 
ben  simple  of  lettrure  of  Cristis  lawe,  and  of  inspiringe  bi 
Goddis  grace.  It  seme]?  J>at  siche  prelatis  ben  ful  fer  to  take  of 
God  suche  li3tnynge  of  Goddis  cunnynge,  fer  \e\  ben  ful  of 
worldeli  witt  in  worldeli  occupacioun,  and  herbi  unclene  in  ])0U5t, 
to  take  siche  wisdom  of  God.  And  dedis  of  |?es  men,  wij?  fruytis 
of  her  liif,  shewen  jjat  jjei  ben  not  ful  cunnynge  in  wisdom 
of  Goddis  lawe,  and  so  |)ei  ben  untrewe  dispenders  of  tresour 
})at  |)ei  feynen  of  God.  And  si]?  a  wastour  of  worldeli  goodis 
shulde  be  blamyd  of  God  and  man,  how  myche  a  wastour  of 
betere  goodis  is  more  for  to  blame;  and  moche  more  if  a 
prelate  feyne  by  ypocrisie  |?at  he  ha}?  power  and  witt,  jovun  of 
God  to  reule  his  Chirche,  and  doi]?  al  amys  ^  in  ])is,  and  sue]? 
not  God  ne  his  lawe.  Certis,  syche  an  ypocrite  addi})  first  a 
lesinge,  and  bi  his  feyned  traitorie  he  ledi|)  amys  Cristis  sheep ; 
and  if  wastinge  of  Goddis  goodis  be  worse,  jjat  ]?e  goodis  be 
betere,  ])is  is  worse  wi])OUten  mesure  J^an  wastinge  of  erj^eli 
goodis.  And  5it  men  ]?at  shulden  be  m.artris  ben  so  smytun 
wi])  cowardise,  jjat  J)ei  deren  not  speke  a  word  for  ri3t  bileve  in 
])is  matere ;  but  jjei  constreynen  men  as  bestis  to  bileve  a  fals- 
hede,  |?at  ]>is  prelate  haj?  power  and  witt  of  God  to  do  ]?us.  And 
whoever  denye]?  ]?is  he  cursij?  hem,  and  pursue}?  hem. 

First  })ei  begynnen  wi}?  ])is : — ])at  he  is  hede  of  holi  Chirche ; 
and  of  }?is  })ei  bringen  for}?  more,  })at  God  mut  comune  wi}?  him 
his  tresour;  and  where  God  ha}?  ordeyned  to  hide,  whe|?er  men 
shal  be  saved  or  dampned,  })ese  ypocritis  seien  })ei  witen  wel 
]7at  }?ei  ben  heed  of  hooli  Chirche,  and  ])anne  })ei  shulen  be 
saif,  and  wite  of  Goddis  privytees,  which  man  he  wole  have 
saif,  and  how  longe  ]>\s  shal  be  in  peyne.  And  so  he  woot  '^  bi 
Goddis  lore  whanne  })e  dai  of  dome  shal  be,  for  he  mai  not  for 
shame  graunte  pardon  after  ])e  dai  of  dome ;  for  after  ]?is  daie 
ben  but  two  places  in  which  pardone  mai  be  feyned,  and  in  ne- 


Their  pre- 
sumptuous 
claims, 


^  So  in  E,  A  has  almys. 


^  wote,  E. 


222 


WVCLIF'S 


especially  with 
regard  to  in- 
dulgences. 


The  sin  of 
hypocrisy, 


|>er  moun  suche  prelatis  pardoun  profite  to  men  J)at  ]?er  ben.  And 
whanne  J)ei  graunten  many  Jjousynd  wynter  of  such  pardone, 
o])er  J)ei  witen,  )?at  ]?is  tyme  shal  be  bifore  )>is  dai,  or  ellis  ])is 
pardoun  shal  serve  of  nou3t.  Sich  ben  many  blasfeme  lesingis 
feyned  of  popis  and  o)?er  prelatis ;  and  whoso  reversij?  hem  in 
Crist  he  mai  be  martir  if  he  dair ;  and  betir  cause  of  martirdom 
fynde  we  noon  to  Goddis  servauntis.  For  as  meynteyning  of 
bileve  is  a  cause  of  martirdome,  so  mayntenyng  of  ]jing  not 
bileve  shulde  be  reversid  of  Cristen  men,  for  ellis  mi^te  al  bileve 
be  changid,  eeld  ^  put  out,  and  newe  brou5t  inne.  For  |;ei  seien 
J)is  is  bileve,  jjat  ])is  is  heed  of  holi  Chirche,  and  what  Jjing  Jjat 
he  feyne]?  is  performed  of  Crist.  And  more  perilous  heresie 
was  never  feyned  of  ))e  fend. 


On  dai  of  many  Martris. 

[SERMON     LXX.] 

Ailendite  afermento  Pharisaeortim. — Luc.  xii.  [i.] 

pis  gospel  telli]),  as  o])er  hav  don,  how  men  shulen  be 
confortid  bi  Crist,  and  stonde  in  his  fei|)  to  de]?,  for  good  \2X. 
shal  come  Jjerof.  Fie  ^e,  sei]?  Crist,  /ro  pe  synne  of  Pharisees ^ 
pat  is  ypocrisie.  For  among  o])er  synnes  \2X  J)e  comuns  be 
blyndid  bi,  )?is  is  oon  of  ]?e  moste  ]?at  rengne]?^  in  prestis,  bo]?e 
among  prelatis  and  al  maner  religious.  For  as  Crist  likij) 
moost  in  good  werk  and  wilful,  so  |>e  fend  liki]?  moost  in  yvel 
werk  and  wilful.  For  as  ]?e  first  mut  nede  be  good,  so  \q 
to]jer  mut  nede  be  yvel.  And  so  men  seien  ]?at  ypocrisie  is 
fals  feyninge  of  holynesse,  and  falli])  whanne  evere  a  man 
feyne}>  })at  he  ha))  spiritual  good  of  God,  and  he  ha]>  not  })is 
good,  but  synne  for  his  fals  feyninge.  And  al  if  many 
spiritual  goodis  ben  feyned  of  ypocritis,  ne])eles  holynesse 
and  witt  ben  feyned  more  comunli ;  and  bi  |>ese  two  ben 
folk  disseyved,  in  j^ing  jjat  touchi])  soulis  helj^e.     And,  for  ))is 


olde,  E. 


regne\>,  E. 


SERMONS. 


223 


l^inp^  mai  not  be  seen,  and  power  of  God  is  feyned  to  prelatis, 
)>erfore  j)is  synne  is  more  hid,  and  more  privyly  disseyve)?  )?e 
peple.  And  so  ]je  fend  cast  a  long  tyme  to  marre  men  in 
bileve,  and  bi  |)is  errour  bringe  aftir^  inne  more  synnes  to 
blynde  J^e  peple. 

And  si]?  Crist  is  holi  treujje,  and  ypocrisie  is  fals  feyning, 
it  seme]?  })at  ]?is  ypocrisie  is  moost  synne  a5ens  Crist.  And 
so  as  lordis  weren  bifore  tormentom-s  of  }?e  fend,  so  ])es 
prestis  and  Pharisees  ben  tormentours  of  Anticrist,  and  more 
falseli  disseyven  \q  peple,  and  more  turmenten  Cristis  ser- 
vantis.  And  herfore  Crist  biddij?  fie  ])is  synne  of  Pharisees. 
Crist  biddi])  attende  his  lawe,  ])at  is,  bisili  to  perceyve  it ;  and 
he  biddi])  attende  from  false  prophetes ;  and  ])at  telli]?  two  J?ingis, 
J?at  is,  to  perceyve  Goddis  lawe,  and  flee  from  falshede  feyned 
J)erof.  For  we  supposen  ])at  in  Goddis  law  is  al  treu])e  ])at  is 
needful,  and  if  })is  feyned  }>ing  of  ypocritis  were  nedeful  to 
Cristene  men,  he  wolde  telle  ]>at,  as  he  doi]?  o})er,  but  now  he 
leve])  })at  ypocritis  seien.  And,  for  ypocritis  ben  cautellous  for 
to  take  men  in  wordis,  }?erfore  Crist  biddi]?  flee  hem,  and  callij? 
her  synne  sour  dow5^;  and  ri3t  as  sour  dow^  shendi]?  })e  dow; 
])at  it  to  longe  dwelli]?  wi]?,  so  synne  of  Jjese  Pharisees  shendi}? 
men  J)at  consenten  to  it.  And  wisdom  of  water  J^at  is  feyned, 
stablid  to  hem  bi  longe  tyme,  confermej?  })is  synne  to  men,  and 
make])  hem  bileve  amys  '■^ ;  and  herfore  biddi]?  Poul  to  dense 
out  })is  old  synne  ]?at  ]?ei  be  new  springinge  of  flour,  as  ]?ei  ben 
clene  in  ]?e  newe  lawe.  Crist  ordeynede  in  his  law  alle  hise 
children  to  be  free,  and  flee  rites'^  of  Pharisees  ]?at  cumbren  ]?e 
folk  before.  Loke  we  J?at  ])is  be  not  knodyn*  wi]?  us,  but  holde 
we  us  in  J)e  whete  flour,  ]?at  tau5te  us  fulli  Goddis  lawe,  and  ]?e 
weie  to  come  to  hevene.  Cunne  we  wel  Goddis  lawe,  and  loke 
wher  Fariseis  grounden  hem  in  it ;  and  if  J)ei  done  not,  flee  we 
her  sentence  as  heresie  or  fendis  glewe^.    And,  for  we  shulden 


^  om.  E. 


doii-i,  E. 


^  ri-^ds^  E. 


*  hioden,  E. 


gleu,  E. 


^  The  meaning  seems  to  be : — as 
'  sour  dou3,'  or  leaven,  is  made  from 
a  mixture  of  pure  flour  with  water, 
and,  if  left  too  long  with  fresh 
dough,  spoils  it, — so  the  doctrine  of 
the  hypocrites,  being   compounded. 


partly  of  Christian  tiuth,  partly  of 
an  unsound  philosophy  of  their  own 
invention  ('  wisdom  of  water  J>at  is 
feyned '),  if  it  has  established  itself 
fnmly  and  for  a  long  time  in  men's 
minds,  makes  them  •  bileve  amys.' 


as  exemplified 
in  the  luodern 
Pharisees, 


I  Cor.  V.  7. 


324 


WFC  LIF'S 


must  be 
shunned. 


examyne  it  bi  J)e  flour  of  Goddis  lawe,  J)erfore  Crist  biddij)  flee 
fro  it  whanne  we  witen  ]?at  it  is  ungroundid.  And  so  men  hav 
tau^t  comunli  jjat  men  shulden  not  holde  al  gold  J>at  shyne]?  as 
gold,  for  many  Jjingis  ben  fourboshid  ful  falseli.  And  so,  but 
if  Goddis  lawe  telle  a  fei|>,  trowe  it  not,  but  fle  it  as  falshede, 
and  dispise  |)e  techeris  of  it.  And  on  ])is  wise  spekij?  Crist  to 
fle  ))is  synne  of  Pharises,  for  it  is  not  ynow3  men  to  be  spoiled 
|)us  of  her  goodis ;  but  worse  it  is  to  be  spoilid  of  bileve  and 
o]>er  vertues.  And  if  ])is  synne  be  now  hid  in  soulis  of  ypo- 
critis,  ne]?eles  it  shal  be  knowun  at  \q  laste  jugement  of  Crist ; 
for  he  seij),  J^at  now^t  is  hilid  pat  ne  it  shal  he  sheivid  ]?anne, 
a?id  noping  is  privy  now  pat  ne  it  shal  be  knowun  Jjanne.  Alle 
false  castis  and  her  ententis,  shulen  be  knowun  |>anne  to  |>e 
world ;  and  so  ri3t  tru|?is  of  Cristis  disciplis  shulen  be  seid 
J>anne  in  li3t,  al  if  J)ei  doren  not  seien  hem  now  opinli  unto  ]?e 
world. 

And  for  sich  cowardise  in  synne,  \^X  many  servantis  speken 
in  drede,  Crist  sei]?  to  his  disciplis,  pat  what  pei  hav  seid 
in  derknessis  shal  he  seid  panne  in  li^t,  and  pat  pei  rowned^ 
in  er7'e'^  in  heddis,  shal  he  prechid  upon  housis.  And  Jjus,  as 
Crist  ha])  seid  bifore,  he  hirti]?^  and  conforti])  hise  frendis,  to 
he  not  aferd  of  pese  7nen  pat  viai  oonli  slee  her  hodi,  and  hav  no 
more  to  ponishe  hem,  nei])er  in  bodi  ne  in  soule.  For  deed  bodi 
feeli])  noo  soore,  and  J>e  soule  %o\\  whidir  is  Goddis  wille ;  for 
enemyes  moun  not  cacche  J^e  soule  and  ponishe  it,  as  |>e  bodi. 
And  ])us  seij)  Crist,  \2X  he  shal  shewe  hem  what  lord  pei  shulen 
drede.  Drede  pe  Lord  of  hodi  and  soule,  pat  after  he  hap  slawe  * 
pe  hodi,  hap  power  to  sende  hope  pe  hodi  and  pe  soule  in  to  helle. 
So,  sei|)  Crist,  V  seie  to  'i,ou,  drede  y  pis  Lord  pat  hap  pis  powir. 
Ne  hen  not  fyve  sparewis  sold  for  a  wei^te  of  two  ferpingis ;  and 
oon  of  hem  so  lytil  of  priis  is  7iot'^  for-i,eten  to  fore  ^oure^  Fadir? 
Moche  more  God  wole  ])enke  upon  hise  owne  childre  here,  \2X 
tellen  opynli  his  treujje,  and  susteynen  his  lawe  to  men.  And 
for  surete  of  ))is  fei]?,  Crist  sei]>,  as  he  seide  bifore,  ])at  ^e  heeris 
of  "^oure  heed  alle  hen  noumhrid  unto  God;  and  ])erfore  Crist 
biddi]>  hem   not  drede,  for  pei  hen  hetere  pan  many  sparewis. 

^  ha/i  rownyd,  E.        ^  eren,  E.        ^  herd]),  E.         *  slowen,  E.         ^   So  in 
E ;  in  A,  the  word,  after  being  written,  has  been  cancelled.         ^  oure,  E. 

WYCLIF. 


SERMONS. 


225 


And  pus  I  seie  to  you,  sei|>  Crist,  pat  ech  man  pat.confessip  me 
hifo7'e  men,  5he,  if  he  die,  /  shal  con/esse  him  hi/ore  Goddis 
aungelis,  how  he  was  trewe  servant  to  God. 

And  here  men  douten  comunli  of  bileve  of  Cristene  men; 
it  seme]>  jjat  ]je  pope  mai  ordeyne  la  we  even  wi]?  Goddis  lawe, 
sij)  he  ponishi]?  more  for  his  lawe,  ]?an  he  ponishi]?  for  Goddis 
lawe,  and  oj^er  he  doe]?  wrong  in  ]>is,  or  his  lawe  is  betere  j>an 
])e  firste.  But  who  dar  seie  })at  he  doijj  wrong  in  such  ponish- 
inge  for  lawis  ?  Also  ]>q  pope  mai  ordeyne  sum  lawe,  as  done 
Princis  of  ])is  worlde ;  but  whi  mai  he  not  make  as  many  as 
him  likij?  to  profite  to  ]?e  Chirche  ? — what  ert  j^ou  jjat  settist 
a  mark  J^at  he  mai  make  ]3ese,  and  no  moo  ?  For  bi  |7is  same 
skill  he  was  longe  sijjen  at  his  mesure,  and  jjus  shulden  ^  him 
faile  power  now  to  reule  J)e  Chirche  bi  his  lawe.  Also,  ellis 
we  diden  amys  in  singinge,  and  in  service  seiynge,  and  so  in 
al  jjat  we  doen,  sip  we  taken  |)is  of  ]>e  pope ;  and  ]?us  in  lower 
prelat  moten  we  graunten  siche  power,  for  ellis  faiHde  obe- 
dience, and  alle  ]^es  ordris  J>at  ben  newe.  Here  men  seien  ]jat 
popis  and  bishopis  and  oJ>er  men  mai  make  lawis,  so  ]jat  |;ei 
acorden  wi]?  Goddis  lawe,  and  sumwise  ben  in  Goddis  lawe, 
for  ]?us  ]?ei  techen  Goddis  lawe  more  opinli  ]jan  it  was  tau3t 
bifore.  But,  for  bo])e  errour  and  pride  suen  ofte  tymes  to  J>is 
dede,  j^erfore  seintis  after  Crist  helden  hem  paied  on  Cristis 
lawis ;  for  if  |?ei  weren  executid,  ]?ei  weren  sufficient  and  ynow3. 
But  newe  turnyng  of  Anticrist  to  newe  office  in  J>e  Chirche, 
mut  nede  bringe  in  newe  lawis,  and  putte  Cristis  lawe  abak ; 
and  }>us  sei|>  ]je  Psalm  of  Anticrist,  J^at  God  shal  putte  a  maker 
of  lawe,  and  reule  hem  after  her  coveitise  biside  ])e  lawe  j^at 
Crist  ha]?  ordeyned. 

And  |?is  mai  ben  opynli  seen  in  benefices  departid  to 
men,  and  newe  ordris  ]?at  now  ben  maad,  to  greet  chargis  of 
Cristis  Chirche.  But  folk  shulde  knowe  ])at  \q\  ben  men, 
and  holden  hem  paied  of  Cristis  boundis;  for  if  ]?ei  ben 
reulid  by  resoun,  Cristis  lawe  is  best,  and  ynow3,  and  o])er 
lawis  men  shulden  not  take,  but  as  brauncbis  of  Goddis  lawe. 
And  herfore  biddij)  bileve  to  men,  ne})er  adde  to,  ne  draw  fro ; 


SERMONS. 


*  schdde,  E. 
Q 


On  the  limits 
of  the  right  of 
llie  Pope  to 
legislate  for 
the  Church. 


Ps.  cix.  6  ? 


Christ's  law  is 
best,  and  is 
sufficient. 


2  26 


WFCLIF'S 


and  if  jjei  done,  God  cursi]?  hem,  and  in  |>is  cursing  hav  many- 
men  ben  depid  bi  long  tyme.  And  ]>us  is  ordenance  of  Crist 
put  abak,  and  newe  brou3t  inne.  Ne  it  falli}>  not  to  us  to 
justifie  j)es  newe  officis,  ne  to  defende  |?at  ]?ei  ben  leueful,  alle 
]je  dedis  ]?at  prelatis  done ;  for  it  is  ynow3  to  us  to  cunne  and 
declare  Goddis  lawe,  and  shewe  ))at  it  were  ynow3,  if  o]jer 
lawis  weren  aweie ;  and  so  amende  by  Goddis  lawe  |?e  ordris 
J>at  weren  maad  by  Crist,  and  not  for  synne  of  ])es  ordris  to 
bringe  in  newe  ordris  to  hem.  For  alle  moten  lyve  on  ]je 
peple  * ;  and  jje  secounde  ben  J^e  worse,  si]>  betere  were  bi 
Cristis  lawe  to  amende  men  of  his  ordre,  |)an  to  putte  more 
unstable  ordris,  and  algatis  worse  to  |)e  Chirche.  But  litil 
errour  bringi]?  inne  more,  and  at  j^e  laste  goi|?  al  doun;  and 
herfore  boundis  of  Cristis  ordenaunce  shulde  be  holde  of  alle 
men.  And  it  falli]?  not  to  us  to  assoile  Jjese  fresshe  resouns, 
jjat  |)us  l^e  Chirche  doi]?  amys  in  many  }>ingis  ]?at  it  defendi]?. 


In  Dai  of  many  Martris. 


[SERMON    LXXI.] 


Sedenk  Jestc  super  monteni  Olyveti. — Matthew  xxiv.  [3.] 

In  ];is  gospel  telli))  Crist  how  hise  membris  shulen  be  pur- 
sued, and  what  perils  |?ei  shal  be  inne  for  holdinge  wij)  him 
and  his  lawe.     pe  gospel  telli]>  first,  hoiv  Jesus  sat  onpe  Mounte 


*  alle  moten  lyve  on  \>e  peple P\  There 
was  a  growing  feeling  in  England 
towards  the  end  of  the  fourteenth 
century,  that  the  monastic  and  men- 
dicant fraternities  were  becoming  so 
numerous  as  to  form  a  serious  bur- 
den on  the  industry  of  the  country. 
Besides  direct  statements  to  that 
effect,  such  as  the  passage  in  the 
text,  and  others  that  might  be  ga- 
thered from  the  Vision  of  Piers  Plow- 
man, there  is  an  exquisite  piece  of 
irony  in  Chaucer's  Canterbury  Tales, 
which  really  says  the  same  thing, 
though  in  such  forms  as  became  the 


tender  and  tolerant  genius  of  the 
large-minded  poet.  In  the  prologue 
to  her  tale,  the  Wife  of  Bath,  after 
saying  that  England  was  once  '  ful- 
filled of  faerie,'  adds, — 

I  speke  of  many  hundred  yeres  ago ; 

But  now  can  no  man  see  non  elves  mo  ; 

1-or  now  tlie  grete  charitee  and  prayeres 

Of  limitoures  and  other  holy  freres, 

That  serchen  every  land  and  every  streme, 

As  thikke  as  motes  in  the  sunne-bcme, 

Blissing  halles,  chambres,  kichenes,  and  boures, 

Citees  and  burghes,  castles  high  and  toures, 

Thropes  and  bernes,  shepenes  and  dairies, 

This  makitli  that  ther  ben  no  faeries  : 

For  ther  as  wont  to  walken  was  an  elf, 

Ther  walketh  now  the  Umitour  himself, 

In  undermeles  and  in  morweninges, 

And  sayth  his  niatincs  and  his  holy  thinges. 

As  he  goth  in  his  limitatioun. 


SERMONS. 


I'X-j 


of  Olj'vete,  and  he  wi]?  hise  disciplis  spaken  of  |>e  makinge  of 
})e  temple,  and  how  al  |)is  shulde  be  distried,  and  how  ])e  dai 
of  dome  shulde  come,  and  of  many  jjingis  |>at  shulden  be,  as 
))e  gospel  tellijj  bifore. 

And  jjus  telli]?  ])is  gospel,  how  Cristis  disciplis  comen 
privyli ;  and  axiden  him  of  J>ese  |>ingis,  and  what  tyme  jjei 
shulden  falle,  and  bi  what  signes  men  shulden  wile  pat  Crist 
shulde  come  to  J?e  jugement.  For  bi  J>is  my^ten  |?ei  knowe 
whanne  pis  world  shulde  be  ee7idid.  But  Jesus  answeride  and 
seide  to  hem  J)ingis  j)at  weren  betere  for  hem  to  cunne ;  and 
bi  )?is  answere  moun  we  se  how  curiouste  of  science  or  un- 
skilful coveitise  of  cunnynge,  is  to  dampne.  For  ri3t  as 
coveitise  of  man  is  yvel  sett  for  erj^eli  goodis,  so  coveitise 
of  cunnynge,  J?at  profitij?  not  to  come  to  blisse.  For  man  mai 
disuse  cunnynge  to  his  harm,  as  Poul  sei]?,  but  if  men  coveiten 
to  plese  God  and  profite  in  charite.  And  in  suche  comune 
desiris  mai  not  a  man  synne;  but,  as  comun  ))ing  is  ofte  so]>e, 
whanne  J)e  singuler  is  fals,  so  it  fallij?  ofte  tyme  of  comun  witt 
and  comune  wiile.  And  ]?us  techi])  Crist  here  men,  to  knowe 
treu]?e  for  her  profit. 

And  ]?is  is  a  comun  synne  among  men  now  on  lyve, 
for  jjei  tellen  more  priis  bi  lawe,  civile  or  canoun,  to  cunne 
hem  or  o]7er  jappis^  ])an  to  cunne  Goddis  lawe;  and  for 
sich  wrong  cunnyng  come]?  harm  to  many  men.  And 
many  prelatis,  for  coveitise  setten  her  wille  on  sich  cunnyng, 
for  J>ei  ben  out  of  bileve,  and  coveiten  more  worldli  muk  jjan 
Goddis  worship,  or  hevenli  bliss.  And  j>is  is  a  grevous  synne, 
bojje  among  prelatis  and  comuns,  for  ]jis  synne  maki]?  hem 
rude  and  unable  to  Goddis  lawe,  and  unable  in  wille  and 
maneres  to  lyve  wel  as  Godd^  biddi)?.  And  herfore  seien  sum 
men,  ))at  |>e  pope  and  his  lawe  ben  cursid  for  sum  part,  for 
Jjei  loven  not  Cristis  lawe,  but  avaunsen  and  loven  men  J)at 
holde  wij?  his  rotun  lawe.  For  as  men  loven  Jesus  Crist,  so 
shulden  men  love  his  lawe.  But  Poul  sei]>.  If  ony  man  love 
not  Crist,  cursid  be  he ;  and  |?is  cursinge  is  more  )>an  any  o|>er 
prelatis  cursinge.     And   for    J>is    cursing    seien    sum   men   jjat 


The  sin  of 

imcliastencd 
curiosity. 


I  Cor.  viii.  i. 


which  makes 
the  canon  law 
more  prized 
than  the  law 
of  Christ. 


I  Cor.  xvi.  22. 


*  japis,  E. 


God,  E. 


Q  2 


228 


WFCLIF'S 


The  '  false 
Christs'  of  the 
gospel  paral- 
leled in  the 
present 
hierarchy. 


|je  pope  is  more  ypocrite,  for  he  maki}?  him  Cristis  felowe,  and 
sei]?  he  is  '  moost  hoH  fadir.'  But  Crist  wole  |jat  )?is  fole  wite 
not  whe]7er  he  be  a  fend  or  not ;  and  ]?is  is  moost  ypocrisie, 
and  moost  a3ens  skile.  For  what  cause  shulde  meve  |)e  pope, 
to  make  him  clepid  moost  blessid  fadir,  si]?  ne|)er  tru])e  ne  leva 
of  God  move])  })at  he  is  ou3t  blessid  ?  But  to  morewe,  whanne 
he  is  deed,  ceessi]?  ]>is  ypocritis  name,  for  he  hiri]?  his  name, 
and  ]7e  hire  goe]j  wi]>  his  de}> ;  nej^eles,  if  he  were  blessid,  he 
shulde  be  more  blessid  after  his  de]?.  Alle  ]?e  ypocritis  in 
Cristis  tyme  dursten  not  speke  so  greet  blasfemye,  and  of  ])is 
ypocrisie  ben  many  o|?er  falshedis  coloured. 

But  Crist  seip  to  hise  disciplis,  pat pei  shulden  loke  pat  noon  dis- 
ceyveden  he7n ;  and  speciali  in  bileve  for  |)is  knowing  is  more 
nedeful,  and  ]?is  peril  shulde  be  beter  fled  for  \^  word  Jjat  Crist 
seij?  aftir :  Ma?iy  shulen  come  i7i  my  name,  and  seie  pat,  I  am  Crist, 
for  y  shulen  heere  batels  and  opynyons  of  batels.  For  now  in 
tyme  of  oure  popis  ben  many  opynyouns  of  batels,  si}?  ech  lond 
ha])  opynyoun  to  fi3t  for  his  pope ;  and  pseudo  clerkes 
and  freris  seien  ])at  preestis  shulden  fi5ten  sounest.  And 
sich  disseit  was  not  herd  si])  }>e  tyme  \2X  Crist  was  born,  and 
certeinli  it  ha])  ben  gaderid  of  eelde  synne  of  many  popis. 
Crist  is  a  comune  name  to  preestis  ])at  ben  anointid  of  God, 
but  Crist  takun  by  himsilf  bitokene])  oon  passinge  oJ)er,  as 
])e  pope  passi])  o])ere  preestis,  bo])e  in  witt  and  power,  and 
algatis  in  holynesse,  as  he  maki])  men  to  seie.  But  Crist  sei]) 
pat  such  Cristis  shulen  disseyven  many  rnen  ;  and  no  prophecie 
is  so})er,  ne  more  to  note  of  trewe  men,  si])  ])is  disseit  of  Anti- 
crist  is  moost  perilous  of  o])er. 

But  Crist  confortip  hise  disciplis,  and  biddi})  hem  loke  pat 
pei  be  7iot  troublid ;  for  pese  ping  moten  be,  but  not  '^it  is 
pe  eende.  For  of  ])is  rote  of  striif,  shal  folk  fi3te  a3ens 
folk,  as  Sarasynis  a3ens  Latyns,  ])at  clepen  hem  Cristene 
men ;  and  rewme  shal  fi^te  ayns  rewme,  as  we  seen  now 
at  i3e.  And  pride  of  l)is  cursid  rote  is  cause  of  ]iis  fi3tinge, 
for  if  })e  empire  were  hool,  and  lordshipes  of  oJ)er  rewmes, 
so  ])at  ])ei  weren  not  cursidli  partid  among  clerkes, — ])anne 
wolde  God  move  seculers  to  lyve  in  pees,  as  he  ha])  bedun 
hem.     But  si])  God  sei])  in  his  lawe,  ])at  hise  preestis  shulden 


SEJ^J/ONS. 


229 


not  be  lordis,  ]>e  pope  and  hise  holden  ])is  lordship  a^ens  ]>e 
law  and  wille  of  God,  and  more  opinli  m}3te  no  fend  a3en- 
tonde  God  and  his  ordenance.  But  Joob  axi)?,  who  ever  a3en- 
stood  God,  and  hadde  pees  in  him  silf?  And  of  )?es  harmes 
comen  aftir  pestilcncis  and  himgris,  as  it  is  seid,  and  allc  pes 
higynyngis  0/  soreivis,  Jjat  shal  be  bo))e  here  and  in  helle.  ])cmne 
shukn  hei  put  '^ou  to  turmente,  and  o]?er  J^at  wolen  stonde  wi]> 
tru|)e.  And  after  pei  shulen  she  "^ou,  and  ^e  shulen  be  in  hate 
to  atle  folk  for  my  name.  And  herfore  haj>  |)e  fend  ordeyned 
to  sende  currours  of  hise  lesingis  to  diverse  rewmes  and  men, 
and  move  hem  by  hise  ti|?ingis ;  and  J>us  ben  rewmes  troublid, 
and  men  sclaundrid  and  disseyved.  And  herfore  seij?  Crist, 
pat  pan?ie  many  shulen  be  sclaundrid,  and  shal  hitraie  hem 
togidir;  and  oon  shal  hate  anoper,  and  many  pseudo  profetis 
shulen  rise  and  shulen  disceyve  manye.  And  ]>is  seme|>  to 
many  men  to  be  seid  of  false  freris.  And,  for  wickednesse 
shal  be  plentenous  bojje  bifore  and  ])anne,  pe  charite  of  many 
men  shal  panne  wexe  cold ;  but  he  pat  lastip  to  pe  eende  shal 
be  saif  bi  God. 

And  here  it  seme]?  to  many  men,  jjat  Crist  spak  of  jjis 
tyme,  in  which  |>es  two  popis  fi3ten  |>us  togidir;  for  si|? 
Crist  is  al  witti,  and  love]>  wel  his  Chirche,  and  telli]?  in 
Apocalips  of  many  lesse  perils,  whi  shulde  he  not  tell  of 
j>is  ]jat  is  so  perilous  ?  And  clerkis  hav  a  rule,  |?at  a  word 
seid  bi  himsilf  shulde  be  understonden  for  ]?e  more  famous. 
Wel  Y  woot  ]?at  many  preestis  hav  comen  in  Cristis  name,  and 
ech  seide  ]?at,  I  am  Crist,  but  noon  o])er  as  ])e  pope ;  and  her- 
fore sei]?  Crist  in  ]?e  same  chapiter,  ]?at  |?ere  shal  be  |>anne  greet 
tribulacioun,  what  maner  was  never  fro  j^e  begynynge  of  \t 
world  to  now,  and  shal  not  be  after.  For  bodili  turment  is 
now  ful  greet,  whanne  00  pope  sendi]?  bishopis  and  many  men 
to  sle  many  men,  wymen,  and  children,  and  for  }?e  to]?er  pope 
comen  many  a3ens  hem  ;  and  cause  of  |)is  fi3tinge  is  a  fendis 
cause,  for  no  man  of  erj^e  woot  whe}:er  of  j?es  popis  be  a  fend 
to  be  dampnyd  in  helle,  or  ellis  j>ei  boJ)e.  And  bileve  techij) 
us  })at  Crist  reprovide  Petir,  for  he  wolde  save  his  liif,  jjat  was. 
beter  })an  |jes  bo}>e,  and  made  him  put  up  his  swerd,  and 
suffride  pacientli,  whanne  he  mi3te  wij?  a  word  have  vencusid 


fob  ix. 


May  not  the 
words  of  the 
gospel  be  a 
prophecy  of 
the  present 
schism  1 


230 


WYCLIF'S 


The  danger  to 
souls  from  the 
present  state 
of  things  is  the 
greatest  of  all. 


hem  alle.  And  Crist  techij)  bi  word  \q  maner  of  a  good  herde, 
how  he  puttij)  his  owne  liif  for  his  sheep ;  and  so  of  bileve  he 
is  Anticrist  ]?at  puttij?  many  jjousynd  lyves  for  his  owne  foule 
liif.  And  however  Anticrist  speke  here,  it  is  opynH  Cristis 
lawe  \2X  men  shulden  not  fi^te  j)us,  ne  for  sich  a  cause ;  for  5if 
])e  pope  shal  be  dampned,  as  God  woot  whejjer  \€\  boj?  shal, 
)?anne  men  fi3ten  for  falshede  in  cause  of  a  fend;  and  sich 
a  cause  was  never  herd  so  opynli  a3ens  treu]?e. 

But  gretter  tribulacioun  is  in  dampnynge  of  soulis,  which  ben 
in  false  bileve  of  )jes  ypocritis ;  for  bo]?e  sitten  in  Goddis  temple 
and  seien  \€\  ben  Cristis  vikeris  and  hav  more  power  ]?an  even 
Crist  hadde.  For  Crist  had  no  power  to  graunte  sich  asoiling, 
and  lyve  on  siche  maner,  as  ]jes  popis  done.  And  so  in  many 
pointis  jjes  popis  feynen  falseli  j^at  jjei  passen  in  power  oure 
Lord  Jesus  Crist.  But  Crist  biddi]?  his  children  to  trowe  not 
here  ne|?er  |)e  fer})er  ne  |je  nerrer,  but  reste  in  oolde  bileve. 
And  not  oonli  where  men  fijten  is  ))is  persecucion,  but  in  fer 
cuntreis  bitwixe  contrarie  parties.  And  so,  if  men  tellen  Goddis 
lawe  opinli  in  jjis  matter,  how  men  shulden  not  fijte  ]?us,  but 
reste  in  old  bileve,  Jje  fend  ha|)  many  proctours  to  pursue  siche 
men ;  and  so,  si]?  consente  is  evene  wi]?  |?e  dede,  J)e  more  part 
of  men  is  partener  in  ]?is  dede.  Many  o]?ere  wordis  sei|>  Crist  in 
|?is  chapitre  which  mai  be  applied  to  })is  tribulacion ;  but  00 
word  of  confort  tellij?  Crist  here,  ]?at  jje  daies  shal  be  abreggid 
of  ])is  fel  pursuynge,  for  men  ]?at  ben  chosen  unto  blisse  of 
hevene.  0])er  men  J)at  have  tyme  to  expowne  jjis  chapitle*, 
and  ben  tau3te  of  God,  and  meved  for  to  telle  it,  and  speciali 
5if  })ei  seen  ])e  dede  acorde  wi)>  ))e  speche,  mai  telle  more  of 
Cristis  wordis  here.  But  holde  we  us  in  bileve,  of  which  we 
ben  certein. 


capitle,  E. 


SERMONS. 


231 


J^E  Gospel  of  many  Martris. 


[SERMON     LXXI  I.] 


Nolite  arbitrari. — Matt.  x.  [34.] 

pis  gospel  techi))  men  how  \€\  shal  ri3tfulli  love  God,  and 
makij)  martirs  hardi  to  suffre  for  Cristis  sake.     And,  for  many 
ben   cowardis  to   suffre  in   Cristis   cause,   and   seien   }>at  it  is 
wisdom  to  lyve  here  in  pees,  and  entermete  not^  of  ]?ingis  )>at 
wolen  greve  men,  J>erfore  biddi]?  Crist  his  children  not  to  juge 
pat  he  cam  to  sende  sich  pees  here  in  erpe.     He  cam  not  to  sende 
sich  pees  but  siverd.    pis  swerd  seme]?  to  many  men  not  material 
swerd,  or  bodili  fijtinge,  ]?at  Crist  techi]?  here,  but  wise  wordis 
bo])e  of  repreef  ^  and  pacience,  and  suffringe  for  tru|je,  ^if  }?at 
dee})  falle ;    for  comunli  in  holy  writt  is   swerd  clepid  word. 
And  j?is  is  a  swerd  sharpe  on  bo])e  sidis,  bo]?e  to  kerve  awey 
synne,  and  to  nurishe  virtues,  for  sich  a  swerd  of  wordis  kervej? 
and  departi}?,  and   so  planti]?  love,  and  putti]?  out  cowardise. 
And  for  witt  of  })is  gospel  shulden  men  first  undirstonde,  }?at 
bo]?  pees  and  discord  is  on  two  maneres.     First  is  veri  pees 
bitwixe  God  and  man ;  ]?e  secounde  is  acord  bitwixe  man  and 
his  enemye.     As,  if  ]?e  fend  and  }?i  fleish  and  ]?e  world  acorde 
togidir,  sich  acord  is  clepid  pees,  al  5if  it  be  a^ens  God ;   and 
]?us  on  two  maneres  is  taken  striif  or  discord,     pis  secounde  is 
clepid  pees,  hkyng  to  ]?e  fleish,  and  3it  it  is  to  a  man  venymous 
discord.     And  of  ]?is  pees  speki]?  Crist,  }?at  he  cam  not  to  sende 
it,  but  discord  and  fitting  a^ens  sich  pees.     And  }?us  sei}?  Crist 
pat  he  cam  to  parte  a  man  ayns  his  fadir.     For  he  techi]?  how 
a  soule  shulde  more  love  God  ]?an  ou5te  ellis ;  and  so  love  ]?at 
man  shulde  hav  to  God  shulde  passe  love  and  lawe  of  kinde, 
for  al  siche  kyndeli  love  shulde  serve  to  ]?e  love  of  God.    Ayid 
so  Crist  cam  to  parte  pe  doubter  ayns  her  modir ;   and  ]?at  he 
doi})  whanne  fleishli  wille  holdi}?  wi]?  God  a5ens  \t  fleish,   as 


^  entermete  men  not,  E. 


^  reproue,  E. 


In  what  sense 
Christ  came 
not  to  send 
peace  but 
a  sword. 


232 


WFCLI  F'S 


Human  autho- 
rity and  af- 
fection to  be 
despised  if 
they  clash  with 
tiie  law  and 
love  of  Christ. 


j>ei  jjat  taken  worldli  fode  ever  in  resoun,  to  serve  God,  and  not 
to  lustli  fede  ]je  fleish,  for  likyng  jjat  is  ))erinne.  pe  |)ridde 
tyme  sei]?  Crist,  he  cam  to  departe  pe  housebondis  hroper  ayns 
his  zvyves  sister ;  and  \2X  is  done  whan  love  of  manhede  of 
Crist  putti]?  awei  fleishli  workis.  And  J>us  not  oonli  fleishli 
fadir  but  goosdi  fadir  shulde  be  left,  whanne  \€\  ben  a^ens  God, 
for  J?at  love  shulde  be  kyng.  3he,  5if  \\  pope  or  Jji  bishop  or 
J)i  persoun  bidde  |>ee  do  ]?at  God  biddi]?  ]?ee  not  do,  leve  hem 
}>anne  and  holde  \vi]>  God.  And  we  mai  not  seie  to  ]?es,  ])at 
\€\  mai  not  erre,  ne  be  a^ens  mannis  soule,  sij?  j?ei  ben  put  to 
reule  it ; — certis  so  ben  many  J>ingis  put  bi  kynde  to  helpe 
and  reule,  and  3it  yvel  custom  of  mannis  enemy  mai  turne  hem 
to  anoie  jje  soule,  much  more  ])es  ]?ree  fadris  ^  J>at  ben  more 
fro^  man.    And  Jjus  sei]?  Crist,  jjat  mannis  enemyes  ben 


strange 


his  owne  homely ;  for  more  enemyes  ha]?  no  man  })an  is  lust 
jjat  sue]>  his  fleishe,  and  moche  more  J)es  ]>ree  fadris,  ]?at  shulden 
helpe  man  to  hele  of  soule.  For  ech  ]?ing  ]?at  lettij?  |?is  hele,  and 
bringi]?  in  siknes  of  soule,  is  enemy  to  jjis  man,  3he,  more  ]>an 
he  ];at  slee]?  his  bodi. 

And  to  shewe  )jat  al  J)is  reule  stondi]?  in  skilful  love  of 
God,  sei]?  Crist  moreover,  pat  whoso  lovep  his  fadir  or  modir 
more  pan  Crista  he  is  not  worpi  of  him,  for  he  is  not  wor])i 
to  have  Crist  in  hevene,  boj^e  God  and  brojjer.  And  so 
bi  reule  ]?at  Crist  ^yvej)  here,  bo]?e  fleishli  fadir  and  modir 
shulde  be  lesse  loved  ])an  Crist,  and  if  \€\  stireden  a^ens  Crist 
\q\  shulden  be  left,  and  dispisid,  and  moche  more  ])es  o]?er 
fadirs  ]>at  ben  more  strange  to  men.  As,  3if  ]?i  pope  or  J?i  bishop 
or  J?i  persoun  bidde  Jjee  fi3te  or  3yve  him  of  jji  goodis  a3ens  jje 
resoun  j^at  Crist  ha)?  30vun,  dispise  hem  utterli,  and  holde  ]?e 
reule  ]?at  Crist  techi|> ;  and  ever  flee  J)is  heresie,  |jat  )>es  fadirs 
mai  not  erre  here.  And  to  )?is  witt  seij?  Crist  after, /tz/  he  pat 
lovep  his  sone  or  doubter  more  pa?i  Crist,  is  not  worpi  of  him  ; 
and  jjis  is  so])  of  fleishli  children  and  of  workes  ])at  J^e  soule 
doi]),  for  summe  ben  workes  of  J>e  soule,  and  summe  workes 
of  J>e  fleishe.  And  ofte  tymes  in  bo])e  ])es  erri]?  a  man  fro  ]>e 
reule  of  treuj),  as  ofte  tymes  is   a  mannis   soule  occupied  to 

1  to,  E. 
**  Namely,  a  man's  pope,  bishop,  and  parish  priest. 


SERMONS, 


^33 


lerne  and  teche  worldli  lawis ;  and  God  biddi|>  jjat  his  law 
shiilde  be  tau5t  bifore  ])ese.  And  ]?es  men  loven  more  her 
sones,  |)an  )>ei  loven  Jesus  Crist; — for  it  is  oon  to  love  him, 
and  in  dede  to  love  his  lawe ;  and  so  whoso  lovej)  better  goode 
gobetis,  or  lustli'  workes  |;an  he  love]?  dedis  of  Crist,  he  love]) 
more  his  owne  dou3ter  ])an  he  love]?  ])is  holi  abbot.  And  ])us, 
he  breki])  his  ordre  for  defaute  of  skilful  love. 

And,  for  ]?is  love  is  shewid  in  dede,  and  speciali  in  mannis 
suffringe,  })erfore  sei]?  Crist  afterward,  ]>at  ^e  pat  takip  not  his 
crosse,  and  steep  him,  is  not  worpi  of  him.  It  is  seid  ofte  tymes 
bifore,  ]7at  ])is  cros  ])at  Crist  speki])  of  is  redynesse  of  mannis 
wille  to  suffre  for  Cristis  sake,  bo])e  to  dispise  alle  er])eli  ]jingis 
])at  stretchij)  doun  to  ]?e  er])e,  ])at  is  ]?e  stok  of  ])is  crosse,  and  to 
dispise  alle  frendshipis  bo]?e  of  kyn  and  of  ]?e  worlde, — and  })es 
ben  clepid  two  armis  of  ])is  crosse.  And  ]?anne  mannis 
love  loki])  freeli  to  hise  Jesu  above  him;  and  defaute  of 
]ns  cros  bringi]?  men  alle  maner  of  synne.  And  })is  is  cause 
whi  men  now  ben  not  martirs  as  ]>ei  weren  wont;  for  a 
man  shulde  weie^  ]?is  love,  and  loke  ]?at  he  hadde  ]>is  crosse, 
and  suede  Crist  in  wille  and  dede,  redi  to  suffre  for  his 
sake :  —  but  what  clerk  wole  not  now  leeve  ])e  treu])e  of 
Goddis  lawe,  ou])er  for  love  of  his  fleish,  or  for  love  of 
}?e  world.  And  cause  of  ])is  defaute  in  love  is  scatering  of 
mannis  love ;  for  men  loven  cloutid  ordris,  and  \2X  letti]>  moche 
love  of  Crist;  and  sum  men  loven  worldli  worschippis,  and 
worldly  ^  lordshipis  \2X  bringen  hem  inne ;  and  sum  men 
loven  worldli  goodis,  bo])e  for  worshipis  *  of  ])e  world  and 
for  lustis  of  her  fleish.  And  sich  shenden  Cristis  ordre. 
And  herfore  Crist  forbede  his  preestis  siche  lordshipis,  and 
siche  goodis,  for  he  woolde  ])at  her  love  were  hooli  gaderid 
in  him.  And  ech  man,  boj;  kny3t  and  clerk,  shulde  be 
bisi  to  kepe  ])is  lawe,  and  make  o]?er  to  kepen  it;  or  ellis 
}?ei  loven  not  Jesus  Crist.  And  what  man  ])at  ha]?  ])is  cros, 
and  see])  Cristis  lawe  reversid,  shulde  putte  him  for])  for  love 
of  Crist,  and  fi3te  wi])  swerd  of  wise  wordis,  and  telle  to  men, 
as  Joon  Baptist,  ))at  it  is  not  leveful  to  lyve  ])us }    And  si])  ech 


We  must  take 
up  the  cross. 


Absence  of  a 
spirit  of  mar- 
tyrdom. 


Causes  of  this. 


'  lu&ty,  E. 
^  ivorschip,  E. 


^  jvey^e,  E.  ■''  So  E ;  A  om.  worschippis  and  worldly. 


234 


WFCLIF'S 


Tlie  messen- 
jjers  of  Christ 
are  to  be 
received  and 
helped. 


Heb.  xi.  32-40. 


man  shulde  fi3te  ]ms  wi]?  him  |>at  doij)  a3ens  Goddis  lawe,  sich 
a  synner  wolde  jjenke  anoon  ]jat  he  moste  do  oon  of  })es  two ; 
or  to  sle  siche  a  man,  Jjat  meve]?  ])us  a3ens  his  wille,  or  ellis  to 
amenden  his  lyf,  as  it  is  tau3t  bi  Cristis  lawe.  And  {jus  shulden 
sum  men  ben  martris,  and  sum  mennis  lyf  be  amendid.  But 
charite  of  manye  is  woxen  cold,  and  J>at  maki]?  |>e  Chirche 
bareyne;  for  litil  fruyt  growij?  in  wynter,  for  coldnesse  |?at  is 
jjanne. 

And  J)us  seijj  Crist  afterward,  j?at,  Who  pal  hap  foimden 
his  liif  shal  Use  it,  afid  he  pat  lesep  his  lyf  for  7?ie,  shal  after- 
warde  fynde  it  in  blis.  pis  sentence  seij?  Crist  ofte  to  meve 
hise  martiris  to  sue  him,  for  no  man  my3te  lerne  here  better 
chaffare  or  merchandise.  For  lese  |)i  liif  here  for  God  in  ]?e 
tyme  J^at  is  now  present,  and  ]>ou  shalt  trowe  to  fynde  |)y  liif 
aftirward  in  blisse  of  hevene.  And  bileve  mot  grounden  J)is 
dede ;  for,  as  Poul  seij?,  bi  ]?is  wrou3ten  martiris.  And  ]?us 
fallen  now  in  men,  fei|),  hope,  and  charite.  And,  for  men 
shulden  not  forsake  to  holden  J)is  reule  |>at  Crist  3eve])  here,  for 
drede  of  worldli  sustynance,  |)at  ]je  world  shulde  faile  hem, 
herfore  sei|>  Crist  to  hise  disciplis, /(2/,  who  ever  resseyvep  hem 
resseyvep  him  and  his  Fadir  pat  hap  sent  him,  and  who  resseyvep 
a  prophete  in  pe  name  of  a  profete  shal  resseyve  mede  of  a  profete. 
And  so  it  is  of  o|>er  vertues.  A?td  he  pat  resseyvep  a  just  man, 
in  pe  name  of  pe  first  juste  man,  he  shal  take  mede  of  pis  juste  man; 
and  who  ever  yve  00  of  pe  teste  of  pes  in  name  of  disciple  of  Crist, 
-^he,  a  drau^t  of  cold  water,  sopeli  Crist  seip  to  us,  pat  he  shal  not 
lese  his  mede.  And  ]>is  vertue  of  Cristis  wordis  shulde  meve 
men  to  helpe  goode  preestis,  and  to  3yve  hem  of  worldeli 
jjingis,  to  done  her  office  )jat  Crist  biddij?;  for  Crist  mai  not 
faile  in  wordis  ne  in  dedis  Jjat  he  ha]?  ordeyned.  For  ou]>er 
defaute  is  in  \^  prestis,  or  her  peyne  is  profitable ;  as  sum 
maken  a  newe  reule  to  charge  J)e  peple  in  noumbre  and 
spensis.  And  }>es  men  moten  nedis  faile  ^  in  peyne  of  her 
former  synne ;  and  ))us  cam  in  begginge  and  lying  and  failing 
of  trewe  preching.  And  to  J)es  men  shulden  noon  3yve  goodis 
in  name  of  Crist,  as  he  biddi)?  here,  for  |)ei  rcversen  Crist  as  his 
enemyes,  and  traveilen  not  in  name  of  him. 

'  fayle,  E. 


SERMONS. 


^35 


pE  Gospel  of  many  Martris. 

[SERMON    LXXI  II.] 

Egressus  Jesics  de  Templo. — Matt.  xxiv.  [i.] 

pis  gospel  telli]?,  as  o|)er  bifore,  how  men  shulden  lyve  in 
|)is  world,  and  suffre  persecucioun  \2X  mut  nedis  falle  here, 
pe  story  \q)^\\^  pat  Jesu  wente  out  of  pe  temple^  atid  his  disciplis 
ccmien  after  him,  to  shewe  him  pe  makyng  of  pe  temple;  for  it 
was  fallinge  to  his  wordis  |?at  he  hadde  seid  bifore  to  J?e  peple, 
to  wite,  what  Crist  felide  of  ]?is  makyng  of  jje  temple.  But  Crist 
answer ide  and  seid  to  hem  ;  Se  y  alle  pes.  Sopeli,  Y  seie  to  y)u 
pat  here  shal  not  be  a  stoon  lefte  upon  anoper  undistryed.  And 
|>is  ])ing  was  fulfillid,  wij^inne  fifty  jeer  after,  for  J>e  secunde 
and  forty  yeer  after  |)at  Crist  was  steied  to  hevene  cam  two 
princis  of  Rome,  Titus  and  Vaspasian,  and  ensegiden  |)e  citee, 
whan  it  was  ful  of  men  at  ]?e  feste  of  Paske,  as  Crist  tolde  bifore 
bi  Luke.  And  |>is  oost  envyrounede  J>is  citee  on  ech  side, 
and  lettide  |)e  peple  to  go  out,  and  slewe  jje  folk,  and  at  j>e 
laste  toke  J^e  cite;  and  |>anne  was  ]?e  temple  distroied,  and 
al  J)e  citee  was  turnid,  so  ]?at  jje  mount  of  Calvarie  was  sette 
fer  wi]>inne  ]?e  citee,  whan  it  was  bifore  wi]?outen.  And  so 
was  not  a  stoon  left  upon  ano})er  undistroied,  for  all  ]?e  citee 
and  |>e  temple  weren  turned  to  make  newe  citee.  And  bi  )?es 
wordis  men  taken  |>at  Crist  tolde  litil  by  ])e  temple,  or  ony  siche 
workes  of  crafte  }jat  passen  ])e  state  of  innocence ;  for  clene 
liif  wijjouten  siche  is  beter  to  Crist  jjan  siche  churchis.  Alle 
siche  profiten  not,  but  in  as  moche  as  ]>ei  helpen  |)e  peple  to  heere 
Goddis  word,  and  betere  Jjere  to  preie  God ;  and  jjis  is  comunli 
betere  don  in  ]>e  eire  under  hevene,  but  ofte  tyme,  in  reyny 
wedir,  chirchis  don  good  on  halidai.  And  |>us  curiouste  of 
foolis  is  ungroundid  by  Goddis  lawe.  Atid  whanne  Crist  sat  on 
pe  hill  of  Olyvete,  pe  disciplis  comen  and  axiden  Crist,  to  telle  hem 
whanne  pis  shulde  be,  and  whan7ie  shulden  be  pe  dale  of  dome.  But 
Crist  tolde  hem  of  sounere  perils,  J>at  was  betere  hem  to  knowe, 
and  lefte  j^is  j^ing  hid  to  hem,  as  it  is  told  bifore. 


Christ  foretells 
the  destruction 
of  Jerusalem. 


^3*^ 


WFC  LIF'S 


Three  things 
hidden  from 


We  have 
knowledge 
enough  to 
guide  our 
lives. 


And  so  men  seien  ]?at  |?ree  ]?ingis  wole  God  have  hid  to 
men.  God  wole  J?at  tyme  of  dej?  be  comunli  unknowun  to 
men^  and  whanne  ]je  dale  of  dome  shal  be.  For  men  shulden 
fiver  more  wake,  and  kepe  hem  from  peril  of  synne,  si]?  jjei 
witen  never  whanne  God  hall  come ;  so  J?at  whanne  he  come 
he  fynde  hem  redi  to  take  ]>q  jugement  of  God.  For  ser- 
vauntis  shulden  biden  ]>q  Lord,  and  not  \q  Lord  abide  hise 
servauntis ;  but  whanne  ful  tyme  is  comen  to  God,  J?anne  fallij? 
him  to  make  amende.  And  si})  God  wole  ]?at  his  tyme  be  hid, 
Jjei  synnen  gretli  J)at  traveilen  here  to  knowe  ])is  tyme,  and 
leven  ojjer  J)ing  ])at  God  wole  ])at  men  knowen  and  done;  and 
J)us,  as  it  is  seid  bifore,  popis  ben  gretli  to  blame  ])at  menen 
])at  jjei  shulden  knowe  ])is  dai,  bi  fool  ^  graunting  jjat  Jjci 
graunten  ^  pe  j>ridde  ])ing  J)at  God  wole  have  hid  to  men  is 
privyte  of  his  ordenance,  whejjer  God  have  ordeyned  to  save  ])es 
men,  or  ellis  to  dampne  hem  for  her  synne.  And  cause  of  |)is  is 
as  bifore,  for  men  shulden  ever  be  redi  to  God,  and  ever  serve 
J)is  Lord  in  drede,  lest  he  dampne  men  at  ]>q  laste.  And  ]?us 
many  men  synnen  in  God  a3ens  his  firste  comandement,  ])at 
wolen  not  rise  out  of  her  synne,  but  dwelle  }>erinne,  and  chese  ^ 
a  tyme ;  for  Crist  sei]?  to  false  men  J)at  he  is  Lord,  5he  of  tyme. 

And  ])US  sei])  Q,x\^\.,  pat  of  pat  daie  no  man  knoivep  in  pis  Hi/, 
but  aloonli  pe  Fadir  of  Hevene  ^,  and  two  oj^er  persones  of  |)e 
Fadir;  for  jjing  proprid  to  \q  Godhede  is  )>us  aproprid  to  \q 
Fadir.  And  herbi  it  is  not  denyed  to  jje  two  Persones  aftir. 
But  5if  it  acorde  to  j>e  Fadir,  in  as  moche  as  He  is  God,  it  mut 
nedis  acorde  to  J>e  Sone,  and  also  to  |)e  Hooli  Goost,  sij?  \q\ 
ben  J)e  same  God.  But  it  fallij?  not  j^us  to  aungels,  ne  to  ony 
o])er  creature,  for  in  j^at  Jiat  |)ei  ben,  j^ei  ben  divers  from  her 
God.  And  ]>us,  whan  |>e  Fadir  ha]?  ony  J>ing  in  ]?at  Jjathe  is  God, 
{)e  Sone  and  ])e  Holi  Goost  hav  comunli  ])is  same  ]?ing,  si]>  it 
is  comune  and  propre  to  hem  for  to  be  ])e  same  God.     And 


^  foole,  E. 


"^  chesen  hem,  E. 


*  No  indulgence  could  conceivably 
be  of  any  avail,  except  in  the  inter- 
val between  death  and  the  day  of 
judgment ;  the  writer  means  there- 
fore, that  by  granting  indulgences 
for    specified    terms    of  years,    the 


^  So  E ;  no  italics  in  A. 

popes  did  in  effect  assert  the  pos- 
session of  a  knowledge  respecting 
the  time  of  the  day  of  judgment 
which  Scripture  expressly  denies  to 
all  men. 


SERMONS. 


^2,7 


|)us  |>e  general  undirstonding  of  |>e  laste  dai  of  dome  shulde 
be  knowe  unto  men,  and  special  knowinge  shulde  be  hid,  and 
svhanne  and  how  it  shal  be.  And  j^erfore  Cristen  men  ben 
apaied  in  knowing  of  Goddis  lawe,  for  |)at  is  ynow3  to  hem^ 
and  })erafter  |?ei  shulden  lyve.  And  ^if  |jei  ben  idil  from  j)is 
knowinge,  God  wole  axe  ful  streite  acountis.  So  3if  a  lord 
al  witty  as  God  ^af  a  man  al  Jjat  he  hadde,  in  noumbre  and 
mesure  and  in  wei^te,  to  serve  ]?is  lord  after  ]>es  goodis,  |)is 
lord  wolde  seie  to  |)is  servant,  })at  axide  more  ]?an  were  5now5 : 
Servant,  holdist  |)Ou  me  a  fool  ?  how  usist  Jjou  )?at  jjat  |)0u  hast  ? 
ne  have  Y  not  ^ove  )?ee  5now3  of  cunynge  nedeful  to  ])ee  ?  And 
moche  cuninge  hast  ])0U  hid,  and  puttist  it  not  in  werk ;  and 
|)OU  shuldist  wite  ]?at  j^ee  were  better  to  worche  after  |?is  cuninge 
]?an  for  to  have  newe  cunninge,  and  J)us  to  be  idil  wi|>  J?is. 
God  is  ]?is  lord  ]>at  mesurij)  man  bi  cuninge  ]>at  he  3yvejj 
to  him,  and  wole  j^at  man  worche  after  })is  cuninge ;  and  |?us 
shal  man  occupie  him,  and  not  aboute  newe  cunnynge,  and 
leve  ]?e  work  J)at  he  shulde  do.  And  ]?us  synnede  ^  oure  firste 
fadris,  bi  byheste  ]?at  Jje  fend  hi3te  hem,  |)at  |jei  shulden  not 
die  to  ete  ]?us,  but  be  as  Goddis,  knowing  good  and  yvel ;  and 
jjus  synne}?  ech  man  J?at  is  slow  in  Goddis  service,  for  he  leevej? 
to  putte  in  work  |?e  witt  jjat  God  ha]?  30vun  him,  and  languishij? 
after  a  newe  cunninge  |?at  come]?  of  his  idilnesse;  and  ])is  is  a  sin- 
ful ende,  jjat  mote  nede  bring  in  peyne.  And  so  we  synnen  com- 
unli  here  bi  j?e  firste  synne  of  ]>e  fend,  and  a3ens  \>e  witt  of  God, 
as  3if  we  wolden  be  al  cunnynge.  penke  what  witt  jjou  hast  of 
God,  in  which  ]?ou  art  now  ydil,  and  putt  wiseli  ])at  witt  in 
work,  and  holde  ];ee  paied  of  Goddis  grace;  for  ellis  ]iou 
takist  ]?is  grace  in  veyn,  and  runnest  in  dett  a3ens  \\  God. 

And  |jis  is  a  comune  synne  in  prelatis,  bo]?e  more  and  lasse ; 
for  God  ha|)  ^ovun  hem  witt  in  mesure,  how  ]?ei  shulden  profite 
to  his  Chirche,  and  ]?ei  disusen  ofte  |jis  tresour,  and  languishen 
after  witt  as  fendis ;  for  \>q  presumen  and  tempten  God,  and 
graunten  pardoun  for  longe  tyme,  and  |?ei  witen  never  where 
God  ha]>  ordeyned  |?at  };-is  pardon  mai  stonde  bi  him.  And  J?us 
if  men  wolden  wel  exam}'ne  dedis  ungroundid  in  holi  writt,  \>q\ 


Abuse  of  in- 
dulgences. 


'  syiuieden,  E. 


238 


WrCLIF'S 


The  pastoral 
office  three- 
fold. 


shulden  shame  of  |>es  dedis,  how  jjei  ben  a3ens  God.  Trowe 
we  not,  jjat  Petre  wiste  how  he  shulde  spende  Goddis  tresour,  and 
how  he  shulde  after,  wi]?  Goddis  goodis,  do  profite  unto  his 
Chirche  ?  Who  dar  putt  on  Petre  J)is  synne,  ])at  he  was  necligent 
in  j)is,  ]?at  he  sparide  Goddis  tresour,  ]?e  which  popis  profiten 
wiseli  now?  And  ]>is  shulden  alle  men,  but  algatis  prelatis, 
overse  her  astait  and  her  liif,  whe]?er  it  be  acordinge  to  Goddis 
lawe  or  after  customes  of  \q  fend,  and  contynue  ]?ing  wel  don, 
and  mende  })at  is  amys.  And  siche  a  rekenyng  shulde  a  man 
make  ech  dai  wi]?  him  silf,  for  ]jis  is  a  comun  word  ]>at  many 
seintis  have  in  mou)> ; — ech  tyme  ]?at  God  ha]>  ^ovun  ])ee,  God 
wole  axe  ful  sharpli  how  ]?ou  hast  dispendid  it ;  wel  in  his 
service,  or  amys.  And  Jjis  rekenyng  shulde  ech  man  drede, 
but  speciali  |)es  hi5e  preestis;  for  her  office  is  more  perilous, 
and  more  medeful  5if  it  be  wel.  perfore  is  nede  hem  to  wite 
what  dedis  |)at  jjei  shulden  do,  and  algatis  faile  not  in  her  work, 
for  peril  j^at  wole  come  ])erof ;  si]>  synne  of  hem  turne)?  to  harm 
of  many  sheep  ]?at  jjei  shulden  kepe. 

And  however  J>at  men  feynen  her  office,  it  is  toold  in  Cristis 
lawe,  how  j^ei  shulden  be  occupied  in  Jjre  officis  of  sheepherdis. 
pei  shulden  wiseli  lede  her  sheep  in  sound  pasture  of  Goddis 
lawe,  and  ]je  sheep  J>at  weren  scabbid  heelen,  and  stablen  in 
good  liif,  and  algatis  putte  her  hif  to  save  her  sheep  a3ens 
wolves.  And  ])es  herdis  shulden  flee  sich  tyme,  in  which  j^eeves 
sleen  ]?e  sheep,  and  coveiten  more  ]je  wole  of  hem,  and  J)e 
donge,  wi)?  o]?er  goodis,  Jjan  jjei  coveiten  her  soule  hel|)e ;  for 
|?is  is  a  wolvis  entent,  and  5if  jjei  taken  ])us  ))e  office  of  herde, 
J)ei  ben  wolves  at  ])e  bigynynge.  And  so  jjis  tyme  is  wasted  to 
hem,  in  which  ]?ei  traveilen,  for  her  hie  stait,  or  for  coveitise  of 
richesse  or  ony  o]jer  ]?ing  o]?er  |>an  Goddis  worship,  or  oJ>er 
)>an  profite  of  her  sheep  bi  ]?e  reulis  of  Goddis  lawe.  And  )7us 
if  |?ei  hiden  Goddis  lawe,  and  hi3en  her  owne  lawe  for  j^is  eende, 
))ei  lesen  her  tyme  to  ]jer  dampnynge,  and  to  harmyng  of  her 
sheep.  Sich  ]?ing  shulden  |)es  herdis  jjenken ;  for  jjei  moten 
nedis  reken  wi)?  God,  si}?  tyme  is  a  preciouse  tresour,  jjat  God 
^eve]?  to  dispende  wel.  And  tyme  shal  comen  whanne  we  dien, 
j)at  we  hadden  lever  to  have  a  dai  jjan  al  ])e  worship  or  richesse 
])at  hav  fallen  us  in  ))is  world.     And  |)anne  our  jugement  shall 


SERMONS. 


239 


be  hool,  and  wille  a  ))ing  after  ))at  it  is  good.  Siche  oversi3t 
of  oure  lyf,  and  speciali  of  hi3e  prelatis,  helpij)  j^is  Chirche,  and 
maki))  hem  to  drede  God  and  serve  him  K 


Of  many  Martris. 

[SERMON     LX  XI  v.] 

Dicehat Jesus  iiirhis'^  Judeonim. — Luc.  xi.  [29.] 

pis  gospel  telli]?  what  prelatis  shulden  do,  and  whereof  j>ei 
shal  be  reproved.     And  |)is  wole  bringe  in  martirdom,  bojje 
in  o  man  and  in  ano]?er.     And  jjus  is  told  of  martirdom  ]je 
begynnynge  and  ]?e  ende.    Crist  spake  here  to  princis  of  prestis 
and  to  |)e  comuns  of  Jewis,  for  in  boj)e  ]>es  was  |?e  kynrede  which 
SI0W3  }?es  martirs.     per  ben  two  kynredis  \2X  Crist  spekij?  ofte 
of,   J)e   kynrede    of  Goddis    children,   and    kynrede    of  fendis 
children ;   and  at  \^  bigynnynge  of  |)is  world  bigan  |>es   two 
kynredis.    pe  firste  kynrede  of  martirs  bigan  in  a  man  at  Abel  ; 
\q  secounde  kynrede  toke  bigynnynge  at  Cayn  ;  and  J>es  two 
kynredis  shal  not  faile  bifore  ])e  dai  of  dome  come,     pe  laste 
seint  )?at  shal  lyve  here  shal  be  of  ]?e  firste  kynrede,  and  J>e 
laste  J>at  shal  be  dampned  shal  be  of  ]?e  to|?er  kynrede ;  and 
)>es  kynredis  ben  scatirid  among  many  folke,  ne  j^ei  gone  not 
bi  lyne  of  blood,  but  bi  medling  ^  bi  lynes  of  kynde.     But  |)e 
firste  kynrede  hadde  bigynnynge  bifore  ]?e  toJ>er,  for  it  bigan 
at  Adam,  sij?  Adam  is  saved,     pe  to]>er  began  at  Adames  sone, 
jjat  SI0W5  jje  firste  martir.     But,  for  Adam  was  not  martir,  ])us 
slayn  for  Goddis  love,  and  martirs  ben  ]?e  moste  and  beste  ]?at 
ben  in  |>is  kynrede,  ]?erfore  it  is  marked  to  begynne  at  Abel ; 
for  |je  to}?er  kynrede  was  sum  maner  cause  of  J^is  forjjer.     And, 
as  many  men  supposen,  aboute  J)e  dale  of  dome  shal  ]?is  firste 
longe  lyve  here,  whanne  ]?e  to)?er  shal  be  aweie ;  for  bi  vertue 
of  Crist,  |)at  is  begynnynge  and  endinge,  shal  men  }?ikke  turne 
to  him,  and  leeve  )?e  fend  \\\\  hise  workes. 

^  So  in  E ;  A  has  twbas. 


The  kindred  of 
God's  children 
and  the  kin- 
drefl  of  the 
devil's  children. 


^  serven  him  ivel,  E. 
E  reads  hen  medlid. 


For  bi  medling 


240 


WYC  LIE'S 


John  xvi.  2, 


But  leve  we  now  |>is  mater,  and  sue  we  ]?e  storie  of  }>e  gospel. 
Crist  grette  ]?is  kynrede  and  seide ;  Woo  be  to  '^ou  pat  maken  pe 
graves  ofprophetis,  and  '^oure/adris  kilUden  hem.  Certis  y  heren 
ivitnesse  pat  y  consenten  to  her  workes ;  for  al  5if  ]>ei  killiden  hem 
and  3e  maken  faire  her  sepulcris,  ne]?e]es  ^e  wolen  kille  Crist,  jjat 
is  heed  of  martiris.  And  bi  ]?is  polishing,  3e  tellen  30ur  ipo- 
crisie,  bi  which  5e  florishen  30ure  synne  in  killinge  of  martiris  ; 
for,  as  Crist  sei])  to  ]>is  kyn,  |jei  demen  in  ]?is  to  obeishe  to  God. 
And  Caiphas  |)at  3af  30U  conceil  seide,  it  helpi]>  o  man  to  die^ 
for  J>e  folk ;  but  al  if  J^ese  wordis  weren  so]?,  3it  })is  ypocrite 
seide  hem  falseli;  and  so  ]?is  kynrede  bi  her  ypocrisie  telde 
how  ]jei  wolden  kille  Crist.  And  ]>us  sei]?  Crist  here ;  '^jOure 
fadris  killiden  pes  prophetis,  and  y  hilden  her  sepulcris,  as  who 
seide,  we  wolen  amende ;  but  as  Crist  sei]?  bi  Matheu,  \€\  J^enken 
\€\  wolen  fille  ])e  mesure  of  ]?at  J)at  her  fadirs  bigan,  in  killinge 
of  J?e  heed  of  prophetis.  And  herfore  tellij?  Crist  to  hem,  how 
J)e  wisdom  of  God  seide  of  |)is  kyn  ;  /  shal  sende  to  hem  pro- 
phetis and  apostlis,  and  of  pese  shal  pei  hope  pursue  and  kille. 
pe  Jewis  killiden  not  alle  ]?e  apostlis,  for  Joon  was  not  }ms 
killid,  but  ])ei  killiden  James,  and  pursueden  oJ>er  in  o])er 
contreis  :  so  pat  pe  blood  0/  alle  prophetis, /ro  pe  begynnynge  of 
pe  world,  be  sow^t  of  pis  kynrede,  si]>  ])is  ha]?  done  hem  alle  to 
(\e.]>,fro  pe  blood  of  juste  Abel  unto  pe  blood  of  Zacharie,  which 
pis  kynrede  killiden,  bitwixe  pe  aider  and  pe  temple.  It  is  no 
nede  to  trete  which  was  ])is  Zacharie^,  and  which  Barachie  was 
his  fadir,  and  whanne  }?is  martirdom  was  done ;  for  si]?  o  per- 
sone  ha]?  mony  names,  and  Crist  taki]?  sum  tyme  ]?e  witt  of 
J)e  name,  it  is  noo  drede  ]?at  ne  Crist  sei]?  so]?  here,  as  nedij? 
us  to  knowe  it.  And,  for  ]?ese  prestis  shulden  printe  betir 
]?es  wordis  in  her  soulis,  ]?erfore  Crist  rehersi]?  to  hem,  and 
seij?  on  J)is  maner;  "^he,  I  seie  to  yu,  pis  blood  shal  be 
sou^te  of  pis  kynrede.     For  al3if  ]?is  kynrede  hadde  two  divers 

^  \>at  0  man  dye,  E. 


a  '  There  has  been  much  dispute 
who  this  Zacharias  was.  P'rom  the 
time  of  Origen,  who  relates  that  the 
father  of  John  the  Baptist  was  killed 
in  the  temple,  many  of  the  Greek 
Fathers   have  maintained  that   this 


is  the  person  to  whom  our  Lord 
alludes ;  but  there  can  be  little  or 
no  doubt  that  the  allusion  is  to  Za- 
charias, the  son  of  Jehoiada  (2  Chron. 
xxiv.  20,  2i).'  Smith's  Bib.  Diet. 
Article  '  Zacharias.' 

WYCLIF. 


SERMONS. 


241 


partis : — \q  firste  slew  martiris  from  Abel  unto  j^is  Zacharie, 
jje  secunde  SI0U3  martiris  fro  Zacharie  to  j>e  laste; — nej^eles 
bojje  alle  ]jes  killeris  and  martiris  ]?at  ben  killid  maken  two  kyn- 
redis,  and  ech  helpe]?  oj^er.  For  as  seintis  taken  part  and  helpe 
of  oJ>er  seintis,  so  shrewis  taken  part  and  harm  of  her  felowis. 

And  Crist  gretij)  hem  after,  for  ])0  ]?at  holden  hem  wise 
men,  and  sei|? ;  Woo  be  to  ^ou,  wise  men  of  pe  lawe,  pat 
token  aweie  pe  keie  0/  cunnynge,  a7td  y  entriden  not  inne ;  and  oper 
men  pat  entriden  y  have  for fendid.  And  here  streynej?  )?e  pope, 
what  ]?ing  is  j)is  keie ;  and  he  wole  algatis  have  ]jat  it  is  not 
cunnyng,  for  often  tymes  mony  oJ>er  |)an  popis  han  moch  more 
cunnyng,  and  3it  han  not  |?es  keies.  And  herfore  he  feynej? 
\2X  ])es  keies  ben  poweris,  bo|?  upon  clerkis  and  eke  upon 
seculers; — power  of  jurisdiccion,  and  power  to  assoile  and 
bynde.  But  many  men  Jjenken  here  Jjat  \€\  shulden  more 
trowe  to  Crist  J?an  to  many  Pope  Joonis^  for  he  is  suspect  here. 
Crist  clepij)  ]7is  cunnyng  here,  })e  keie  of  cunnyng,  and  alle  ]>e 
fendis  in  helle  shulden  not  move^  to  denye  Crist,  pes  feyned 
poweris  mai  not  be  proved  ne  perceyved  in  dede ;  and  ]?erfore 
ben  J>ei  feynid,  and  by  cautelis  of  ypocritis  is  jje  folk  bigilid. 
And  J)us  trewe  men  seien  here,  \2X  \^x  ben  two  keies :  J)e  firste 
is  keie  of  cunnynge,  and  |>e  to]jer  keie  of  power,  pese  keies 
hadden  Peter  and  many  oj^er  apostlis;  but  Peter  hadde  pre- 
rogatif  bifore  hise  o|>er  brejjeren.  pis  cunnyng  was  not 
speculatif,  of  gemetrie,  ne  o])er  sciencis,  but  practik,  put  in 
dede,  how  men  shulde  lyve  by  Goddis  lawe.  And  after  ]jis 
science  cam  power  to  bynde  and  unbinde  ;  and  to  whom  God 
grauntijj  ]?e  first  he  graunti]?  \t  secounde.  And  oonhede  of 
jjes  keies  was  not  oonli  5ovun  to  Peter,  si|)  hevene  was  open 
to  o|)er  folk  in  cuntreis  |?at  Peter  cam  not  inne,  bi  keies  )>at 
Crist  5af  to  o|>er  apostlis.  And  so  ]jese  feynede  keies  ben  keies 
of  helle,  5if  \€\  open  helle  gatis  to  children  of  pride ;  and  3if  |>is 
pope  hav  cunnynge  to  |jis  work,  he  is  maister  of  }>es  keies.  For 
God  wole  5eve  cunnyng  to  teche  his  weie  to  hevene  to  whom 
ever  him  liki]? ;  and  he  is  Petris  viker,  al3if  nei])er  fendis  ne 
cardinalis  putten  him  in  his  trone. 


Exaggerated 
papal  preten- 
sions. 


'   Popis  Jons,  E. 


^  So  E ;  mowe,  A, 


SERMONS. 


R 


24^ 


WVCLIF'S 


W/ian?ie  Crist  seide  pese  treupis  unto  jjes  hie  prestis,  Phariseis 
and  men  of  lawe  stoden  gretli  a^ens  him,  and  stoppiden  his  mou]? 
wi]?  many  false  wordis,  and  lettiden  Crist  to  speke  more,  as  a  man 
]?at  spak  blasfemye.  And  herfore  ]?es  lawyeris,  for  ])es  wordis  of 
Crist,  layen  in  awayte  more  to  do  Crist  to  \q  de]?.  And  God 
wote  where  j^e  court  wolde  J^us  shape  for  men,  \2X  seiden  sharpli 
to  hem  ])is  sentence  of  J)e  gospel ;  and  if  j^ei  done,  \€\  ben 
J)anne  of  \q  secounde  kynrede.  For  J)is  kynrede  lepi}>  from 
00  folk  to  ano]>er;  for  it  is  now  among  Jewis  and  now 
among  he])en  men,  and  now  come]?  a3en,  as  J^e  fend  hopi|j 
victorie,  and  failing  of  Goddis  lawe,  and  growinge  of  mannis 
lawe.  For  no])ing  is  beter  post  to  likyng  of  ]?e  fend.  And 
si]j  |)is  kynrede  is  now  moost  among  prestis,  as  it  was  in 
Cristis  tyme,  trewe  men  shulden  speke  to  hem  sharpU  as 
Crist  dide.  For  ))e  fend  ha]?  hem  moost  helperis  in  ])is  cause, 
and  makeris  of  martiris  bi  pursuynge  and  sleynge.  And 
^if  ]?ei  senden  men  to  hevene,  ])at  is  on  wrong  maner;  but 
\€\  senden  men  evene  to  helle,  as  to  her  owne  hous,  for  ]?ei 
have  exilid  Goddis  lawe,  bi  which  ]?ei  shulden  worche,  and 
brou3t  in  ])e  fendis  lawe  bi  which  ]?ei  rengnen. 

And  after  sei}?  Crist,  how  })es  lawyeris  aspteden  how  pei  viy^ien 
take  ou^t  ofCi'istis  moup  for  to  accuse  him,  and  so  do  him  to  dee]?; 
and  ]?us  ]?ese  ypocritis  feyneden  to  fulfille  her  law.  And  }?us  it 
is  to  dale  of  ]?es  hi3e  prestis  ;  for  ]?ei  hav  newe  lawis  maad  biside 
Goddis  lawe  to  dampne  men  to  de]?  as  open  heretikes.  And 
to  do  }?is  dede  ]?ei  counseiliden  not  wi]?  Goddis  lawe,  but  wi]? 
foundun^  heresies  }?at  hemsilf  holden,  ]?at  ]?ei  mai  not  synne 
ne  erre  in  siche  jugementis.  But  \€\  jugen  for  heretikes  al 
maner  of  sich  men  ]?at  seien  ]?at  }?ei  shulden  sue  Crist,  and 
leeve  her  worldli  liif.  3^^  I'^i  leven  Cristis  liif,  and  ^even  hem 
]?us  to  lordship,  ])ei  ben  J?e  fendis  children  and  open  Anticristis ; 
for  ]?ei  mai  not  be  Cristis  children,  but  3if  ]?ei  suen  him,  and 
holden  hem  in  his  boundis,  and  go  not  out  by  newe  lawes,  and 
speciali  holde  hem  in  mekeness  and  poverte.  And  here  we 
mai  assaie  where  ]?ei  doren  be  martiris. 


^  fonnden,  E. 


SERMONS. 


243 


In  feestis  of  many  Martris. 

[SERMON     LXXV.] 

Egrediente  Jesu  de  Templo. — Mark  xiii.  [i.] 

pis  gospel  telli]?,  as  o]?er  bifore'',  how  Crist  mesuride  his 
discipHs,  bo])e  in  wit  and  wille,  to  suffre  for  his  love,  pis 
gospel  tellijj,  as  o]?er  bifore,  how  Jesus  ivente  out  of  pe  temple^ 
and  oon  of  his  disciplis  seide  to  him;  Maister,  loke  what  stoones 
and  makingis  ben  of  ])is  grete  temple.  And  Jesus  answeride 
and  seide  to  him  : — Seest  pou  pese  grete  bildingis.  per  shal  not 
be  a  stoon  lefte  upon  a  stoon,  pat  ne  it  shal  be  dis tried.  And 
whanne  Crist  satt  upon  pe  Mounte  of  Olyves,  ayn  pe  temple,  his 
disciplis  axiden  him,  pes  foure  bi  hem  silf  Peter  and  Joon  and 
James  afid  Aftdrew : — Telle  pou  us  whanne  pes  pingis  shal  be 
don,  and  what  tokene  shal  be,  whanne  alle  pes  shal  bigynne  to 
have  an  ende.  And  Jesus  answeringe,  bigan  to  seie  to  hem;  See 
y  first  pat  no  man  disseyve  '^ou;  for  many  shal  come  in  my  7iame, 
and  seie  pat  Y  am  he  ]?at  governe|>  holi  Chirche,  and  pei  shal 
disseyve  many.  But  whanne  y  shal  here  bateilis,  and  opynyons 
of  batels,  drede  y  not,  but  be  3e  sadde  in  bileve. 

Moo  opynyons  of  batels,  herden  we  never ;  for  men  wi}?  ]>e  00 
pope  seien  J?at  it  is  needful  to  fi3te  wi])  men  })at  holden  wi]?  J>at 
o])er,  and  ]jei  wij)  ]?e  toJ>er  pope  have  contrarious  opynyons. 
And  3it  men  wij?  oure  pope  hav  J^is  opynyoun ;  j^at  prelatis  and 
prestis  shulden  fi3te  a3ens  \e  to]?er  pope,  and  men  )>at  holdi)> 
wij)  him,  but  if  ]jei  converte  hem.  Sum  of  us  have  ]?is  opyn- 
youn; ]>2X  preestis  shulden  not  fi3te,  but  move  men  bi  resoun 
and  Goddis  lawe  to  treu|)e,  and  preie  mekeli  for  men  ])at  |)ei 
do  after  Goddis  wille ;  and  ]>at  it  is  not  bileve  ]jat  o]?er  ])is,  or 
]jis,  be  Pope ;  for  3if  he  shal  not  be  saif,  he  is  noo  part  of  holi 
Chirche.  And  so  ]?is  is  no  cause  to  Cristen  men  to  fi3te  inne ; 
but  rajjer  shulde  bo]?e  J^es  popis  go  mekeli  to  ]je  emperour, 
and  renounse  al  her  lordship  \dX  ]?ei  have  of  seculers ;  and  si)> 


Christ  foretells 

the  destruction 
of  Jerusalem, 


Rumours  of 
wars  between 
the  adherents 
of  the  rival 
popes. 


"  See  Sermon  LXXIII. 
R  2 


244 


WrCLIF'S 


Interpretation 
of  the  gospel. 


lyve  a  pore  liif  as  Peter  and  Poul  diden,  and  algatis  move  no 
men,  ne  counseille  hem,  for  to  fi3te  ]?us.  And  in  ])is  opynyoun 
resten  many  meke  prestis.  In^  ojjer  pointis  of  |jis  mater  ben 
an  hundred  opynyouns  among  clerkes,  and  lewide  men,  and 
alle  ben  of  bateiles. 

And  after,  seip  Crist,  pat  alle  pes  moten  ben,  hut  "^it  is  noo 
eende,  to  make  j^e  dai  of  dome.  Folk  shal  rise  ayns  folk, 
as  Sarasins  a3ens  Latyns ;  rewme  ayns  rewme,  as  Inglond  ^ 
a3ens  Franche^;  and  erpe-dene"^  shal  he,  hi  placis,  and  hujigris, 
as  men  hav  feelid^.  \ies  ben  bigynnynge  of  sorewis ;  and 
perfore  loke  wel  i,ou  silf  for  pei  shall  bitraie  y)u  in  her  coun- 
ceilis,  and  in  her  sinagogis  shal  y  he  hetyn;  and  bifore  kytigis 
and  justices  shal  y  stonde,  for  me,  in  witnes  to  hem.  A?id  in  alle 
folk  moot  first  be  prechid  pe  gospel.  And  J)is  ordeynede  Crist 
of  his  grete  wisdom ;  for  bifore  ]?ei  hadden  killid  ]jes  hooli 
apostlis,  jjer  was  no  maner  of  folk,  Grekis  ne  Latyns,  ne  bar- 
bares,  ]?at  ne  \€\  hadden  j?e  gospel  of  Crist  prechid  unto  hem. 
And  whan  pei  shal  lede  y)u,  and  bitraie  '^ou  to  jugis,  penke  y  not 
bifore  bisili,  what  '^e  shal  speke ;  hut  what  shal  be  y)vun  y)U  in 
pat  hour,  speke  y  pat,  for  pat  seip  God.  For  y  ben  not  spekinge, 
but  pe  Holi  Goost,  si]?  ^e  ben  hise  instrumentis,  and  he  spekij> 
first; — 0"  broper  shal  bitraie  his  broper  in  to  his  dep,  and  pe 
fadir  shal  bitraie  his  sone,  and  pe  sones  shal  rise  ayns  her  fadris, 
and  do  hem  to  deep.  And  y  shal  be  in  hate  to  alle  men  for  my 
name;  but  he  pat  las  tip  to  pe  eende  he  shal  he  saf 

pe  lettre  of  ]?is  gospel  is  told  bifore,  and  so  it  is  ynow^  here 


^  So  E ;  om.  A. 
5  one,  E. 


Etiglonde,  E.  ^  Fraunce,  E. 


'  er\>edone,  E. 


'^  This  passage  might  be  expected 
to  supply  the  means  of  fixing  the 
date  of  the  composition  of  these 
sermons,  but  I  have  not  found  it  so. 
In  Professor  Rogers'  valuable  History 
of  Agriculture  and  Prices  in  England 
(i.  217),  I  find  it  stated  that  in  the 
fourteenth  century,  '  the  following 
are  years  of  famine,  the  average 
price  of  wheat  having  risen  above 
los.  the  quarter: — 1315,  1318,  1321, 
1351,1 369.'  Again,—'  It  rose  above 
9s.  in  1294  and  1370:'  '  above  8s.  in 
1293,  1314.  1350,  1363,  1367,  1374, 


1390.'  In  the  years  1 381-1386,  with- 
in which  these  semions  must  have 
been  composed  if  Wyclif  was  their 
author,  the  price  of  wheat  was  re- 
markably low.  These  statistics  refer 
to  the  southern  and  midland  coun- 
ties, and  are  thoroughly  reliable. 
Either  then,  if  Wyclif  wrote  the  ser- 
mon, the  reference  must  have  been 
to  a  time  of  scarcity  as  far  back  as 
1374;  or,  if  we  suppose  the  scarcity 
of  1390  to  be  pointed  at,  Wyclif  was 
not  the  author  of  the  sermon. 


SERMONS. 


^45 


to  telle  pleyne  storie.  Here  men  moven  li3tli,  si|)  Crist  tolde  alle 
]7es  perils,  it  seme]?  jjat  |)ei  mut  nedis  be ;  but  who  my^te  ])anne 
lette  hem  ?  Here  men  seien  comunli,  ]?at  al  |>ing  mut  nedis 
be,  and  3it  men  moten  nedis  a^ensstonde  many  of  J)es ;  and 
so  j?ei  moten  nedis  have  mede  of  siche  a5enstondinge.  For 
as  we  moten  nedis  preie  for  ]?ingis  J)at  nedis  moten  be,  as 
shewen  )>ree  )>e  firste  axingis  of  J>e  Pater  noster ;  so  we  moten 
nedis  enforse  a5ens  j?ingis  j?at  nedis  moten  be.  And  of  sich 
enforsinge  mote  nedis  come  mede;  for  ellis  shulden  no  men 
lette  yvel  to  come ;  and  mede  in  a3enstonding,  and  conseillinge 
to  goode,  weren  al  aweye  bi  ])is  lewide  resoun.  And,  for  alle 
jjes  ben  false,  and  many  o})er  ]?at  suen,  enforse  we  a^ens  yvel, 
and  preie  we  for  goode,  al^if  God  have  ordeyned  |?at  ]?ei  moten 
nedis  come.  And,  for  men  shulden  do  J)us,  jjerfore  haj)  God 
ordeyned,  ]?at  comynge  of  many  sich  jjingis  ben  unknowen 
to  men. 

But  here  men  douten  over  ]>is,  of  ordre  of  |>is  help  to  J)e 
Chirche ;  but  here  seien  Cristene  men,  Jjat  no  man  shulde 
doute  to  helpe  ]?e  Chirche,  but  alle  men  shulden  help  it  here, 
ech  man  on  his  maner;  si]?  God  tellij)  us  bi  his  lawe  ))at  jjis 
is  his  wille.  Seculer  lordis  shulden  helpe  here  principali,  for 
many  causis.  Oon,  for  God  ha|)  ^ovun  hem  swerd  for  to  helpe 
his  Chirche  bi  strengj^e,  and  strengj^e  wij>  mennis  drede  is  nede- 
ful  to  do  J)is  dede.  Also  lordis  of  J)is  worlde  ben  Jjo,  to  whiche 
])is  harm  is  don,  who  shulde  stonde  more  for  ])is  cause,  J^an 
lordis  |>at  hav  lost  j?is  lordship.  Also,  ]?at  man  ]>at  ha]?  synned 
shulde  algatis  make  asee]? ;  but  ]>q  generacion  of  lordis  bi  foUe 
brou5t  in  ]>is  wrong,  and  herfore  it  falli|>  to  hem  to  make  aseej) 
for  |)is  synne.  And  Jjus  shulde  kny3tis  knowe,  how  ])ei  shulden 
stonde  for  Goddis  cause,  and  not  al  oonli  kille  men  in  mennis 
cause,  as  boucheris.  pei  shulden  have  shame  how  ]jei  ben 
hardi  in  cause  of  Jje  world  and  of  |)e  fend,  but  in  ]?e  cause  of 
God  j?ei  ben  bo]?  cowardis  and  foolis.  And  ne]?eles  |)is  lord 
doi])  worship  and  profite  to  kny^ttis  J>at  serven  him,  and  ]?ei 
mai  not  denye  J)is,  ]>at  ne  for  blyndenesse  and  cowardise  holdi}? 
])e  fend  ajens  God  ])is  lordship  })at  ])ei  shulden  have. 

But  over  })is,  men  have  doute  what  ordre  men  shulden  have, 
and  where  men  shulden  begynne  to  worche,  in  iust  restoringe  of 


A  predestina- 
rian  objection 
answered. 


Church-reform 


246 


WFCLIF'S 


should  begin 
at  Rome. 


Spiritual  arms 
alone  should 
be  used  to  hejil  \ 
the  schism. 


Jjes  goodis.  But  here  men  seien,  sij>  J)is  wrong  is  brood  sprad 
in  Cristendom,  and  Goddis  oost  shulde  be  my^ti  to  do  J)is  dede 
a^ens  ]>e  fend,  in  many  placis  shulden  men  worche  on  ]>is 
weie  to  helpen  her  modir.  But  si]>  ])e  nest  and  heed  hereof  is 
at  Rome,  where  it  bigan,  it  semej>  to  many  men  jjat  at  Rome 
shulde  Jjis  ri5tting  bigynne ;  and  so  shulde  ]?is  heed  be  stoppid 
to  feyne  censuris  ajens  God,  and  fere  foolis  bi  cursingis  for 
]>ei  fulfillen  Goddis  lawe ;  and  wij)  J?is  bo]?e  lordis  and  comuns 
mai  lette  freris  to  harmen  Jie  Chirche.  And  Jjus  were  Goddis 
word  soJ>  whanne  he  spekij?  to  ]>e  fend,  and  sei]?,  a  woman 
shal  disquatte^  his  heed.  And  Marie  helpe^  J>e  Chirche  ])at 
it  be  so.  For  5if  richesse  and  worldli  lordship  weren  taken 
aweie  from  prelatis  and  preestis,  moche  of  ]?e  fendis  pride  were 
abatid  in  ]>es  clerkes ;  and  Goddis  name  were  not  dispisid  ech 
dai  as  it  is  now,  but  his  lawe  shulde  be  betere  holde,  and 
Anticristis  jugementis  shulde  ceesse. 

But  jit  men  douten  whe]?er  ]>ei  shulden  fijten  in  j^is  cause  ajens 
her  enemyes; — special!,  sij?  Crist  movede  two  princis  of  Rome  for 
to  fijte,  Titus  and  Vaspasian,  ]?at  distroieden  Jerusalem.  Here 
men  ))enken,  ])at  Cristene  men  shulden  not  fijte  but  if  Crist  bad 
hem ;  for  Crist  seide  })at  his  yoke  is  softe  and  his  charge  lijt  to 
bere.  And  so  nei]?er  bodili  swerd  nej)er  o]>er  armes,  ne  fijtinge 
shulde  be  here  usid  of  Cristene  men ;  ne  o]?er  lawe  but  Goddis 
lawe,  and  lordis  drede,  and  manassing  to  clerkis  |>at  wolden 
ajenstonde.  And  to  bindinge  and  prisoninge  of  hem  shulde 
alle  maner  of  men  helpe ;  but  bi  Goddis  grace  J)is  shulde 
not  falle,  si]>  clerkis  shulde  helpe  here  in  Goddis  cause,  and 
feyn  ^  to  be  dischargid  of  er])eli  goodis,  Jjat  J)ei  beren  now. 
And  Jjanne  j^ei  shulden  go  lijt  to  hevene,  and  drawe  J?e  world 
after  hem ;  |)er  \>ei  doppen  now  to  helle,  and  drawen  many 
men  wi]?  hem.  Freris  shulden  help  in  })is  cause,  si]?  ]>ei  ben 
groundid  in  poverte,  and  ])ei  have  but  temporal  goodis  ^, 
J>e  which  ben  knytt  to  her  hertis.  And  shortly  alle  maner  of 
men,  jhe,  prestis  boj^e  more  and  lesse,  shulden  helpe  here 
in  Goddis  cause,  for   love   })at   J)ei    shulden   love  her  modir. 

^  disquate,  E.  ^  helpe  Marie,  E.  ^  /^y",  E. 

•'»  As  opposed  to  lands  or  lordships. 


SERMONS, 


247 


But  now  \e\  clepen  good,  yvel,  and  harm,  profit,  and  bond- 
age, fredom ;  but  ])anne  shulden  jjei  wel  witen  how  al  ]?at 
helpi]>  to  hevene  is  good,  and  al  |)at  shulde  be  by  Goddis 
lawe  were  free  and  helpli^  to  ]?is  eende. 

And  ))us  ]?e  lord  preisij?  his  baili,  for  he  for^af  to  his  tenaunte 
fifty  barels  of  oile.  And  so  |?is  jifte  was  ri3tful,  sij>  j)is  lord  is 
God  himsilf;  and  ])is  tenaunte  is  kynde  of  clerkis,  for  ]?ei  shulden 
jeve  devocioun,  and  be  paied  of  litil  corn^.  For,  as  Poul  techi]?, 
]jei  shulden  holde  hem  paied  wij>  bodili  fode  and  hileyng. 
And  ])us  shulden  preestis  preche  to  lordis,  to  holde  hem  paied 
of  worldli  goodis,  and  sette  her  wille  in  hevenli  goodis,  which 
wille  shulde  make  hem  lijt  to  hevene.  But  jje  fend  ha]?  stranglid 
})ese  houndis  wi]>  talwe^,  Jjat  j^ei  mai  not  berke.  And  |jus  si]? 
seculer  men  shulden  be  moo  J?an  prestis  shulden  be,  and  prestis 
shulden  have,  by  titil  of  almesse,  her  sustenance  of  ]?e  peple,  wi}?- 
drawing  of  her  service  a^en  shulde  move  to  wi]?draw  ]?es  goodis. 
And  whoever  a3enstondiJ?  ]?is  sentence  is  unlawful  a5ens  God. 

And  so  men  shulden  graunte  in  dede  to  obeishe  to  }?e  pope, 
as  )?e  peple  obeishide  to  Petre,  and  as  Goddis  lawe  wole  axe; 
but  it  were  to  myche  to  pass  ]?is,  for  })anne  men  obeishiden  to 
J)e  fend,  si]?  Goddis  lawe  shulde  be  reule,  and  teche  how  God 
wole  J)at  men  obeishe.  And  si]?  ]?e  freris  accusen  ]?e  court,  in 
matter  of  ]?e  sacrid  oost,  and  saien  ]?at  it  techi]?  ]?at  }?is  oost  is 
not  Goddis  bodi,  but  accident  wi]?outen  suget  ]?at  alle  men 
knowen  not,  men  shulden  axe  J?is  treu]?e  of  ]?is  court  wi]? 
good  grounding  b.     And  5if  ]?is  court  faile  in  ]?is,  }?ei  fallen  in 


^  belpi\>,  E. 

a  Does  this  mean,  —  the  clergy 
should  be  content  to  retain  for 
themselves  '  litil  corn,'  or  temporal 
riches,  just  as  the  debtor  in  the 
parable  retained  only  twenty  for  his 
own  profit  out  of  the  hundred  mea- 
sures of  wheat  that  he  had  to  render 
to  his  lord,  but  they  should  rejoice 
in  being  permitted  to  keep  an  abun- 
dant measure  (fifty  out  of  a  hundred 
barrels)  of  '  oile,'  or  devotion  ?  See 
Serm.  LXXXV. 

^  The  general  drift  of  this  re- 
markable passage  seems  to  be  as 
follows.  The  friars,— after  the  synod 


^  talow,  E. 

of  1382,  which  had  been  promoted, 
and  indeed  ordered,  by  '  the  Court,' 
or,  as  we  should  say  now,  by  the 
Government, — and  after  the  sending 
down  of  letters  patent  into  all  the 
counties  (see  Lewis,  p.  106),  ap- 
pointing inquisitors,  who  would  be 
in  many  or  most  instances  friars, 
to  search  out  heretical  writings  and 
their  fautors, — might  well  say  that 
the  Court  taught  their  doctrine  con- 
cerning the  Eucharist,  and  condemned 
that  of  Wychf.  This  is  called  by 
the  writer,  accusing  the  Court  of 
teaching  the  said  doctrine ;  because, 


The  pope 
should  be 
obeyed,  as  far 
as  consistent 
with  the  laws 
of  God. 


248 


WFCLIF'S 


The  doctrine  of 
the  Eucharist. 


moost  jjat  J>ei  shulden  do ;  for  ]?ei  shulden  teche  men  bileve  ]>e 
which  is  ground  of  Cristis  ordre.  But  Crist  sei]?  wi]?  many 
seintis,  ]?at  ]?is  oost  is  Goddis  bodi,  al  if  it  be  breed  in  his 
kynde,  as  Poul  techi|>  ofte  tymes.  pus  shulden  rewmes  stoppe 
first  fruytes,  and  avaunsing  of  Cardinalis,  wi])  ojjer  spoilingis  of 
jjis  court,  bi  ))e  which  rewmes  and  peplis  ben  chargid.  And 
jif  men  seie  J?at  rewmes  mai  not  defenden  hem  fro  sich  spoil- 
ing, certis  ]?anne  |)ei  ben  to  feble  to  defende  hem  from  ojjer 
enemyes ;  and  5if  cowardise  lette  hem,  bi  feynynge  of  Anticrist, 
Jjanne  ]?ei  ben  to  unstable  for  defaute  of  bileve.  For  ne]?er  God 
ne  man  mai  noie,  and  moche  more  alle  fendis  of  helle,  but  jif 
jje  law  of  Holi  Writt  accuse  men^  ajens  God. 


pE  Gospel  of  con  Confessor  and  Bishop. 


[SERMON     LXXVL] 


The  duty  of 
watchfulness. 


Vigilate,  quia  nescitis  qua  hora. — Matt.  xxiv.  [42.] 

pESE  gospellis  ben  passid  \2X  fallen  to  ])es  martiris,  and  now 
comen  gospelis  Jjat  fallen  to  confessouris.  And  so  J)is  gospel 
techij?  a  wisdom  of  Crist,  how  men  \2X  have  cure  shulden  kepe 
])er  sheep ;  and  ]?is  lore  perteyne])  to  moo  ]?an  to  preestis,  but 
\€\  shulden  kepe  passingli  |>e  lore  |?at  Crist  techij)  here.  Crist 
biddi)>  first  j^at  hise  servantis  wake,  for  peiwiten  never  whamie  pe 
Lord  is  to  come.  And  it  is  knowen  to  men  |)at  Crist  spekij?  here 
of  wakinge  fro  synne,  for  jjat  is  |>e  best  wakynge,  and  ]?is  beste 
Lord  spekij)  of  beste  ])ing;  for  as  creaturis  tellen  a  man  his 
God,  so  Jnngis  of  kynde  tellen  men  how  jjei  shulden  serve  God. 
It  is  knowen  to  clerkis  j^at  man  ha]?  fyve  wittis,  and  stopping 
of  jjese  wittis  bringi]?  in  sleep  to  man ;  and  Jeanne  man  is  half 

'  hem,  E. 


as  he  goes  on  to  say,  Christ  and 
many  of  the  saints  unmistakably 
taught  his  doctrine,  lie  proceeds  to 
suggest,  apparently  in  the  hope  of 
setting  himself  right  with  the  Court 
by  appealing  to  its  self-interest,  that, 
the  existing  hierarchy  was   terribly 


burdensome  both  to  Court  and  na- 
tion, and  that  to  '  stoppe  first  fruytis,' 
and  other  ecclesiastical  exactions, 
would  be  greatly  to  the  advantage 
of  the  state.  The  advice  was  not 
acted  upon  till  the  year  1534. 


SERiMONS. 


249 


deed,  and  unable  for  to  worche  or  to  defende  himsilf  a3ens 
enemys  ]jat  wolen  harmyn  ^  him.  pese  wittis  ben  clepid  si3te 
and  heering,  smelling  and  taist,  wi])  groping ;  and  alle  jjes 
shulden  be  fed  wi]?  God,  jjat  mai  never  faile  fro  mannis  witt. 
But  stopping  of  love  wi]>  worldli  ]>ingis  letti]?  mannis  heed  to 
perceyve  God ;  and  so,  as  clerkis  seien,  ]?es  fyve  wittis  comen  of 
a  vertue  wijjinne  in  \e  heed,  and  ^if  a  man  bi  sleep  be  lettid  in 
J)is  virtue,  oujjer  bi  fumes,  or  drunkenes,  or  ojjer  cause,  Jjes  fyve 
wittis  ben  stoppid  and  wanten  her  worching.  And  letting  of 
)>ese  fyve  wittis  is  clepid  mannis  sleep.  But  al  J)at  man  ha))  is 
jovun  to  him  of  God,  for  to  serve  his  God,  oujjer  worching 
or  suffring ;  and  5if  he  leve  ])is  service,  jjanne  he  slepij)  goostli. 
And  wit  wij)inne  in  mannis  heed,  j?at  is  God  himself,  mut  move 
his  out- wittis  to  worche  as  J)ei  shulden ;  and  so  al  ])at  letti])  man 
to  be  moved  |)us  of  God  bringij?  in  sleep  of  synne,  and  letti]> 
him  to  wake.  And  so  er])eli  fumes  comyng  fro  ]?e  stomak  ben 
grete  cause  of  J)is  sleep,  and  letti]) ^  helping  of  God;  for  God 
dwelli])  not  wij)  man  bisi  aboute  er])eli  ])ingis.  But  worching  of 
a  mannis  soule  aboute  siche  J)ingis  maki])  worldli  fumes  lette^ 
a  mannis  resoun  to  knowe  hevenli  goodis,  and  wake  wi])  hise 
wittis ;  for  sich  a  man  lovej)  more  goodis  of  ])is  world  ])anne  he 
lovej)  his  God,  for  on  hem  his  wille  is  more  sett 

And  ])erfore  clepi])  Poul  J)ese  averouse  men,  serveris  of  maw- 
mettis,  and  brekeris  of  Goddis  heestis;  and  alle  wittis  of  sich 
men  slepen  fro  Goddis  service.  We  shulden  wake  to  resoun,  and 
knowe  ])at  our  si^te  is  jovun  us  of  God,  to  serven  him  and  oure 
soule s ;  and  5if  we  fallen  hereof,  for  synne  ])at  we  ben  inne,  we 
misusen  oure  si3te,  and  slepen  wi])  it.  Si3te  is  jovun  to  man 
as  hiest  out-witt,  for  to  sue  his  profite,  and  flee  J)ing  ])at  harmej) 
him;  and  J>ingis  ])at  ben  bifore  him,  ])e  which  he  shulde  do, 
shulde  a  man  wel  knowe,  and  take  to  him  ])e  profitable.  And 
])us,  as  Crist  techi]),  men  synnen  in  si^te  of  wymmen,  for  he  J)at 
see])  a  woman  for  to  coveite  her,  he  ha])  in  ])at  done  lecherie 
in  his  herte.  For,  as  Crist  techi]),  ])e  rote  of  a  man's  synne  is 
wi])inne  in  his  herte  bifore  ])at  it  be  in  dede,  and  herfore  men 
shulden  flee  cause  ])at  ])Us  bringi])  synne  to  mannis  herte.     pe 


barmen,  E. 


om. 


and  leHi)>,  E. 


Eph.  V.  5. 


Sins  of  sight. 


250 


WYCLI  F'S 


I  John  ii.  r6. 


Sins  of  hearing. 


Rom.  X.  17. 


synne  of  si3t  is  not  |>us  oonli  in  lecherie  of  fleish,  but  it  is  also 
in  coveitise  of  worldli  goodis ;  as  whanne  |)0U  seest  er]?eli  J>ing, 
and  coveitist  to  hav  it,  a3ens  ]?e  wille  of  ])i  God,  J)OU  synnest 
J>anne  in  ]?i  si3te.  And  ]jus  sei]?  Seint  Joon,  ]?at  in  coveitise  of 
i5en  is  understonden  al  coveitise  of  ojjer  wittis  a^ens  resoun. 
Ne  a  man  synnej>  not  in  si3t,  al  oonli  on  ]?es  two  maneres, 
but  whanne  he  is  idil  in  his  si^t,  and  aspiej?  not  his  profit;  as 
sum  men  loken  to  veyn  plaies,  and  many  si3tis  of  worldli  ])ingis, 
])e  which  profiten  not  to  her  soule,  but  ra])er  doi]?  hem  harm. 
And  si3t  is  J>e  first  witt  stoppid  whanne  a  man  slepij?.  So]?eli 
we  shulden  ever  loke  upon  God,  as  we  mai  here  seen  him  bi 
mirrour,  in  a  derknes  of  ))ingis  ])at  he  ha]?  maad ;  3he,  boj^e  ni3t 
and  dai,  slepinge  and  wakinge,  shulde  we  Jjus  ]?enke  on  God 
and  his  lawe. 

pe  secounde  uttir  witt  is  heeringe  of  man,  ]?at  is  brou3t  many 
weies  in  to  sleping  of  synne.  For  God  haj?  50vun  us  J>is 
virtue  for  to  heeren  him,  and  so  to  heeren  pees  and  charite 
]>at  he  spekij)  in  us;  but  men  ben  now  redi  to  heeren  of 
unpees,  batailis,  and  strives,  and  chidingis  of  neijboris ;  and 
cause  of  sich  heeringe  is  assent  to  siche  }?ingis,  for  litil  worldli 
wynning  and  lesyng  of  pees.  And  bi  sich  heeringe  men  mai 
knowe  whos  children  jjei  ben.  We  shulden  witen  |>at  heeryng 
was  graunted  to  man  for  to  cunne  his  bileve,  as  Seint  Poul 
sei|);  and  so  bileve  is  of  heering,  and  heering  is  by  Cristis 
word.  And  for  ])is,  Crist  wole  j^at  men  preche  ]je  gospel; 
and  for  ]jis  ha]?  kynde  ordeyned  Jjat  heering  shulde  be  in  a 
sercle,  bifore  men,  and  bihinde  men,  and  on  ^  ech  side  of  men, 
as  bileve  is  of  treujjis,  bifore  us,  and  bihinde  us.  And  to  oure 
bileve  shulde  we  shape  oure  heering.  And  ]?is  is  o  defaute  J>at 
men  have  in  heeringe,  ]>at  \€\  wolen  gladli  heere  fablis,  and 
falsehedis,  and  slaundris  of  her  nei3bouris,  al  5if  ]?ei  knowen 
hem  false.  But  al  3if  sich  telleris  ben  moche  for  to  blame, 
ne])eles  sich  heereris  ben  hatid  of  God.  For  kynde  ha])  jovun 
to  men  to  heeren  voicis  in  ]?e  eire,  and  not  in  er])e  bine])en  us, 
where  voices  comen  not ;  in  tokne  }>at  we  shulden  jyve  oure 
wittis  to  trowe  J)ing  ])at  mai  be  in  eire,  ]?at  is  aboven  us,  which 

^  So  E;  0071,  A. 


SERMONS. 


251 


})ing  profitijj  to  oure  soule.  And  if  we  heeren  sich  falsenes  |?at 
we  wite  profitij)  not,  we  shulden  not  heeren  but  wi]>  peyne, 
and  trowe  not  |>erto,  and  algatis  fle  sich  men  |?at  tellen  sich 
talis;  for  God  ha})  ^ovun  us  heeringe  to  heeren  his  workes, 
)>at  ben  moo  and  sutiler  ])an  ])is  witt  wole  suffise  to. 

And  herfore  ])e  gospel  telli})  how  Crist  dide  a  miracle,  and 
heeiide  a  deef  man  and  domb  upon  ])is  manere :  Crist  toke  him 
aside  fro  |>e  comune  peple,  and  putte  his  fyngris  in  his  eeris,  and 
wij)  his  spitting  touchide  his  tonge,  and  5af  him  ])anne  vertue 
to  heeren  and  to  speke.  God  here  techi]>  man  for  to  fle  fablis 
J)at  ben  in  comune  peple,  and  take  hede  to  him.  pe  sutil 
workes  of  God  ben  hise  smale  fyngris,  ]?at  men  shulden  heer 
and  trowe,  and  ))erwij>  fede  jjer  wittis,  and  wi)>  sich  savery 
treu|)is  occupien  her  speechis.  And  jjus  mai  we  ))enke  how  we 
ben  deffe  and  dumbe ;  but  we  shulden  wij)  \ts  two  wittis  wake 
to  oure  God,  for  he  wole  have  rekenynge,  bo]>e  in  oure  de]> 
and  at  \e  dale  of  dome,  how  we  have  dispendid  vertues  Jjat  he 
haj)  5ovun  us. 

And  si]?  we  witen  not  whanne  ])is  rekenynge  shal  falle,  it 
is  a  greet  wisdom  to  wake  ajens  J)is  tyme;  and  herfore  seij? 
Crist,  ]>is  ping  wite  we  wel,  pat  ^if  pe  hosebonde  wiste  whanne 
pe  pee/  were  to  coine,  certis  he  wolde  wake,  and  suffre  him  not 
to  7nyne  his  hous^.  pis  ])eef  is  \e  fend,  joyned  to  man,  to 
tempte  him,  and  to  harme  him  al  ]jat  he  can,  and  speciali  in 
tyme  jjat  ])is  man  shulde  die ;  for  if  he  take  ]?eefli  virtues  fro  j^is 
man  in  hour  of  hise  dee]?,  he  doi])  jjise  ]?efte  moost.  And  ^if  he 
have  maistrie  to  sle  siche  a  man,  he  chesi]?  sich  a  tyme  whanne 
he  is  moost  unredi ;  and  ]?anne  he  is  ful  bisie  to  bringe  in  \q 
worste  synne,  for  jjanne  his  ful  victorie  is  endid  in  j)at  man. 
And  here  men  douten  comunli,  what  hour  men  shal  dien, 
whejjer  God  shal  take  hem  in  her  beste  tyme.  But  here  we 
shal  wite,  ]?at  alle  ]?o  ]>at  shal  be  saif  waken  in  hour  of  her  de]?, 
and  over  comen  \q  fend,  and  suffren  him  not  Jeanne  to  undirmyne 
her  hous.  And  so  ))es  men  dien,  whanne  j^ei  ben  moost  ripe. 
But  ^if  ]>e  fend  lede  hem  Jeanne  as  his  owne  servantis,  and  ]?ei 
shal  be  dampned,  he  waiti)?  him  a  tyme  whanne  he  trowi]?  best 


The  cure  of 
the  deaf  and 
dumb  man. 


*  In  the  first  Wycliffite  version — '  suffre  not  his  hous  to  be  undirmynyd.' 


252 


WFCLIF'S 


The  faithful 
servant. 


The  parable  of 
the  talents. 


to  overcome  |?es  men ;  and  so  ]jes  men  dien  in  her  worste  tyme, 
for  in  tyme  J?at  J>ei  have  ]?e  synne  J)at  evermore  shal  laste.  And 
J)at  is  ))e  worste  yvel,  J>at  God  mai  suffre  to  be ;  for  God  mote 
nedis  punishe  J)is  synne  in  helle  \vi]?outen  ende.  And  for  |)is 
peril  of  ]?is  ])eef  shulden  men  waken  warli ;  but,  for  ]>is  harm 
of  ]?is  jjeef  is  not  but  bi  Goddis  jugement,  J>erfore  sei]?  Crist  to 
warn  alle  men;  And  p  erf  ore  be  y  redt,/or  in  pat  hour  pat  y 
hopen  not  Crist  is  to  come.  For,  as  it  is  ofte  seid,  dee])  is  ])e 
J?ridde  \vs\%^  )?at  God  wole  have  unknowun  to  man,  for  he 
shulde  ever  be  redi. 

And,  for  ech  man  shulde  gouerne  alle  his  wittis,  and  make 
hem  serve  to  hise  profit,  as  a  man  doi]?  his  meyne,  ])erfore  sei]) 
Crist  ]?us  :  Who,  trowest  pou,  is  a  trewe  servant,  pat  pe  Lord  hap 
put  to  be  upon  his  meyne,  pat  he  ^yve  hem  mete  in  good  tyme  to  ete  ? 
pis  Lord  is  God  himsilf,  and  we  ben  hise  servantis ;  |>is  meyne 
of  ])is  Lord  ben  alle  oure  wittis,  which  we  5even  mete  for  to 
serve  God,  whanne  we  leden  hem  bi  resoun  to  profite  to  oure 
soule.  Blessid  be  pat  servant,  pat  whanne  his  Lord  is  comen,  he 
hap  foundun  him  doinge  so  unto  pis  meyne;  sopeli  Y  seie  to  ^ou, 
pat  he  shal  putte  him  upon  alle  hise  goodis,  and  make  him  his  eire, 
pat  man  Jjat  doi]>  J>us  shal  come  to  hevene,  and  ]?ere  shal  he  be 
Cristis  eire,  and  ful  lord  of  Cristis  heritage ;  and  j)is  lordshipe 
shal  serven  to  alle  Cristis  children. 


PE  Gospel  of  oon  Confessour  and  Bishop. 

[SERMON    LXXVII.] 

Homo  quidam  per egre  proficisceyis. — Matt.  xxv.  [14.] 

pis  gospel  telli]?  a  parable  jiat  Crist  tau^te  his  disciplis,  and, 
in  hem,  alle  Cristene  men,  how  \€\  shulden  chaffare  here. 
And  ]?is  parable  tellij)  j^e  resoun  whi  men  shulden  wiseli  chaf- 
fare }>us  : — A  man,  seip  Crist,  goinge  a  pilgrimage^  clepide  hise 
servantis y  and '^af  hetn  his  goodis.      And  oon  he  '^dffyve  besauntis, 

"  See  p.  236, 


SERMONS. 


•^53 


and  two  to  anoper,  and  to  anoper  von,  ech  on  after  his  owne  virtue. 
And  whan7ie  he  hadde  delid  Jms,  he  wente  anoon  his  pilgrimage. 
And  of  pes  pree  servantis,  pe  first,  pat  hadde  fyve  besauntis,  wente 
ajid  wroiqte  ifi  hem,  and  gat  oper  fyve;  pe  secoufide,  pat  hadde  two 
besaufitis,  wan  oper  two;  but  he  pat  took  oo?i,  wente  and  dalf^  in 
pe  erpe,  and  hidde  pe  monie  of  his  lord  wipouten  encreese.  And 
after  long  tyme  cam  pe  lord  of  pese  servantis  and  rekenede  wip 
hem.  And  pe  firste,pat  hadde  fyve  besauntis,  cam  to  pe  lord  and 
offride  him  oper  fyve,  and  seide  ;  Lord  pou  i,avest  me  fyve  be- 
sauntis, lo  I  have  geten  over^  oper  fyve.  And  his  lord  seide 
to  him  ;  Wei  be  pe,  good  servaunt  and  trewe;  for  pou  was  trewe 
of  litil,  upon  7Jiany  pingis  Y  shal  putte  pee  ;  entre  in  to  pe  joie 
of  pi  lord,  pe  secounde  cam  nyy  pat  hadde  two  besauntis,  and 
seide ;  Lord  pou  -^avest  me  two  besauntis,  lo,  oper  two  have  Y 
wonne  ouer.  And  his  lord  seide  to  him  ;  Wei  be  pee,  good  ser- 
vaunt aftd  trewe  ;  for  pou  was  trewe  of  f  ewe  pingis,  Y  shall  putte 
pee  upon  f?iany  pingis  ;  entre  into  Joie  of  pi  lord. 

pis  o  man  ]?at  wente  \\i?>  in  |)ilgrimage  is  comunli  seid,  oure 
Lord  Jesus  Crist,  for  he  is  o  man  among  alle  o])ere.  His  wend- 
inge  on  pilgrimage  is  taken  on  two  maners ;  comunli  it  is  takun 
for  his  steyng  in  to  hevene,  for  dwellinge  in  hevene  is  strange 
to  mannis  fleish.  pe  secounde  maner  of  pilgrimage  of  J)is  o 
man  is  clepid  dwellinge  in  J>is  world  bi  manheed  of  Crist ;  for 
J)is  was  strange  pilgrimage  to  Cristis  Godhede.  And  algatis  in 
}jis  pilgrimage  clepide  Crist  hise  servantis,  and  jaf  hem  his 
goodis  to  profite  wi]?al.  But  j^ese  ]?re  manere  goodis  jovun 
to  jjes  jjree  servantis,  is  comunli  understonden  upon  two 
maneres,  as  doctouris  varien  in  Jjese  two  pilgrimagis.  For 
as  a  man  is  two  ]?ingis,  ])e  spirit  and  jje  bodi,  so  Crist  is  two 
kyndis,  jie  Godhede  and  j^e  manhede.  As  anentis  his  Godhede, 
his  waundringe  here,  is  pilgrimage;  and  as  anentis  his  man- 
hede, his  steynge  to  hevene  is  pilgrimage.  And  he  clepide 
hise  servantis  bi  a  long  cleping,  fro  jje  bigynnynge  of  \q  world 
to  \q  laste  dai,  but  at  ]>\s  dai  of  dome  he  maki|)  a  ful  rekenyng. 
And  sij)  Cristis  Godhede  is  everywhere,  he  mai  wel  clepe  ]>ese 
servantis,  and  3yve  hem  his  goodis,  sij)  ]jei  have  nou3t  but  of 


Interpretation 
of  the  parable. 


'  dalve  it,  K 


'  om.  E. 


•54 


WVCLIF'S 


The  expla- 
nation of 
St.  Gregory. 


Another 
explanation. 


God.  It  seme]?  }jat  Gregory  menej?  ])us  })es  ]?ree  partingis 
of  )7es  goodis  ^.  Sum  men  have  of  God  her  fyve  outwittis  wij? 
her  purtenaunce  ;  and  ])es  ben  jje  firste  men  |>at  have  jjese  fyve 
besauntis.  pe  secounde  men  wi])  two  besauntis,  ben  siche 
trewe  men  J)at  passen  not  in  Jjese  wittis,  but  have  good  undir- 
Stonding,  and  ]jerwi]?  ri3tful  workes.  After  Jjis  understondinge, 
|)e  J)ridde  servant  is  wickid  men  wi]>  sutil  undirstonding,  gaderid 
of  her  wittis  wiJ)OUten  and  wiJ)inne-for|? ;  but  ]?ei  failen  juste 
workes  answeringe  to  ])ese  wittis.  And  |?es  men  delven  her 
wittis  in  undirstondinge  of  J)is  worlde,  and  profiten  not  to 
heveneward,  ne  to  ])e  Chirche,  ne  to  hem  silf. 

pe  secounde  undirstondinge  of  J)is  parable  of  Crist  is  more 
sutil  and  traveilous,  and  acording  wi]?  ]?e  text,  as  bo])e  ])es  un- 
dirstondingis  may  be  aplied  to  ]>q  text,  pese  fyve  besauntis  of  J)e 
firste  man  ben  fyve  maner  of  goodis  Jiat  God  3eve])  to  sum  men, 
}?at  he  wole  have  saved.  Goodis  of  grace  ben  })e  firste,  ]?at  Austin 
telli})  moche  bi'',  and  fallen  to  sich  men  ))at  lyven  to  Goddis 
worship  and  to  profite  of  her  soulis ;  for  ]jei  have  ever  goodis 
of  grace  in  all  o])er  ])at  }jei  have.  Goodis  of  kynde  ben  goodis 
of  vertues,  bo])e  bodili  and  goostli,  bi  which  a  man  worchi]>  to 
disserve  ]?e  blisse  of  hevene.  pe  ])ridde  ben  goodis  of  fortune 
J)e  which  God  3yveJ)  to  men,  to  serven  him  and  to  wynne  hem 
blisse,  bi  wise  delyng  of  ]?es  goodis ;  and  ])us  weren  Job  and 
Abraham  riche,  wi})  seintis  of  ])e  newe  lawe.  pe  four])e  manere 
of  goodis  ])at  God  5eve])  here  to  men,  ben  goodis  of  good  fame, 
]?at  God  graunti])  in  ]?is  world ;  for  sum  men  have  alle  ])es  })ree 
goodis  and  ]?erwi])  a  good  fame,  ])at  ]>ei  serven  wel  to  God,  and 
to  profit  of  his  Chirche.  pe  fifte  goodis,  ben  sparkelis  of  glorie, 
])at  sum  men  have  here  in  ])is  world ;  ])e  which  ben  joie  of 
hevenli  blisse  ]>at  ])ei  hopen  fulli  to  have,  and  blisse^  hem  on 


blessen,  E. 


<^  S.  Greg.  In  Evang.  Homil.  ix. : 
'  Quinque  ergo  talentis  donum  quin- 
que  sensuum,  id  est  exteriorum 
scienlia  exprimitur.  Duobus  vero, 
intellectus  et  operatio  designatur. 
Unius  autem  talenti  nomine,  intel- 
lectus tantummodo  designatur.' 

''  It  would  be  idle  to  seek  to  il- 


lustrate the  statement  in  the  text  by 
passages  from  the  works  of  the 
great  doctor  of  grace,  seeing  that 
hardly  a  treatise  of  any  length  came 
from  his  marvellous  pen  in  which 
the  doctrine  of  the  necessity  of  pre- 
venient  grace  in  order  to  good  works 
is  not  more  or  less  enforced. 


SERMONS. 


^5S 


sum  manere  a,  ]?e  while  })ei  lyven  here  on  erjje.  pes  men  ben 
})e  firste  servant,  ]>at  profiti]?  in  jjes  fyve  besauntis.  pe  secounde 
servaunt  wi])  two  besauntis  is  undirstonden  alle  siche  men  ]>at 
have  in  plentee  goodis  of  kynde  and  goodis  of  grace,  and 
worchen  wi})  hem.  pe  j^ridde  servant  wij)  o  besaunt  is  undir- 
stonden alle  sich  men  )?at  have  in  plente  goodis  of  kynde,  and 
profiten  not  wi)>  ])es  goodis,  for  worldli  occupacions  letten  to 
disserve  hem  blisse.  And  ])es  men  delven  in  jje  er])e,  and  hiden 
))e  goodis  |>at  God  ha]>  ^ovun  hem.  And  to  })es  ])ree  men,  and 
no  moo,  parti}?  God  here  hise  goodis.  pese  two  firste  worchen 
wi)>  God  wi])  witt  and  wille  |)at  ]?ei  have,  and  turnen  al  her 
iyvynge  here  to  worship  of  God,  and  profite  to  his  Chirche ; 
and  herfore  jjei  maken  hem  wor]?i  to  take  fulle  goodis  at  ]?e  dai 
of  dome.  And  so  doublyng  of  her  workes  is  merite  Jjat  ])ei 
have  added,  bi  which  God  maki]?  hem  able  for  to  have  Jje  blisse 
of  hevene ;  and  alle  Jjese  goodis  J^at  men  have  here  ben  but 
litil  to  hevenli  goodis,  for  |?ere  men  shal  have  fulli  alle  Jje  goodis 
of  hevene  and  er])e. 

And  God  shal  grete  his  trewe  servantis  ]?us  at  jje  daie  of 
dome,  whanne  he  shal  seie;  Come  jee  ))at  ben  blessid,  my 
Fadris  children,  and  take  je  now  \q  rewme  of  hevene, 
Jjat  was  maad  redi  to  50U  fro  J?e  bigynnynge  of  )?e  world. 
For  ever  God  is  making  redi  j^e  blis  ]?at  hise  seintis  shal 
have ;  and  alle  \q  goodis  ])at  we  have  here  ben  now  but 
fewe  and  litil,  to  regarde  of  ]?e  goodis  ]?at  we  shal  have  in 
hevenli  blis.  For  5if  man  shal  come  to  |)is  joie,  he  shal  have 
al  ]?at  he  wole,  and  as  fulli  as  he  wole,  and  on  what  manere 
j)at  he  wole;  but  here  we  languishen  for  o]?er  havyng  jjat  us 
falli|>  to  have  in  hevene. 

And  here  men  seien  ]?at  goodis  of  fortune  ben  \q  leste 
of  ]jes  fyve,  si]?  a  man  wolde  skilfulli  ^yve  alle  J?es  goodis 
for  his  hel]?e,  and  heel]?e  of  bodi  is  good  of  kinde  wi]?  o|?er 
partis  }?at  man  ha]?.  And  si}?  a  man  shulde  chafFare  here, 
and  lese  all  }?es  goodis  of  kynde  for  to  wynne  him  goodis 
of  grace,  goodis  of  grace  ben  algatis  beter.     And  si]>  mannis 


Tlie  goods  of 
fortune  pre- 
ferred by  most 
men  to  all  the 
other  four 


*  De  Lyra's  explanation  does  not 
differ  much  from  this.  He  inter- 
prets the  five  talents  to  mean,  the 


goods  of  nature,  those  of  grace, 
those  of  knowledge,  those  of  power, 
and  those  of  wealth.  Bibl.  Sac.  vol.  v. 


256 


WFCLIF'S 


because  their 
love  is  ill 
directed. 


The  last  end 
of  the  new 
crusaders. 


fame,  ]?at  is  his  name  writun  in  Jje  book  of  liif,  is  betere 
|)anne  alle  \&s  o|)er,  and  j^erof  man  shulde  more  joie,  jjese 
four})e  goodis  ben  betere  |)an  |)e  goodis  told  bifore.  And  si]> 
a  man  travaili]?  here  for  to  gete  ]?e  fifte  ^  good,  it  moot  nedis 
be  beter  jjan  )jei,  si])  it  is  eende  of  alle  bifore.  And  in  travaile 
aboute  |?ese  goodis,  and  algatis  in  priis  ^  of  hem,  stondi]?  al  ]>e 
mede  in  |>is  liif,  and  al  un]>ank  of  peyne  of  helle ;  for  now  J)is 
worlde  ha]?  blindid  men  a3ens  her  witt  and  her  resoun,  ])at 
goodis  of  fortune,  jjat  ben  lest,  ben  moost  told  bi  of  |)es  fyve. 
And  for  ]?es,  and  worldli  name,  men  fi3ten  and  traveilen  hugeli ; 
but  al  if  J)es  ben  goode  in  kynde,  ne]?eles  havynge  of  hem 
profiti])  not  to  man  here,  but  for  vertues  and  goodis  of  blisse. 
And  ofte  it  falli]?,  }?at  \>\s  havyng  J?at  philosophris  tellen  leest  bi, 
harme]?  to  man  in  oJ>er  goodis,  for  unskilful  love  of  hem ;  and 
so  in  love  of  mannis  soule,  wiseli  weyed  as  it  shulde  be,  stondi]) 
al  ]?e  mede  of  man,  ])at  he  ha|)  here  in  erjje.  Loke  ])at  he  love 
moost  his  God,  sij>  he  is  \q  beste  })ing  j^at  mai  be,  and  si]),  he 
love^  him  silf,  and  aungelis  wi])'*  nei^boris,  as  \q\  ben  goode. 
But  in  ])is  love,  man  shal  have  ordre  ;  as  kynde  ha])  tau3te  him 
for  to  love  first  himsilf,  and  o])er  in  kynde  after  ])at  ])ei  ben 
nere  to  him.  And  in  ano])er  ordre  of  love,  betere  and  fer])ere, 
shal  man  love  more  ;  but  ])is  craft  of  good  love  is  turned  now 
up  so  doun,  for  ])is  world  and  worldli  goodis  passen  now  in 
wei3te  of  love.  And  herfore  ])es  worldli  men  chaffaren  aboute 
worldli  goodis,  and  her  traveile  wi])  ]>qx  bisynesse  techen  ])at  ])ei 
loven  moost  ])es  goodis.  And  certis  ])ei  failen  in  craft  of  love, 
and  comen  not  to  ])e  goode  of  blisse;  and  bi  ]?is  cause  ha]) 
Crist  ordeyned  his  prestis  to  be  not  worldli,  but  to  lyve  in 
povert  of  J)is  world,  and  in  peyne  of  her  bodi.  For  ])us  dide 
Crist  wi])  hise  disciplis,  and  tau3te  us  to  sue  him.  And  bi  ])is 
cause  men  supposen  ])at  many  prelatis  of  ])is  Chirche  hiden 
Goddis  tresour  in  ])e  er])e,  to  her  owne  dampnacion;  and  so 
at  })e  dale  of  dome,  God  shal  not  seie,  Wei  be  J)ee,  but  God 
shal  seie,  austernli ;  Of  ])i  mou])  Y  juge  ])ee,  for  ])0U  shuldest 
have  ])is  cunnynge,  and  lyve  ])erafter  bi  ])y  state  ^.  And  ])us 
diden  ])es  confessouris,  and  so  ])ei  camen  to  joie   of  hevene ; 

*  and,  E. 


•  fyve]>e,  E.  ^  pris,  E.  '  So  E ;  A  has  love]*. 

'  So  E ;  A  reads,  love  \>era/ter  bi  >e  state,  which  is  nonsense. 


WYCLIF. 


SERMONS. 


^51 


and  ])us  |jese  martiris  of  |)ese  werres,  si|j  \>q\  ben  }?e  fendis  ser- 
vantis,  ben  in  martirdom  of  helle  })at  shal  lasten  \vi|?outen  ende. 
And  her  techeris  more  and  lesse  ben  not  confessouris  of  Crist 
but  confessouris  of  ])e  fend,  whos  lawe  ]>ei  holden  and  techen. 


pE  Gospel  of  o  Confessor  and  Bishop. 


[SERMON      LXXVIIL] 

Homo  quidain  nohilis  ahiit  in  regionem. — Luc.  xix.  [12.] 

pis  gospel  telli]?  how  men  shulden  lyve,  as  jje  nexte  bifore 
dide  in  a  lyche  parable,  and  knytti]?  ]?erto  many  treujjis.  And 
it  mai  falle  ful  wel  Jjat  Crist  in  dyvers  tymes  seide  dyvers 
parablis,  jje  which  weren  of  liche  sentencis.  Crist  sei|>  J)at, 
0  nohJe  man  wente  out  into  a  fer  contre  for  to  take  to  him  a 
reivme,  and  turne  ayn,  whan  he  hadde  do.  Doctouris  seien 
comunli  J^at  ]?is  nobleman  is  Crist,  ]?at  wente  out  of  ]>q  God- 
hede,  and  bicam  man  heere  in  erjje,  for  to  gete  him  a  rewme 
of  ])e  Churche  of  trewe  men.  But  Crist  lefte  not  to  be  God, 
al  if  he  made  his  manhede  wijiouten ;  and  ])us  he  styede  a^en 
to  hevene,  whanne  he  hadde  made  \\s  marchandije  ^  And  ]?is 
is  a  noble  man,  as  |jis  regioun  is  ferre ;  for  nobler  man  |?an  is 
Crist  mai  noon  be  in  ])is  world,  si]>  speciali  God  is  his  Fadir, 
and  his  modir  is  wijjouten  synne,  and  J)is  child  is  God  and 
man.  But  where  mai  be  a  nobler  man?  And  as  moche  as 
Crist  made  him  lasse,  as  fer  fro  Godhede  is  ])is  regioun.  And 
here  taken  many  men,  how  Crist  ]?at  is  ]?is  noble  man  was 
porest  man  here  in  erj)e,  and  suffride  for  us  many  peynes. 
And  noblei  of  oure  prelatis  shulde  not  lette  hem  to  be  pore, 
si]?  ]?ei  ben  sinful  wi]>  her  eldris,  and  mai  not  come  to  Cristis 
noblei.  And  si]>  al  })at  Crist  suffride  here,  he  suffride  for  love 
of  his  lawe,  he  love]?  to  litil  Crist  or  his  lawe  ]?at  grutchi]?  a^ens 
|)is  poverte.  And  false  glosis  seid  in  Jjis  mater  maken  prestis 
synne  more  grevous,  for  it  is  a  moche  synne  a  preest  to  seie 


SERMONS. 


'  marchaundhe,  E. 
S 


The  parable 
of  the  ten 
pounds. 


Ps.  cvi.  6. 


258  WYC  LIE'S 

])at  he  is  Cristis  viker,  and  by  auctorite  of  Crist  reuli])  fulli  his 
liif,  and  5it  he  gabbi]?  upon  Crist  and  bi  blasfemye  bigilij)  jje 
peple. 

pz>  nohle  man  clepide  teti  servatttis,  ];at  ben  alle  J)e  kynde 
of  men,  and  '^af  hern  ten  besaujttis,  |)at  weren  delid  among  hem; 
and  bad  hem  chaffare  wip  pis  mo7ieie  til  pat  he  come  ayjt.  pes 
ten  besauntis  ben  alle  \q  goodis  j^at  Crist  ^af  here  to  man- 
kynde,  and  her  chaffaryng  wij^  })es  is  her  profitable  worching; 
and  Crist  at  ]?e  dai  of  dome  wole  axe  rekenyng  of  alle  |)es. 
It  is  no  charge  to  us  now  to  wite  how  moche  |?is  moneie  is, 
for  moneie  changij?  ofte  in  priis,  after  j^at  |)e  prince  wole 
ordeyne.  ])e  citise?iis  of  pis  noble  man  weren  hi3e  prestis  of 
|)e  temple,  wi]?  scribis  and  Phariseis;  and  al  |?is  peple  hatide 
Crist  and  senten  message  after  him,  now  bi  prestis,  now  bi 
dekenes,  now  bi  kny5tis  of  Heroude,  and  ever  to  take  Crist  in 
wordis  to  fynde  hem  cause  to  dampne  him.  And,  for  \€\ 
my^ten  not  bi  her  lawe,  ]?ei  feyneden  many  gabbingis.  And 
ever  ]?ei  meneden  and  seiden  in  dede,  pat  pei  wolden  not  pat 
Crist  rengnede  on  hem;  and  ne]?eles  Crist  is  hi3est  king  and 
regne])  upon  al  }>is  world.  And  cause  of  ]jis  rebellioun  was  j)e 
lore  of  Cristis  lawe,  for  he  tau^t  poverte  and  mekenesse,  and 
lore  to  bringe  men  to  hevene ;  and  al  ]?is  displeside  hem,  for 
\€\  weren  Jje  fendis  children.  And  jjus  have  cardinalis  pursued 
]je  pope'\  and  many  sugettis  her  prelatis,  and  many  prelatis 
pursuen  trewe  men  jjat  grutchen  a3ens  her  lordship ;  and  alle 
]?es  seien  in  dede  ]?at  ]?ei  wolen  not  J^at  Crist  rengne  over  hem. 
And  for  ]?er  message  is  fals,  and  failij?  J>e  ground  of  trujje, 
Jjerfore  sei]?  God  ]?at  ]?ei  senden^  a  message  bihinde  him,  for 
))is^  is  feyned  vanite,  for  to  putte  treu])e  bihinde^.  But  it  is 
7}iaad,  longe  after  at  tyme  of  Jje  dai  of  dome,  |?at  Crist  cam  a5en, 
whanne  he  had  gaderid  al  his  rewme,  for  Jeanne  shal  holi 
Chirche  be  hool,  and  ever  dwelle  wi]?  her  kyng.  And  for 
hool  cumyng  of  })is  rewme  we  preien  in  our  Pater  nosters. 

^  senten,  E.  ^  and  for  \>is,  A  ;  E  om.  a7id.  ^  om.  E. 

*  pursued  the  Pope.     This  seems  by  subjects '  may  possibly  refer  to 

to  be   an  allusion  to   the  rejection  the  rising  of  the  Commons  in  1381 

of  Urban  after  his  election  by  the  and  the  murder  of  Archbishop  Sud- 

majority  of  the  Cardinals  in  1378.  bury. 
The  '  persecution   of  their  prelates 


SERMONS. 


259 


Whanne  \>\s  kyng  shal  come  a3en  for  to  juge  alle  maner  men, 
he  shal  bidde  clepe  hisc  scrvantis,  to  whom  he  '^a/  hifore  his 
?}ioneie,  pat  pei  sheiven  how  ]m  hadde  chaffarid  \vi)j  goodis,  ]?at 
])ei  hadde  take^  of  God^.  \)e  Juste  servant  come  and  seide ; 
Lord,  pi  besaunt  hap  geten  ten.  And  pe  kyng  seide  to  him,  Wei 
he  pee,  goode  servaunte;  for  pou  was^  trewe  in  litil,  pou  shall 
hen  havynge  power  upon  ten  citees.  pes  ten  citees  ben  alle  ])e 
goodis  j>at  seintis  shal  have  in  hevene.  And  pe  toper  servaunt 
cam,  and  seide  ;  Lord,  pi  besajit  hap  maad  fyve.  And  pe  kyng 
seide  to  hifu.  And  be  pou  upon  fyve  citees.  And  pe  pridde  ivickede 
servant  came,  and  seide  to  pe  lord ;  Sire,  lo  here  pi  besaunt,  put 
ayn  in  a  sudarie.  For  Y drede  pee  herfore,pat  pou  art  austerne'^ 
man  pat  takist  ping  pat  pou  puttist  not,  and  repest  pat  pou  hast 
not  sowun.  pe  king  seip  to  him.  Of  pi  owne  moup  Y  juge  pee, 
wickide  servaunt.  pou  seiest,  pou  wistist  pat  Y  was  an  austerne 
7fian,  taking  ping  pat  Y putte  not  pere,  and  reping  pat  Y  have  not 
sowun ;  and  whi  yivest  pou  not  my  moneie  to  pe  table,  to  be 
occurid^,  and  Y  shulde  have  ax  id  after  my  moneie,  wip  oker 
perof. 

per  ben  sum  men  ])at  lyven  here  in  swete  and  bisynesse, 

and    casten   hem    not    for   to    profiten    wij?    goodis    |>at   God 

ha|)  lent  hem  for  to  wynne  \q  blisse  of  hevene,  as  God  ha]> 

bodyn  hem  to  do.     And  ]>es  ben  ]?e  jjridde  servant  ]?at  shewij? 

Goddis  moneie  in  a  cloi]? ;  for  goodis  of  kynde  shal  man  bringe 

to  Goddis  dome,  mawgrey^  his.      And  his  liif  in  |?is  world  is 

money  wlappid  in  sweting  cloiJ>.     But  God  jugij;  sich  men  of 

her  owne  conscience,  si]?  ech  man  shulde  wite,  }>at  God,  over 

goodis  ))at  he  5yve|?,  axij?  profite  of  mennis  workes ;    but  to 

men,  and  noon  to  him.     And  so,   si]?  God  putti]?  in  chaffare 

))ing  to  profite  bi   mennis  traveile,  men   shulden  traveile   fast 

})erwi}?  for  to   profite   to   hem  silf;    and  so   God  repi]?  many 

Jjingis   ]?at  he   sue ''   not  bi  him   silve,   for  he    helpi]?  man  to 

worche,  and  al  })e    profit  he   5eve])  to   man.      And  jjus    sei]? 

Austin  a  ])at  Goddis  oker  is  leueful   and   gracious,   for  God 

^  taken,  E.  ^  So  E ;  A  wrongly  includes  the  words  wi\> — God  in  the 

italics.  ^  wast,  E.  *  an  ansterne,  E.  ^  to  be  ocurid,  E,  and 

excludes  rightly  from  the  italics ;  A  includes.         ®  magrey,  E.         ''  sewe,  E. 

*    S.    Aug.  Enarratio    In  Psalm.       nerator.     Minus  vult  dare  certe,  et 
XXXVI.     '  Attende   quid  facit  foe-       plus   accipere  :    hoc  fac  et  tu  :    da 

S    2 


God's  mode 
of  usury. 


26o 


WrCLIF'S 


The  property 
of  wicked  men 
is  nut  truly 
their  own 


okuri]?  not  wij)  man,  but  5if  God  make  j)e  encrees;  and  al  \q 
vantage  of  ]?is  okir,  God  kepi]?  to  man  and  not  to  him.  And 
so  man  5yve)>  Goddis  moneie  for  to  drawe  at  ]?e  table,  whanne 
he  putti]>  Goddis  jyftis  to  wynne  him  j^e  blisse  of  hevene ;  and 
Jjanne  \\s  kyng  ha]?  encrees  to  his  worship,  and  mannis  profite. 

And  so  sei]?  Jesus  Crist  to  aungels  ]?at  stonden  biside ;  Take 
pis  hesaunt  fi'O  pis  pef,  and  ^yve  it  him  pat  hap  ten  besauntis. 
And  pes  seintis  seiden  to  Crist,  Lord,  he  hap  ten  besauntis.  For 
evry  ]?ing  sei]?  himsilf,  and  ech  |)ing  sei]?  o}?er  to  God ;  and  })us 
telli])  Cristis  jugement  to  men,  }?at  Crist  wole  not  bigile.  For 
so};e  Y  seie  to  30U ;  to  ech  ]?at  haj?  shal  it  be  ^ovun,  and  bi  ]?is 
5ifte  shal  he  have  plente ;  but  from  him  Jjat  ha]?  not,  ]?at  ]?at  he 
ha]?  shal  be  taken  awey.  .  For  ]?is  is  trewe  sentence  of  seintis, 
|?at  just  men  ]?at  han  hevene,  han  alle  worldli  })ingis  bi  resoun  of 
her  Lord :  and  so  alle  unjuste  men,  ]?at  God  3yve]?  helle  for  her 
service,  have  not  justli,  al  5if  ]?ei  semen  to  have  moche.  And 
5if  ]?ou  axe  who  shal  take  aweie  goodis  fro  J?ese  uniuste  men,  si]? 
]?ei  ben  comunli  my^te,  and  no  man  dar  take  fro  hem ;  Crist  an- 
sweri]?  here  and  mai  not  gabbe,  })is  just  man  to  whom  God  ^eve}? 
hevene  taki]?  fro  ]?is  uniuste  man  ]?at  ]?at  him  seme]?  to  have ;  and 
not  bi  his  owne  autorite,  ne  bi  streng]?e  of  him  silf,  but  bi  autorite 
of  God,  and  bi  vertue  of  his  lawe.  And  al  5if  worldli  men 
semen  to  have  myche  goodis,  5it  ]?is  is  a  false  havynge,  for  it  is 
unjuste  to  God ;  and  si]?  God  is  chief  lord,  ]?at  jugij?  men  ];us  to 
have  and  ]?us  to  wante  bi  his  lawe,  no  man  shulde  a^en-seie  ])is. 
And  uniust  occupacion,  clepid  havynge  to  ]?is  world,  is  so]?eli 
noon  havynge,  but  holding  of  o]?er  mennis  goodis".  And  sum 
men  ]?at  shal  be  saif,  al  if  ]?ei  semen  now  pore,  ne]?eles  ]?ei 
have  now  hevene,  and  alle  goodis  of  ]?is  world :  but  ];is  havyng 
is  now  hid,  and  jit  unknowen  to  men,  for  Goddis  rijt  is  not  jit 
put  in  possessioun.       pis   trewe    sentence   of   seintis    is    now 

modica,  accipe  magna.  Vide  quam 
late  crescat  foenus  tuum.  Da  tem- 
poralia,  accipe  aeterna :  da  terram, 
accipe  coeliim.  Et  cui  dabo,  forte 
dicis  ?  Ipse  Dominus  procedit 
quem  foeneres,  qui  tibi  jubebat  ne 
foenerares.' 

»  This  favourite  opinion  of  Wyc- 
lif's,  that  moital  sin  invalidates  the 
light  to  hold  property  or  lordship, 


both  as  regards  laymen  and  as  re- 
gards ecclesiastics,  is  set  forth  at 
large  in  his  Be  Doni'mio  Chili  and 
other  treatises.  Among  the  twenty- 
four  propositions  condemned  by  the 
Synod  of  1382  (Lewis,  p.  loS),  was 
the  assertion  '  that  a  civil  lord  is  no 
lord,  a  bishop  no  bishop,  a  prelate 
no  prelate,  whilst  he  is  in  mortal 
sin.' 


SERMONS, 


%6i 


scorned  bi  mannis  lawe;  ne]?eles  seintis  have  now  alio  |>ing 
jjat  jiei  wolen  have.  And  as  philosophris  seien,  havyng  is  on 
many  maneres.  And  herfore  ]?is  gospel  sei]>  jjat  unjust  man 
ha])  not  sich  |)ing,  and  ])e  gospel  of  Mathew  sei|)  ])at  him  semej) 
to  have  it;  for  if  man  robbe  oj^er  mannis  goodis,  and  waste 
hem  at  his  wille,  ne])eles  he  ha]>  hem  not,  but  occupiej)  ])ingis 
)?at  ben  not  his. 

But  Crist  speki|>  at  \e  dai  of  dome  of  false  prestis,  ))at  weren 
his  enemyes,  to  angelis  and  seintis  in  hevene ;  |)at  J>ei  shulden 
bringe  hem  bifore  hem,  and  sle  hem  in  his  presence,  for 
])ei  shal  be  dampned  by  Goddis  jugement.  And  \\s  dampn- 
yng  to  helle  is  a  manere  of  sleying  more  noyous  J>an  bodili 
sleying.  And  seintis  shal  here  juge  wi]?  God.  And  J)e  storie 
of  ])e  gospel  tellij),  how  Crist,  whanne  he  hadde  seid  ))es 
wordis,  wente  bifore  o])er  men  and  stieden^  into  Jerusalem. 
And  ))is  bitokene)?  ]jat  ])is  sentence,  al  if  it  be  scorned  here  in 
erjje,  jit  it  is  kept  saf  in  hevene,  and  is  above  mannis  power. 


Of  con  Confessor  and  Bishop. 


[SERMON      LXXIX.] 


Vtdete,  et  vigilate,  et  orate. — Mark  xiii.  [33.] 

pis  gospel  gaderij)  shortli  J)e  sentence  bifore  seid,  and  tellij? 
how  men  shal  wake,  and  speciali  bishopis.  First  Crist  biddij? 
J)ree  jjingis  ]?at^  hav  hem  in  ordre  ;  first,  he  \i\A^^^}^  pat  we  shal 
see,  and  after  |>at  we  shal  ivake,  and  ]?e  ]>ridde  tyme  Jiat  we  shal 
preie,  to  contynue  jjes  two.  pe  firste  is  needful  to  prelatis;  for 
rijt  as  jje  witt  of  si3t  shewij?  a  man  moost  wakinge  among  ojjer 
wittis,  so  si3t  of  Goddis  lawe  maki]?  a  man  moost  wake  to 
God.  For  J)is  lawe  is  bileve,  Jjat  man  shulde  moost  stodie  inne. 
Crist  biddi])  jjat  man  shulde  see,  not  vanitees  of  jje  world,  ne 
unstable  mannis  lawe,  for  bojje  ])es  sijtis  don  harm  to  men, 
but  lawe  of  Crist  \2X  is  book  of  liif,  and  Goddis  w^ord,  Jesus 


^  sty^ede,  E. 


^  So  E:  A  has  \>an. 


Clear  vision, 
watchfulness, 
prayer;  virtues 
specially 
episcopal. 


26l 


WYCLI  F'S 


Ps.  Ixxxv.  8. 


2  Cor.  ii.  15. 


Ps.  xxxiv.  8. 


The  nature  of 

Christian 

scmoiir. 


Crist.  And  so  here  we  ben  bodun  to  eendyn  oure  firste  witt 
at  God.  For  J)e  secounde  witt,  sei)?  David,  |?at  he  shal  heere 
what  God  speki]?  in  him ;  for  he  is  certeyn  of  bileve  \2X  God 
speki])  pees  to  his  peple.  And  so  3if  buUis  bidden  werre,  to 
kille  men  for  unknowun  cause,  it  is  o]?er  not  Goddis  bidding, 
or  |)e  folk  is  |)e  fendis  peple.  Of  ]?e  |)ridde  witt  seij)  Poul,  ]jat 
he  and  his  felowis  ben  good  smel  of  Crist  to  God,  for  j^ei  suen 
Crist  in  lyvynge.  Of  ]je  fourjje  witt  sei}?  \q  Psalme ;  Taste  36 
and  understonde,  how  |)at  J)e  Lord  is  swete,  and  o|)er  worldli 
]?ingis  ben  bittere ;  for  al  ^if  J^ei  semen  swete  first,  jje  laste  of 
hem  is  bittere  as  wormod.  For  j^e  fifte  witt,  sei]?  Crist ;  Take 
my  3oke  upon  30U,  and  lerne  of  me  |?es  two  lessouns,  ]?at  Y  am 
mylde  and  meke  of  hert ;  for  my  joke  is  swete  and  softe,  and 
my  charge  is  lijt  ynowj,  si]?  it  drawij?  men  upward,  and  puttij> 
not  down  to  helle.  And  so  shulde  we  wake  wel,  and  reste 
)>es  fyve  wittis  in  God ;  for  if  a  man  have  al  bileve  jjat  Goddis 
lawe  techi]?  ouwher\  but  3if  he  wake  in  charite,  al  si3t  of  ]>is 
man  is  nou5t.  And  |)erfore  biddi]?  |)e  secound  word  ]>at  we 
shulen  algatis  wake  to  God.  And,  for  we  mai  not  laste  in 
J)is,  but  3if  God  contynue  his  grace,  ]?erfore  jje  ]jridde  word 
biddi])  |>at  for  ];is  grace  we  shulden  preie.  But,  for  J>e  secounde 
word  of  wakinge  is  ful  nedeful  here  to  men,  and  wakinge  is 
loosing  of  wittis,  to  perseyve  ]?ings  present,  and  it  is  told  of 
si3t  and  heering  ^^  of  o]?er  J^ree  wittis  were  to  speke. 

And  first  of  smelling  of  a  man,  more  spiritual  ]?an  o]?er  two, 
as  ]7e  nose  is  more  hi3er  in  \^  heed  ]?an  is  J)e  tunge.  It  is  speche 
of  hoH  writt,  ]?at  name  |>at  man  ha]>  in  ]?is  lyf  to  |)e  jugement  of 
God  is  smeling  of  J>at  man  ;  and  so  sum  men  ben  good  smelling 
and  sum  men  stinking  to  God.  And  |?us  sei})  Poul,  for  he  was 
certeyn  ]?at  ]?ei  sueden  Crist  in  lyvynge,  ]?at  |>ei  weren  a  good 
odour  of  Crist  to  God  for  her  liif ;  for  as  we  shulden  be  mem- 
bris  of  Crist,  so  we  shulden  be  odours  of  Crist.  And  so  we 
shulden  sue  Crist  here  in  al  oure  manere  of  lyvynge  ;  and  3if  we 
lyven  a  contrarie  lyf,  and  go  fro  Crist  spirituali,  we  ben  stink- 
ing bifore  God  bi  synne  and  ypocrisie,  for  j?at  synne  stinki}) 

^  owywhere,  E. 
«  See  Sermon  LXXVI. 


SERMONS. 


263 


moost  bifore  God  of  alle  o])er.  And  so,  3if  ]?at  hi5e  prelalis 
taken  ]>e  fame  of  good  name,  and  gon  fro  ]?e  weie  of  Crist,  no 
man  stynkij?  more  )?an  ]jei.  And  herfore  ofte  God  heeri|>  not 
|>e  preier  of  J^e  comune  peple,  for  Jje  liif  of  her  prelate  is  so 
stinking  bifore  God.  And  ])us  spekij?  Goddis  lawe,  J)at  God 
smellide  brent  ti])es,  for  devocioun  of  hem  ])at  offriden  smellide 
wel  unto  God ;  and  ]?us  preiej?  David  jjat  his  preier  stretche  to 
God  as  incense.  But  stinke  unto  men,  as  Goddis  children 
stonke  to  Pharao,  is  not  moche  for  to  flee,  but  stinkinge  to 
Goddis  jugement ;  and  ])us  wake  we  in  J?is  witt  jjat  al  oure  liif 
smelle  wel  to  God,  for  alle  ]?at  slepyn  in  synne  ben  stynkinge 
bifore  God. 

pe  secounde  witt  of  ]?es  Jjree,  is  tastinge  of  mannis  tonge; 
and  bi  mannis  speche  mai  we  wite  who  tasti]?  of  Goddis 
sweetnesse,  for  ]?at  man  haj?  delite  to  speke  of  God  and  his 
lawe.  And  oJ>er  men  ben  in  feveris,  and  tasten  not  of  Goddis 
word,  but  it  seme]>  bitter  to  hem,  for  her  tast  is  turned  amys ; 
and  ])es  moten  be  goostli  heelid,  as  jjei  heelen  men  of  feveris. 
And  deedli  signe  of  sich  syk  men  is  J)at  hem  wanti]?  appetit  of 
Goddis  word,  Jjat  shulde  be  her  food  and  lyf,  as  Goddis  lawe 
techi|>.  And  herfore  techij?  Seint  Petre,  J>at  5if  ony  man  speke, 
loke  J?at  he  speke  Goddis  wordis ;  and  bi  J>is  tokene  he  is  hool. 
Here  mai  we  see  how  mannis  lawis  hav  distemperid  kynde  of 
men,  and  turned  hem  into  swyn  }?at  jjei  savere  not  Goddis 
word. 

pe  jjridde  witt  is  felynge,  jjat  is  everywhere  in  ))e  bodi,  bojje 
above  and  bene])e,  for  it  is  so  nedeful ;  and  herfore  ha]?  kynde 
ordeyned  his  instrument  bi  al  ]>q  bodi,  al  5if  it  take  roote  of  ])e 
herte,  in  which  is  jugement  of  taist.  And  it  is  ful  nedeful  to 
fede  mennis  bodi  in  mesure,  for  ]?e  bodi  serve]?  to  \q  soule,  and 
is  horse  to  it  in  many  goode  workes.  And  ]>us  all  ])es  ])ree 
wittis  ben  more  fleishli  ]?an  ]?es  o]?er  two,  and  moven  man 
unevenli  to  glotonye  and  lecherie ;  and  herfore  ]?e  fend  tempti]) 
algatis  bi  ]?is  ]jridde  witt,  as  he  temptide  Adam  and  Eve  to  ete 
of  ])ing  J)at  God  forbad.  And  3if  we  ]7enken  on  })at  state,  and 
how  we  shulden  ever  sue  God,  and  how  exces  and  defaute  in 
Jje  feding  of  oure  fleish,  whanne  it  passi])  good  resoun, 
smacchi]?   synne  ajens  God,  it  is  ful  hard  in  J?is  liif  to  kepe 


Gen.  viii.  21 ; 
compare 
Ez.  XX.  40,  41. 


Ps.  cxli.  2. 


Taste. 


I  Peter  iv.  11. 


Feeling. 


264 


WYC  LIE'S 


Responsibility 
of  Christian 
ministers. 


US  fro  synne  of  taist;  but  as  his  instrument  is  everywhere  as 
a  nett  in  mannis  bodi,  so  ])e  fend  ha]?  many  wilis,  to  make 
man  slepe  bi  ]>is  witt.  And  ne]>eles  |?is  waki])  last,  among 
o]?er  wittis  of  man.  And  so  ]?e  fend,  bi  ])is  witt,  bringi]?  dee)?  of 
ojjer  wittis,  and  maki]?  a  man  falle  fro  God  in  dedeh  synne, 
and  fele  not,  al  3if  his  wittis  semen  opyn  to  jugement  of  ojjer 
men.  And  ])is  is  \^  fallinge  yvel,  in  which  mennis  i3en  ben 
sum  tym  opyn,  and  5it  ]>ei  mai  no  more  see,  ]?an  an  ymage  ]?at 
ha]>  noo  witt.  For  her  nerves  of  charite,  bi  which  \€\  shulden 
love  God  moost,  failen  in  her  herte,  and  Jjere  Jjei  shulde  moove 
her  lymes  to  serve  God.  And  J?us  we  shulde  wake  to  God  in 
j?re  wittis  of  our  soule. 

pe  resoun  \2X  Crist  tellij?  whi  we  shulden  wake  |)us  is 
told  bifore  bi  Mathew,  how  we  witen  never  whanne  |>e 
Lord  come]?.  For  y  witen  never ^  seij?  Crist,  whanne  is  tyme 
for  to  wake ;  as  a  man  pat  we?ite  in  pilgrimage  lefte  his  house, 
and  ^af  power  to  his  servantis  of  ech  work  of  his  hous,  and 
bad  his  porter  wake  wele.  pis  man  ]?at  wente  in  pilgrimage  is 
Jesus  Crist,  bo]?e  God  and  man,  and  lefte  ]?e  goodis  of  his 
Chirche  in  mannis  hondis  after  him.  And  so  aile  ]?e  goodis 
of  ])is  world  ha]?  he  put  in  mennes  hondis,  but  speciali  in 
prelatis  hondis ;  whom  he  biddi]?  kepe  his  Chirche,  and  speciali 
soulis,  ]?at  J?ei  shulden  kepe  and  teche  hem  bi  Goddis  lawe. 
And  si]?  Cristis  Chirche  is  men  ]?at  shal  after  be  saf  in  hevene, 
and  ]?es  men  hav  here  al  ]?is  world,  and  moche  more  J?is  grete 
prelatis,  ]?es  shulden  kepe  alle  Goddis  workes,  and  algatis 
wake  in  charite.  For  ]?ei  shulden  be  fisheris  to  God,  and  open 
and  shette  ]?e  dore  of  hevene  bi  ]?e  keies  ]?at  God  haj?  jovun, 
oonli  to  profite  to  ]?e  Chirche.  And  ])us  it  seme]>  to  manye  J>at 
no  man  shulde  take  prelacie  ne  cure  of  soulis  but  in  greet 
drede,  lest  ]?ei  weren  unable  to  God  and  sich  men  ]?at  shulden 
be  dampned;  and  ]?e  sheep  shulden  be  savyd.  For  ]?anne  her 
care  of  prelacie  doi]?  hem  moche  harm  of  soule,  algatis  3if  ]?ei 
taken  sich  cure  for  wynnynge  or  worldh  worship;  for  God 
5}-ve]?  men  cure  ynou3,  and  speciali  unto  his  prestis,  to  whiche 
he  5yve])  power  and  wit  to  govern  his  Chirche  after  his 
lawe ;  whereto  shulde  men  take  more  care,  si]?  ]?is  is  hard  and 
mouclie  ynow3.     pus   Petre   and   o])er   aposdis  token   care  of 


SERMONS. 


265 


Cristis  Chirche,  and  not  bi  chcsing  of  man  and  jurisdiccioun 
jjat  is  now  usid. 

But  it  is  drede  now  jjat  prestis  kepen  dritt  and  vanite, 
and  to  ))is  is  her  entent;  and  herto  ])ei  shapen  lawis.  For 
])e  lawe  ])at  Crist  haj>  30vun.  and  \q  chesinge  ]jat  he  ha)? 
chosen,  were  ynow3  to  governe  his  Chirche  wi|)OUten  lawis 
now  maad.  And  office  for  to  preche  ]je  gospel,  wij?  few  ojjer 
sacramentis,  weren  service  li3t  and  ynow^  to  siche  preestis 
for  to  kepe ;  and  |)is  diden  Petre  and  Poule  and  ojjer  apostlis 
ever}-chon.  pei  stryven  not  for  mannis  choise,  ne  for  juris- 
diccioun, for  5it  was  not  |)e  Churche  dowid,  for  to  take  j?es 
worldli  goodis,  but  for  to  take  mede  of  Crist  for  good  kepinge 
of  his  Chirche.  And  not  al  oonli  siche  preestis  have  keping  of 
Cristis  Chirche,  but  kingis  and  princis  of  |)is  world,  as  Ysidere 
htn])  witnesse  ^.  And  so  ech  man  |)at  God  jyve]?  power  and 
witt  for  to  knowe  his  wille,  shulden,  after  her  power  and  witt, 
profite  to  Cristis  Churche ;  for  God  wole  ]?is  streidi  at  domes  dai 
of  alle  siche  men.  For  God  ha]?  ^ovun  J^ese  men  siche  power 
to  serve  God  ])us  in  er]?e;  and  to  profite  to  her  modir  holi 
Churche  J)at  ]?ei  shulde  helpe.  And  jjis  bond  is  streite  ynow^, 
al  3if  man  made  noon  ojjer  bond,  for  J)is  bindij?  ech  man  to 
profite  to  his  modir.  What  nede  is  it  to  make  newe  bondis,  Jjc 
which  done  more  harm  |>an  good,  and  man  can  neijjer  kytte  ne 
loose,  but  if  God  telle  hem  speciali. 

And  her/ore   hiddip   Crist   men   wake,    and    speciali    for   j)is 


Kins,rs  and 
princes  are 
keepers  of 
Christ's 
Church  as  well 
as  priests. 


'■»  I  am  again  indebted  to  the  kind- 
ness of  Professor  Stubbs  for  point- 
ing out  to  me  the  curious  passage  to 
which  the  text  probably  refers.  It 
is  in  the  Senteriiiae  of  Isidore,  Bishop 
of  Seville,  lib.  iii.  cap.  li,  and  is  so 
interesting  in  itself,  that  I  quote  it 
at  some  length  : — '  Principes  seculi 
nonnunquam  intra  Ecclesiam  po- 
testatis  adeptae  culmina  tenent :  ut 
per  eandem  "potestatem  disciplinam 
Ecclesiasticammuniant.  Ceterum  in- 
tra Ecclesiam  potestates  necessariae 
non  essent,  nisi  ut,  quod  non  prae- 
valet  sacerdos  efficere  per  doctrinae 
sermonem,  potestas  hoc  imperet  per 
disciplinae  terrorem.  Saepe  per  reg- 
num  terrenum  celeste  regnum   pro- 


ficit,  ut  qui  intra  Ecclesiam  positi 
contra  fidem  et  disciplinam  Ecclesiae 
agunt,  rigore  principum  conteran- 
tur  ;  ipsamque  disciplinam  quam  Ec- 
clesiae humilitas  exercere  non  prae- 
valet,  cervicibus  superborum  potestas 
principalis  imponat ;  et  ut  venera- 
tionem  mereatur,  virtute  potestatis 
impertiat.  —  Cognoscant  principes 
saecuii  Deo  debere  se  rationem  red- 
dere  propter  Ecclesiam,  quam  a 
Christo  tuendam  suscipiunt.  Nam, 
sive  augeatur  pax  et  disciplina  Ec- 
clesiae per  fideles  principes,  sive  sol- 
vatur ;  ille  ab  eis  rationem  exiget, 
qui  eorum  potestati  suam  Ecclesiam 
credidit.' 


266 


WFCLIF'S 


Christ's  ex- 
ceeding love 
for  his  Church. 


cause  '.—/or  J?ei  witen  not  whanm  pe  lord  of  pis  house  shal 
come,  in  tyme  of  mennis  de]),  ne  in  tyme  of  his  laste 
dome.  And  ))anne  he  shal  speke  in  ]?is  cause  moost  sharpli 
of  alle  ojjer.  For  ]>is  cause  he  chargi)?  moost;  si]?  he 
lovej?  more  his  Chirche  ]?an  ony  persone  J>erof,  and  bad  alle 
to  worshipe  ]?is  modir  bo]?e  in  ]?e  olde  lawe  and  in  \q  newe. 
And,  for  God  shal  come  privyli  to  ])es  two  jugementis  at  un- 
knowinge  of  men,  jjerfore  he  is  seid  to  come  onpe  ny-i^t.  A  nyjt 
is  partid  in  foure  houres ;  as  evenynge  and  mydny^t,  cockis  crow- 
inge  and  morewnynge ;  and  alle  J>es  houres  ben  unknowun.  For 
if  we  departe  our  lif  to  our  dej)  in  foure  houris,  or  tyme  to  Jjc 
laste  dome  in  four  houris,  evene  to  hemsilf,  we  witen  never 
how  ny3  or  ferre  is  ]?e  comynge  of  jjis  Lord.  And  algatis,  5if 
we  wole  be  saved,  we  moten  waken  fro  synne,  so  ]?at  we  be  not 
foundun  Jeanne  on  deed  sleep.  For  \q  trumpe  shal  waken  us, 
ouJ>er  to  blisse  or  to  peyne.  And  |?is  Lord  shal  dampne  alle  )>o 
)>at  he  shal  jjanne  fynde  sleping ;  for  ech  man  Jjat  shal  be  saved 
shal  be  clene  at  J?e  dai  of  dome.  And  ])us  Crist  speki]?  generali, 
to  printe  jjis  love  in  alle  mennis  hertis;  pai  ping  pat  Y  seie  to 
y)u,  Y  seie  to  alle, — wake  y. 


pE  Gospel  of  oon  Confessor  and  Doctour. 


[SERMON     LXXX.] 


The  salt  of 
the  earth. 


Vos  estis^  sal  terre. — Matt.  v.  [13.] 

pis  gospel  is  seid  of  Crist,  as  it  semej>  to  many  men,  to  alle 
Jjo  J>at  he  3yve])  witt  to  profile  to  his  Churche.  But  it  is  seid 
speciali  to  bishopis,  and  to  confessouris,  and  to  techeris  of 
Goddis  lawe,  for  to  alle  |)es  God  3yve|>  salt.  And  Crist  telli]? 
to  alle  siche  what  office  jjat  |?ei  shal  have,  and  whanne  J^ei  faile 
in  her  office,  and  what  wise  ]>ei  shal  be  punished.  First  sei]) 
Crist  to  l^es  servantis  :  y  ben  salt  of  pe  erpe.  And  yf  pe  salt 
vanishe  awey,  in  what  ping  shal  pe  erpe  be  saltid?  ^is  salt  is  ?iot 
worp  after  but  to  be  casten  out  and  be  defoulid  of  vien,  jjat  shulden 


^  So  E ;    Vos  qui  estis,  A. 


SERMONS. 

take  hede  to  t>is  salt,  pis  salt  of  J)e  erjje  ben  techeris  ]>e  whiche 
bi  ]>e  lawe  of  Crist  speken  sharpli  to  men,  and  tellen  hem  |jer 
defautis.  pis  \e\  done  to  er]jeli  men  whanne  God  rubbij)  )?y 
hem  his  lawe.  We  shal  first  wite  ]?e  kynde  of  salt,  and  si]) 
what  properties  it  haj>.  And  bi  })is  mai  we  wite  where  men 
)>at  comen  as  apostlis  done  ])e  office  of  her  stat,  or  ellis  jjei 
failen  of  her  office.  Clerkis  seien  jjat  salt  is  maad  of  gravel 
and  of  water,  wi|)  hete  of  |>e  sonne  or  of  fier,  and  maad  hard 
wi]>  blast  of  |)e  wynd.  And  by  Aristotlis  reule  it  is  dissolved 
bi  ]?e  contrarie  ».  And  so  cold  ])ing  and  moist  dissolvy])  salt, 
si])  hote  })ing  and  drie  maki]?  it  hard,  pes  disciplis  ben  made 
salt,  ])at  sum  tyme  weren  unstable  as  gravel,  bi  ])e  water  of  bap- 
tem,  and  hete  of  charite,  and  wynd  of  \q  Holi  Goost,  to  savore 
men  as  salt  doi]?.  And  J)es  ben  maad  whittere  ]>an  snow  fro 
J>e  blaknes  of  her  synne.  And  kynde  of  water  saddid  in  hem 
bitokenej)  ])e  stable  witt  of  God.  And  ])us,  for  Goddis  lawe 
commandi]?  in  offringe  to  be  devocion  and  hete  of  charite, 
jjerwi])  Goddis  lawe  biddi]),  in  figure  of  })is,  in  ech  offringe  to 
be  salt  offrid.  And  ])us  shulden  doctours  teche  \e  peple  how 
])ei  shulden  lyv  to  God,  and  how  ])ei  shulden  do  here  almes. 
For  5if  coveitouse  men  rubben  to  hem,  ])ei  ben  not  salt  but 
cold  water. 

Many  propirteis  ben  of  salt,  and  to  telle  few  here  is 
ynow3.  O  propirte  of  salt  is  ])at  it  maki]?  fleish  drie  and 
kepi])  it  fro  rotting  and  fro  stinkinge  and  fro  wormes.  So 
prestis,  bi  Goddis  wordis,  shulden  have  hem  to  fleishli  men. 
pei  shulden  drie  hem  from  lecherie,  and  kepe  hem  from  yvel 
conscience,  and  fro  stynking  of  synne,  and  ])anne  \e.\  hav 
])e  kynde  of  salt.  And  ])us  salt  maki]?  mete  savory,  and  salt 
maki])  J)e  er|)e  bareyne,  and  salt  helij)  fleishli  woundis  whanne 
it  is  stoppid  in  hem.  Bi  J)es  ])re  propirtees  of  salt  shulden 
doctours  worchen  in  fleishli  men,  and  avoide  hem  fro  ivel 
workis,  and  make  hem  bareyne  fro  fleishli  dedis.  And  J)ei 
shulden  savore  Goddis  wordis,  and  declare  hem  bi  resoun, 
and  pronounce  hem  to  ])e  peple,  as  ])es  wordis  wolden  plese 
to  hem.     And  ])us  depe  woundis  in  man  ])at  weren  groundid 


267 


The  compo- 
sition of  salt. 


The  properties 
of  salt. 


^  ovhtv  5oKH  dfjn  TO.  evavria  lTnh^x(a9ai.     Categ.  6,   18;  compare  Topi- 
corum,  ii.  7,  4. 


268 


WFCLIF'S 


I  Kings  ii.  26. 


Col  iv.  6. 


Wealth  the 
cause  of  the 
corruption  of 
the  clergy. 


Matt.  xxiv.  12. 


Light  and  its 
properties. 


in  old  synne  shulden  be  heelid  bi  virtue  of  God.  And  ]?anne 
men  kepten  ]?e  kynde  of  salt,  and  failing  in  ony  of  |>es  wolde 
make  failinge  in  oure  salt. 

And  ])us  mai  men  wite  wher  bishopis  or  ojjer  prechours  to 
j?e  peple  fallen  in  ])is  kynde  of  salt,  or  ellis  done  treuli  her 
office.  Crist  techi]?  J?at  3if  J>ei  faillen  j>ei  shal  be  cast  out,  and 
defoulid  of  men,  and  to  |>es  two  ben  jjei  worjji.  And  J?is  shal 
be  at  ]?e  last  dome,  whanne  J)ese  false  men  shal  be  cast  out 
into  ]?e  fier  of  helle  and  to  be  defoulid  of  many  men.  But,  as 
many  jjenken,  sich  men  shulden  be  punishid  here,  and  be  put 
out  of  her  office  and  be  defoulid  of  o]>er  men.  pus  ])e  wise  kyng 
Salomon  tretede  ]je  hi3e  preest  of  his  fadir.  For  si]?  lordis 
shulden  reule  Cristis  Chirche,  and  |)es  don  so  moche  harm 
jjerto,  a  greet  charite  were  it  in  lordis  to  put  doun  ])es  Goddis 
enemyes,  and  bi  forme  of  Goddis  lawe  to  maken  hem  serve 
in  her  office.  And  ]?is  is  oon  ])e  moste  defaute  ]jat  rengne]) 
now  in  ]>e  Chirche.  pese  prelaLis  ])at  shulden  be  salt  and 
make  Goddis  lawe  savory  —  for,  as  Seint  Poul  techij),  oure 
word  shulde  be  savorid  wi|>  salt — |)ei  ben  now  fresh  broteP 
and  stinkinge,  and  tm-nid  al  fro  ])e  kynde  of  salt,  and  wij) 
stinkinge  wordis  and  lawe  ])ei  maken  Goddis  lawe  unsavery. 
And  goodis  put  in  preestis  possessioun  is  rote  of  al  ]?is  synne  ; 
for  |)ei  wolden  ellis  be  stable  as  salt  and  savoren  her  word  and 
stonde  ]?erbi,  and  suffre  for  Goddis  lawe  dej?,  and  distrie  )>e 
fendis  lawe.  But  now  J>ei  ben  fresh  as  foolis  and  wanten  witt 
and  charite.  And  herfore  ])e  charite  of  many  wexi]?  cold,  as 
Crist  ha]?  told. 

pe  secound  word  of  ]?is  gospel  sei]?  to  J?es  Cristis  disciplis : 
y  ben  li-^i  of  pe  world.  And  foure  propirtees  ben  in  li3t,  ]?at 
shulden  acorde  to  J?ese  techeris;  and  ]?anne  Crist  sei]?  so]> 
of  hem  as  he  dide  of  his  apostlis.  pe  first  propirte  of  li3t 
stondij?  in  ]?is  ])ing,  ]?at  among  bodili  qualitees  li3t  is  more 
spiritual.  ]^e  secounde  propirte  of  li3t  stondi]?  in  ])is  }?ing,  \2X 
among  bodili  formes  li3t  is  moost  general,  for  it  bringi]?  for]? 
alle  ])ing  |?at  growe]?  here  in  er])e.  pe  ])ridde  propirte  of  li3t 
stondij?  in  ]>is,  ]?at  in  al  his  worchinge  it  worchi]>  bi  ordre ;  for 


SERMONS, 


269 


reule  of  |>e  ^  hi5e  kynd  ledij)  li3t  ever,  pe  four|>  propirte  of  li3t 
stondi})  in  |^is,  j^at  among  oj^er  qualitees  it  conforti})  more  man ; 
for  a  man  kyndeli  hidousij?  derknesse  and  is  gladid  bi  li^t  as 
oure  witt  telli}>.  As  anentis  ]?e  firste  propirte  prelatis  shukle 
be  spiritual,  and  hoklen  hem  paied  of  Htil  bodiU  goodis  ;  for 
so  dide  Crist  and  Baptist  and  o]>er  apostUs ;  but  now  ]jei  axen 
worldH  fare  in  fode  and  aray.  As  anentis  ))e  secounde  pro- 
pirtee,  prelatis  shulden  be  comun  and  profite  to  alle  men,  and 
acorde  wij?  hem  in  goode,  and  be  to  alle  alle  ]jingis,  as  Seint 
Poul  was.  For  he  shulde  grutche  a^ens  nou5t  but  p»at  J>at 
smacchij?  synne.  After  |?e  Jsridde  propirte  prelatis  shuldep 
worche  wiseli,  now  prechinge,  now  preiynge,  now  wel  lyvynge. 
And  what  liif  ever  \e\  lyveden  shulde  ^  profite  to  ]?e  Chirche, 
and  wher  \e\  my5ten  more  profite,  more  |)ei  shulden  worche. 
After  ]?e  fourj^e  propirte  a  prelat  shulde  5yve  confort  to  lyve 
after  Crist,  and  fle  derkenes  of  synne,  and  nevere  speke  of  peyne 
but  for  ]jis  entent,  to  make  men  fle  synne  and  5yve  hem  to 
virtues.  And  al  |)e  lif  of  prelatis  shulde  sowne  counfort  to  \t 
peple.  And  shordi,  no})ing  falli|j  to  \q  reule  of  preestis  Jjat  it 
ne  is  ensamplid  in  propirtees  of  li^t.  Li3t  worchi]?  redili,  and 
bojje  in  fair  and  in  foule,  and  takij?  not  but  beyng  of  J)e  place 
to  which  it  profitij).  And  jjus  shulde  prestis  be  li3t  of  ]?is  world, 
and  gendre  witt  and  charite  among  men  |?at  |>ei  delen  wijj. 

pe  ]jridde  tyme  lickene])  Crist  his  clerkes  to  a  cite,  and  sei]), 
J?at  it  may  fiot  be  hid  whanne  it  is  sett  on  a  hill.  Prelatis  shulde 
be  a  citee  and  take  fleying  of  \(t  contre  whanne  \t\  ben  pur- 
sued of  her  goostli  enemyes.  Li^t  and  al  maner  of  fode  shulde 
jjis  cite  hav,  Jjat  ^if  it  failide  in  ]je  contre  ])ere  shulden  men 
fynde  it.  Al  maner  of  marchaundise  shulde  it  have  to  selle, 
and  store  J>e  contre  wi|?outen  ony  charging;  for  goostli  j^ing 
encresij)  w^hanne  it  is  more  usid.  And  so  as  Ysaye  techij>,  \€\ 
shulden  not  chaff'ere  wi]>  moneie ;  but  as  \€\  token  freeli  of 
God  so  shulden  ))ei  3yve  freeh.  This  cite  shulde  be  sett  upon 
an  hill,  |)e  which  hii  is  Jesus  Crist,  }>at  is  hied  over  o])er  hillis  as 
Ysay  telli]>.  For  Crist  is  fondement  and  hill  and  dore  bi  many 
resouns.  And  no  man  shulde  take  ]?is  state  but  in  virtu  of 
Crist,  lest  he  be  a  smoky  hill,  wyndi,  and  of  yvel  wedris. 

'  om.  E.  2  So  E ;  shulden,  A. 


The  clergy 
should  be  the 
city  set  on 
a  hill. 


Is.  1 


270 


WFCLIF'S 


And  like  the 
candle  set  on 
a  candlestick. 


pe  four]?e  liknesse  of  Crist  is  of  a  li^t  lanterne  pat  vwt  putte 
on  a  candehticke  in  a  derk  hous,  pat  men  pat  comen  in  see  soone 
li'^t.  And,  for  sich  prelatis  ben  not  li^t  in  kynde,  Jjerfore  )?ei 
ben  likned  of  Crist  to  a  lanterne;  and  wyndis  of  ]?is  world 
shulden  not  quenche  her  li3t.  pe  candilsticke  )>at  ])ei  ben  inne 
shulde  be  Cristis  lawe.  And  so,  ^if  a  prelate  implie  him  wi|> 
seculer  nedis,  he  crepi}?  undir  a  bushel  and  failij)  of  his  li^tyng. 
pz>  hous  is  holi  Chirche,  to  which  prelatis  shulde  profite 
wijjouten  envie  for  taking  of  her  li3t.  And  herfore  biddi]?  Crist 
to  his  disciplis, /<2/  her  li-^t  shal  shyne  in  presence  0/  men,  pat  pet 
see  her  goode  workes,  and  so  panke  God  of  hevene.  And  here 
mai  we  see  how  dowing  of  |?e  Chirche  is  not  tau3t  of  Crist, 
but  evene  ]je  contrarie  of  it.  For  bi  |>is  prestis  ben  hid  under 
jje  bushel,  and  ]?e  peple  see|?  not  |?er  postlis  workes,  but  workes 
of  )?e  world.  And  ]?ei  glorifie  not  God  bi  hem,  but  preisen 
J?e  emperour.  And  wise  men  holden  him  a  fool,  for  he  derkide 
])us  Jje  Chirche.  And,  for  men  my3ten  seien  |>at  Crist  cam  to 
unbinde  ]je  lawe,  and  so  office  of  his  preestis  shulden  chaunge 
fro  |>e  olde  lawe,  as  Anticristis  prestis  serven  now  to  ]?e  world, — 
herfore  seij)  Crist,  pat  men  shulden  not  gesse  pat  he  cam  to  louse 
pe  lawe,  hut  for  to  fulfille  it.  And  so  as  preestis  in  ]>e  olde 
lawe  weren  bisee  aboute  her  bestis,  so  prestis  in  Cristis  lawe 
shulden  be  more  spiritual,  and  li3tne  folk  bi  ]>e  gospel,  and 
bicome  profetis.  But  |)e  fend  haj?  turned  |?is  work  al  to  worldli 
liif,  al3if  disciplis  of  Jsis  worlde  shulden  have  here  her  blisse. 
And  for  filling  of  ]?is  law  Crist  seij?  J)us:  Sopeli,  Y  seie  to  ^ou, 
til  pat  hevene  and  erpe  passe  aweie,  an  i  ne  a  title  shal  not  passe  fro 
pe  lawe  bifore  alle  pingis  ben  doone.  And  J>is  word  of  Crist  is 
a3ens  lawe  of  Anticrist,  for  Crist  speki|)  here  of  ]?e  old  lawe 
of  God,  and  wole  \2X,  as  longe  tyme  as  hevene  %o\\  aboute, 
and  peple  dwelli})  here  in  er)?e  by  chaunging  of  men,  Jje  leste 
mandement  of  God,  [is]  ^  undirstonden  bi  leste  lettre  ^  ne  ]?e 
leste  counseil,  or  ]?e  witt  of  ceremonie,  shall  not  passe  fro 
Goddis  lawe  til  J)e  dai  of  dome  come.  For  al3if  Anticrist  have 
brou3t  a  lawe  jjat  letti])  |?e  use  ^  of  Goddis  lawe,  3it  jje  treujje 

'  om.  E  ;  rightly.  ^  So  E  ;  uss,  A. 

a  Yodh,  or  iota,  the  smallest  letter  in  the  Hebrew  alphabet. 


SERMONS. 

of  Goddis  lawe  and  j)e  dette  to  usen  it  lasti})  evermore  and 
bindijj  men  ful  harde.  And  it  is  not  li^t  to  unbinde  oon  of 
Goddis  heestis  ;  for  Crist  biheti)?  here ;  \^al  ivho  ever  doip  pus 
he  shal  be  clepid  teste  in  pis  CJiirche  wanderinge^  si)?  |)e  Chirche 
above  jugi]?  him  in  ]?is  Chirche  and  not  of  j?e  Chirche,  but  to 
be  dampned  in  helle.  And  ]?is  cleping  of  )je  Chirche  above 
mut  nedelingis  stonde ;  but  defending  and  teching  of  ]?e  lawe 
of  God  makij)  a  man  clepid  of  him  grete  in  ^e  blisse  of 
hevene. 


1^71 


Of  oon  Confessour  and  Abbot. 


[SERMON      LXXXL] 

Nemo  accendit  tucernam. — Luc.  xi.  [33.] 

pis  gospel  techi]>  how  ech  confessour  shulde  kepe  him,  and 
speciali  abotis  and  J>es  newe  religiouse.  But,  as  it  seme]?  to 
juste  men,  Crist  tellij?  litil  bi  ])es  ordris,  but  telli|)  ech  man  of 
his  Chirche  how  he^  shal  profite  Jjerto,  and  how  he  shal  kepe 
himself  in  state  of  salvacioun.  First  speki]?  Crist  in  figuratife 
speche,  and  sei]?  ])at,  710  man  ti'^tip  a  tanterne  in  derknesse,  and 
puttip  it  in  oon  of  ])es  two  infamous-  places;  neper  in  hid ptace^ 
ne  undir  a  bushel.  Ech  man  shulde  be  a  lanterne  li3tid  of  God. 
pe  bodi  of  ])is  lanterne  is  mannis  bodi ;  J>e  homes  of  ]?is  lan- 
terne ben  spiritis  in  man,  and  ]?e  remanent  of  his  bodi,  as  fleish 
and  boon,  ben  oj^er  tres'*  in  which  |)is  horn  is  picchid.  pe  li3t 
in  ])is  lanterne  is  mannis  soule,  and  li3tnynge  wi])innefor])  is 
witt  \2X  God  5eve]?  man.  pat  man  putti]?  his  lanterne  in  hidd 
place  or  undir  a  bushel,  ]?at  lyve|)  in  worldli  bisynes  and  not 
profite]?  to  ]?e  Chirche.  For  God  ha]?  jovun  him  soule  and 
witt,  to  li3t  men  here  in  er]?e  ]?at  ben  in  derknes  of  synne,  as 
ech  man  shulde  h^te  to  ojiere ;  for  ech  man  ha]?  sum  knowing 
)>at  failij)  to  ano]?er  man;  and  so  ech  man  shulde  be  lanterne 
to  li3tne  sum  men  of  Goddis  hous;   and  herfore  3eve]?  God 


How  Christian 
men  are  to 
keep  them- 
selves in  the 
state  of  sal- 
vation. 


^  So  E ;  we,  A. 


■^  famous,  E 


placis,  E. 


*  trees,  E. 


272 


WFCLIF'S 


Apoc.  i.  20. 

The  religious 
inutility  of 
cloistered 
orders. 


The  single 
eye. 


1  Cor.  xiii.  5. 


i  ]>\s  lijt  to  li3te  sum  men  in  J>is  world.  And  j?anne  J>e  li^t  failij? 
in  J?is  lanterne  whanne  jje  man  is  deed  in  bodi.  And  5if  he  be 
deed  in  good  workes  ])is  lanterne  is  deed  in  a  man.  But  ri5t 
as  lanterne  wanti|>  of  himsilf  li^t  to  shyne  wi|?inne  or  wij)0ut, 
so  mannis  bodi  wanti]?  of  himsilf  li^t  of  liif  and  of  witt. 

And  so  God  biddi]?  ]jis  lanterne  to  be  put  07i  hye  on  a  candil- 
sticke  lo  '^eve  men  li'^t  in  Goddis  hous,  and  algatis  to  li^t  ]jis  hous. 
And  so  |)is  candilsticke  may  be  state  ]?at  God  approve])  to  Jjis  ende, 
as  sevene  candilstickis  of  gold  ben  sevene  statis  of  bishopis. 
And,  as  many  men  ]?enken,  alle  ]?es  newe  religious  ben  hid  bi 
mannis  ordenaunce  to  bere  li^t  to  Cristis  Chirche ;  for  ^if  a 
man  be  closid  in  a  cloistre,  what  profiti]?  he,  bi  Cristis  orde- 
nance,  to  make  li5t  to  his  bro]>er  ])at  feli]?  not  of  his  profit  ? 
And  |)us  closing  of  jjes  cloistres,  or  hi^e  housis,  ])at  men  hav 
foundun,  is  biside  Cristis  lawe,  foundun  of  prince  of  |>is  er]je. 
And  so  alle  J>es  ben  yvel  hid  fro  profit  of  holi  Chirche. 

And  ]?us  speki])  Crist  generali  to  Cristen  men,  and  sei]),  \)e 
lanterne  of  pi  bodi  is  pin  iy.  And  ]?at  is  on  double  manere;  for 
sum  men  hav  a  simple  iy,  a7td pat  eiy  li^tip  al  pe  bodi ;  andyf 
pifi  eye  be  wayward,  '^he,  pi  bodi  shal  be  derk.  Here  is  ]>e  lanterne 
clepid,  ])e  li^t  ])at  shulde  be  in  ]?is  lanterne;  for  J)is  li3t  is  |>e 
ende  wherfore  God  ha}?  maad  ))is  lanterne.  And  ^if  ]>is  li3t  be 
of  rijt  entent  Jeanne  is  ])in  i5e  simple ;  as  men  ]?at  wolen  profite 
to  Cristis  Chirche,  after  Goddis  lawe,  hav  a  ri^t  ei^e  and  a 
simple,  even  after  Goddis  wille.  And  so  a  simple  |)ing  is  seid 
wijjouten  folding  fro  ])is  ri^t.  And  ]?e  lijt  of  charite  shyne]?  in 
siche  a  lanterne ;  for  as  Poul  sei}? : — Charite  seki])  not  his  owne 
wynnyng,  but  how  it  my^te  best  profite  to  many  men  of  ])e 
Chirche.  But  he  ha]?  a  blynd  eyje  turned  aweyward  from 
God  })at  seki])  more  his  owne  wynnyng  ]jan  profit  of  Cristis 
Chirche ;  and  in  ]jis  angle  of  ])is  eije  is  derknesse  fro  charite. 
And  |?es  men  wanten  li^t  of  God,  ])at  shulden  shyne  ri^tli  bi 
hem.  And  but  jif  Goddis  grace  worche  bi  hem,  ]?ei  ben  derke 
as  to  merite.  And  so  sei])  Crist,  Jjat  simple  i^e  maki]?  al  \t 
bodi  shynyng,  and  i^e  \2X  is  turned  amys  maki]?  ])e  bodi  al  derk. 
And  })e  bodi  may  be  clepid  ]?e  multitude  of  mannis  workes,  or 
mannis  liif,  ])at  is  medeful  or  sinful  bi  sich  ententis ;  for  bi  Jjes 
man  ha])  charite  or  wanti]?  charite  in  his  workes.     And  herby 

WYCLIF. 


SERMONS. 


"-n 


mannis  lyf  is  medeful  or  dampnable  bi  Goddis  lawe.  And  jjus 
\q  charite  of  Crist  stretchi])  ri3di  wi)>outen  angle,  to  profit  of 
Cristis  Chirche,  and  not  to  profit  of  him  silf.  And  ]?us  Poul 
sou^te  many  mennis  profit,  and  not  his  owne  worldli  wyn- 
nyng;  for  sich  entent  is  algatis  derk,  and  lijt  of  God  goij? 
not  ]jerby. 

And  herfore  biddi|>  Crist  to  us  pat  we  shiilde  see  pat  l^t  ift  us 
be  not  derknesse,  bi  y vel  entent ;  for  jjanne  it  is  an  y\'el  li^t.  No 
man  is  here  in  erjje  ))at  ne  God  5eveJ?  him  sum  li^t :  as  sum 
knowing  and  sum  entent  in  coveiting  of  sum  good.  And  ^if 
|)is  lijt  be  ri^tful,  wij^outen  angle  of  crokidnesse,  |?anne  Goddis 
grace  shyne]>  wi]?  him,  and  eUis  his  lijt  is  derknesse ;  for  sich 
crokidnesse  bringi])  a^en  derknesse  of  mannis  liif.  And  so,  yf 
al  pi  hodi  be  al  shynynge,  havynge  noo  part  of  derknesse,  it  shal 
he  shynyng  al,  and  it  shal  li^t7ie  pee  as  a  lanterne  of  shynyng. 
pes  wordis  semen  superflu  and  seid  of  Crist  wi])Outen  witt. 
But  it  is  ajens  bileve  to  trowe  |>us  of  Cristis  wordis ;  and  jjer- 
fore  we  shal  undirstonde  Jjat  ))er  ben  two  goodnessis  in  workes ; 
goodnesse  in  kynde  of  workes,  and  goodnesse  in  vertues.  pe 
firste  mai  be  wi]?outen  ]je  secounde,  but  ]je  secounde  is  \& 
betere ;  as  yS.  a  man  bi  ypocrisie  3yve  good  to  nedi  men,  ])an 
his  5yvyng  is  good  and  his  work  is  ful  of  li^t ;  but  it  ha|)  oonli 
li^t  of  kynde  and  not  li3t  of  vertues.  And  J>is  techi]?  Crist  us : 
\2X  yS.  al  ]?e  bodi  of  oure  workes  be  shynyng  bi  li^t  in  kynde, 
and  hav  noo  part  of  derknesse,  neijjer  in  kynde  ne  in  vertues, 
))anne  it  shal  be  al  lijt  bi  double  li^t  of  kynde  and  vertues. 
And  |)is  secounde  lijt  of  vertues  men  shulden  moche  telle  bi, 
and  fle  derknes  in  vertues,  al  3if  jjei  have  li^t  in  kinde.  For 
God  loki]?  to  ]?is  secounde  li3t,  and  blessi]?  men  in  hevene  \tx- 
fore ;  and  for  j^e  first  li3t  of  kynde  a  man  mai  be  depe  dampned 
in  helle :  as  3if  ]?ou  bi  ypocrisie  do  good  to  ])i  nei5bore,  and 
die  in  |)is  ypocrisie,  \om  shalt  be  depe  dampned  in  helle ;  and 
for  )>is  good  ])at  jjou  didist  jjou  shalt  be  dampned  wijjouten 
ende.  And  3if  ]?ou  ponishe  a  man  of  |je  Chirche,  for  double 
love  jjat  ])0u  hast,  bo])e  to  Jjc  Chirche  and  to  J>is  man,  al  if  jjou 
erre  in  ]jis  man,  supposing  \2X  he  be  yvel,  and  he  be  good  to 
si3t  of  God,  and  God  excusij?  \\  ignoraunce  for  derkness  hid 
to  })ee ;  3it  |jou  maist  be  saif  in  hevene  for  |)is  yvel  werk  in  his 

SERMONS.  T 


1  Cor.  X.  33. 


Objective 
goodness  and 
subjective 
goodness. 


274 


WFC  LIF'S 


Application  to 
the  friars. 


kynde,  and  goodnesse  J)at  it  ha]?  in  vertues*.  And  Jjerfore  loke 
to  J>is  godenesse.  And  )>us  sei]?  Crist :  ])at  5if  ]>\  workes  ben 
alle  ful  of  li5t  of  kynde,  and  ]?ei  have  noo  derkness  of  vertues, 
jjanne  |?ei  shal  be  algatis  li^t,  and  li5ten  ]?ee  as  lanterne  of 
shynyng.  And  ]?us  Jjou  shuldist  ri5te  jji  i3e,  and  al3atis  from 
derknes  of  vertues.  And  5if  }^ou  have  jjes  two  li3tis,  it  makij) 
more  shynyng  to  ]>ee.  But  algatis  have  ]?is  secounde  li3t;  for 
wi|)OUten  it  is  no3t  medeful.  And  herfore  sei]>  Crist  here,  ])at 
]?is  bodi  of  J)i  workes  shal  li3te  jjee  as  a  lanterne  of  shynyng 
bi  Goddis  grace.  And  ]?us,  3if  we  studien  wel,  ])es  wordis  of 
Crist,  J>at  semen  unsavery,  and  rehersid  wi|)Outen  witt,  ben  ful 
of  witt  ])at  men  shulde  knowe ;  si|>  mannis  entente  shulde  be 
reulid  bi  ri3tnes  of  his  vertues,  and  man  shulde  also  be  bisie  to 
done  his  workes  good  in  kynde.  But  ri3tnes  of  ])is  o]?er  entent 
is  algatis  nedeful  to  man,  si]?  mannis  entent  moot  nedis  be 
reulid  bi  })e  lawe  of  God,  Jjat  he  do  bi  charite  alle  hise  workes 
Jjat  he  doi]?.  And  so  blyndenesse  of  J^e  first  li3t  taki}?  man 
in  excusing;  but  blyndnesse  of  })e  secounde  li3t  mai  no  way 
be  excusid.  But  bo])e  J^es  blyndenessis  shulden  be  fled;  sijj 
))e  firste  bringij)  in  ]?e  to]?er. 

And  blyndenes  of  J^es  newe  ordris  maki})  many  men  to  be 
dampned ;  si}?  }?e  state  of  preestis  }>at  Crist  ordeyned  was  li3t 
and  esi  for  to  knowe,  but  })e  fend  marie]?  ^  manye  wi}?  newe 
statis  ]?at  he  brou3t  inne ;  and  he  moovej?  hem  to  speke  a3ens 
}?e  lore  ]?at  Crist  ha]?  tau3t.  And,  for  ])es  derke  wordis  of  Crist 
maken  many  men  to  muse,  men  seken  divers  weies  to  undir- 
stonde  Cristis  wordis : — as  sum  men  seien  ]?at  Crist  techi]?  here, 
]?at  jif  alle  workes  of  })i  liif  be,  at  ]?i  de]?,  shynynge  by  grace, 
J)ei  shal  be  shynyng  after  in  hevene,  and  lijte  })ee  as  a  lanterne 
of  bri^tnes ;  for  men  shal  after  be  brijt  in  hevene,  moche  more 
}?anne  we  wenyn^  here.  How  ever  Crist  undirstood,  we  bileve 
|?es  wordis  ben  so}?,  and  ful  of  resoun  and  witt,  and  knowun  to 
hem  ])at  he  wole  shewe  it. 


^  tnarri\y,  E. 

«  '  In  kynde,'  that  is,  objectively, 
the  persecution  of  an  innocent  man 
is  an  evil  work ;  but  '  in  vertues/  or 
subjectively,  and  by  virtue  of  your 


^  wenen,  E. 

pure  intention,  it  may  be  a  good 
work,  and  may  help  to  make  you 
'  saif  in  hevene.' 


SERMONS. 


^iry 


pE  Gospel  on  feestis  of  many  Gonfessours. 


[SERMON    LXXXIL] 


Sini  hanbivestri praecincti. — Luc.  xii.  [35.] 

pis  gospel  techi]?  alle  men  how  ]jat  ]?ei  shulden  lyve  to  Crist, 
but  speciali  prelatis,  |>at  shulden  be  li3t  to  ]?e  peple.  And  so, 
for  confessours  kepten  ]?is  lore  in  her  hif  bifore  o]?er  men,  ]>er- 
fore  ])e  Chirche  redij?  J)is  gospel  whanne  men  seien  of  con- 
fessouris.  First  Crist  biddi]?  to  his  disciplis,  pat  her  lendis  be 
girdid  bifore,  and  laniernes  brejinynge  in  her  hondis,  as  pei 
shulden  bide  her  Lord  whanne  he  comep  ayn  fro  bridalis.  pes 
lendis  ]>at  Crist  spekij?  of  ben  J>e  fleishli  kynde  joyned  wi]?  \q 
soule.  And  ]jes  lendis  helpen  ])e  spirit  upon  two  maneres ;  and 
for  ])es  two  maneris  |?ei  ben  clepid  lendis.  pis  fleish  serve]?  to 
\q  soule,  suffringe  as  it  shulde  sufFre,  and  doinge  as  it  shulde 
do,  whanne  it  is  tau5t  wel  of  ])e  soule.  And  ])us  sei]?  Poul  ^,  ]>at 
Crist  was  in  Abrahams  lendis.  And  so  Crist  techi]?  here 
chastite,  as  Gregory  sei]?^; — but  not  oonli  chastite  but  alle 
fleishli  vertues.  pes  lendis  ben  girded  bifore,  whanne  man, 
by  discrescioun,  drawi]?  from  his  fleish  |)e  norishment  ])erof; 
or  chastise])  it,  on  o])er  manere,  bifore  it  faUe  in  synne.  Brenn- 
ynge  lanternes  ben  medeful  workes  ])at  men  have  in  her  vertue, 
bi  whiche  \€\  shulden  worche ;  and,  for  ])es  workes  comen  bo])e 
of  bodi  and  of  soule,  ])erfore  \^\  ben  clepid  of  Crist  two 
lanternes,  and  \€\  ben  in  oure  hondis  whanne  we  worchen 
wi])  hem.  For  it  is  not  ynow3  to  kepe  us  fro  synnes,  but  if 
we  worken  gode  workes  bi  })es  two  lanternes. 

But  for  ])es  bridalis,  we  shal  wite  \2X  \€\  ben  taken  on  many 
maneres;  first  for  \q  weddingis  Jjat  Crist  is  joyned  wi])  ])e 
soule ;    after  for   ])e  dweflinge  J>at  Crist  dwelli]?  wi])  }»e  soule ; 


The  saintly 
life. 


The  lord's 
return  from 
the  wedding. 


^  Compare  Hebrews  vii.  10,  Gal.  *>  S.  Greg.  Homilia  xiii. '  Lumbos 
iii.  17.  The  writer  of  the  sermon  enim  praecingimus,  cum  carnis  lux- 
appears  to  have  misunderstood  the  uriamper  continentiam  coarctamus.' 
first  of  these  passages. 

T  2 


276 


WYCLIF'S 


Opening  to 
him. 


The  meaning 
of  the  three 
watches  ; 


and  ])e  jjridde  for  \^  goostli  fode  J)at  soulis  ben  fed  wi]?  Crist 
in  blisse.  And  so  J>ei  ben  ]jree  weddingis  ]jat  Crist  is  weddid 
here ;  first  whanne  he  toke  mankynde,  and  made  it  00  persona 
wi])  him;  after  whanne  he  taki]?  his  Chirche,  and  maki])  it  00 
spouse  wij?  him ;  jje  jjridde  wedding  is  particuler,  whanne 
Crist  taki]?  00  soule  to  him.  And  so  Crist  is  seid  to  turne 
a3en  fro  bridahs  on  two  maneris.  First,  whanne  a  man  is  deed 
\2X  Crist  ha]?  ordeyned  to  come  to  blisse,  Crist  turnej?  a5en  to 
his  soule  from  dwelling  wi]>  \q  Chirche  in  hevene.  But  Crist 
levejj  not  jjis  Chirche,  but  on  new  manere  dwelli]?  wi]?  ]?is  soule. 
But  jjanne  he  must  have  dwelt  bifore,  or  ellis  |)is  soule  cam 
not  bi  ]?is  state.  And  so  we  shulden  be  liche  to  men  ])at 
abiden  ])e  comynge  of  Crist,  in  tyme  of  de]?,  or  ]je  dai  of  dome. 
And  |)is  abiding  shulde  alle  men  marke,  for  }jis  comyng  is 
uncertein,  and  ]>is  tyme  is  perilous ;  si]?  ]?is  drau3t  mot  be  wel 
drawen  5if  oure  liif  shal  ou^te  profite.  And  so  to  }?es  comyngis 
of  Crist  shulde  ech  man  make  him  redi;  si]?  Crist  shal  come 
and  knocke  at  doris,  and  entre  to  hem  ]?at  ben  wakinge,  and 
redi  to  resseyve  Crist  wi]?outen  sleping  in  synne.  And  ]?is 
openyng  shal  be  doon  anoon,  as  li5tnyng  of  sonne  ^  is  in  ]?e  eir. 
And  so  Crist  knocki]?  at  oure  doris  whanne  he  techi}?  us  signes 
of  de}?,  or  signe  of  ]?e  dai  of  dome ;  but  ])e  laste  knockyng  is 
sudeyne.  ^\i  a  man  be  redi  bifore  to  dwellen  wi}?  Crist  wi]?- 
outen  ende,  ])anne  he  opene]?  to  Crist,  si]?  ]?is  openyng  is  redy- 
nesse.  And  ]?us  sei]?  Crist  ful  so]?li,  pat  pes  servauntis  ben  blessid 
whiche,  whanne  pe  Lord  comep,  he  findep  pus  wakinge.  Sopeli, 
V  seie  to  '■i^ou,  pat  pis  Lord  shal  girde  him,  and  viake  hem  sitte  to 
mete,  and  passe  and  mynystre  to  hem.  pe  sitting  to  mete  of 
seintis,  is  confermyng  of  hem  in  blisse ;  ]?e  passing  of  };is  Lord 
bi  hem  is  his  shewing  to  oon  and  o])er.  And  al  5if  ]?is  shewing 
be  togidere,  3it  her  taking  is  divers;  and  her  diversite  is 
signefied  bi  }?is  passing  of  Crist,  pis  service  is  li3t  to  Crist,  for 
it  is  but  Cristis  shewing  of  his  Godhede,  and  his  manhede,  in 
which  seintis  shal  be  fed. 

And  "3,1/ pis  Lord  co??ie  in  pe  secounde  vigile,  and  eke  in  pe  pridde, 
ajidfynde  sich  redynesse  in  pes  servantis,/id  blessid  ben  pes  servantis, 
si}?  )?ei  anoon  ben  blessid  of  God.    pes  }?re  vigiles  ]?at  Crist  telli}? 

'   swine,  E. 


SERMONS. 


'^11 


of  here,  ben  ))re  wakingis  fro  synne,  and  algatis  fro  ]>e  laste  synne 
\2X  is  ])e  worste  yvel  Jjat  mai  be ;  and  so  we  preien  in  J)e  Pater 
noster  God  to  delyvere  us  fro  |>is  yvel.  pes  vigiles  ben  clepid 
}5re,  for  j^e  Holy  Trinite,  for  ]?ou5t  of  resoun  of  him,  shulde  make 
men  to  wake  wel.  And  so  ech  tyme  ])at  man  lyvej?  here  is 
departid  in  |?ree  parties,  and  tyme  to  ]>e  dai  of  dome  is  also  de- 
partid  in  |>ree ;  and,  for  jje  quantite  of  ]?es  j^ree  is  uncertein  to 
man,  })erfore  he  shulde  ever  wake,  and  jjanne  he  waki])  ]?es  jjree 
vigilis.  pe  first  ]?ree  ha]?  ech  seint,  bifore  J?e  soule  go  fro  ])e 
bodi ;  ]?e  toj^er  ]?re  haj)  ]?e  Chirche,  bifore  \q  dai  of  dome  come. 
And  so  unknowing  of  ]>es  tymes,  and  knowinge  how  men 
shulden  ever  wake,  profiti]>  unto  Goddis  children,  as  done 
alle  ]?ingis.  As  Poul  sei]?  ^,  bi  ])at  J>at  we  knowun  not  jje 
quantite  of  ])es  J>re  tymes,  shulden  we  ever  more  be  in  drede 
and  ever  wake  out  of  synne. 

And  l^is  lore  techij)  Crist  in  a  parable  to  his  children, 
pzj  ping  he  seip,  wife  we'^  wel  pat  y/ pe  househonde  wiste 
what  tyme  pe'^  peef  wolde  come,  and  stele  his  goodis,  he 
ivolde  wake  warlt,  and  suffre  not  pis  peef  pus  to  breken  his 
hous,  and  spoylen  him.  It  is  touchid  bifore  ^  how  J?is 
peef  is  j)e  fend,  J>at  doij?  al  his  diligence  to  tempte  man  whanne 
he  shal  die.  For  ech  man  and  a  fend  ben  couplid  togider  in 
a  liste  and  fi5ten  bo])e  ni3t  and  dai,  and  algatis  whanne  ])e  fend 
hopi]>  to  overcome.  And  so  whanne  J)e  ny5t  of  synne  blindi]? 
men  to  knowun  hemsilf,  })anne  is  tyme  to  ]?e  fend  to  fi3te  fastist^ 
wij>  his  make ;  for  ri3t  as  nestis  in  a  sunne  beem  ben  wel  per- 
ceyved  wi]?  fil]?e  of  man,  so  synnes  ben  wel  perceyved  of  a  man 
]>at  is  in  grace,  pis  jjeef  worchi]>  ever  bi  disseitis,  and  fi3ti]> 
blejjeliest  *  on  ny5tis ;  and  in  tyme  of  mannis  de]?  he  enforsi]? 
moost  to  overcome,  for  ]?is  victorie  shal  ever  laste,  on  whejjer 
side  J)at  it  falle.  pis  housebondis  hous  is  his  bodi,  ]?at  his 
soule  is  kept  ynne ;  and  undirmynyng  of  ]>is  hous  mai  be  don 
on  two  maneres.  First,  whanne  jje  fend  supposi])  ]?at  a  man 
shal  die  here,  he  gaderij?  togidere  mannis  spiritis,  and  temptij) 
him  to  mony  synnes,  as  to  ire  and  lecherie,  and  algatis  to  dis- 

^  3^,  E.  2  So  E .  oni.  A.  ^  fast,  E.  *  So  E ;  hlelyerst,  A. 

*  The  passage  referred  to  is  not  in  any  of  the  Pauline  epistles,  but  in 
I  Pet.  i.  17.  ^  See  Sermon  LXXVI,  p.  251. 


and  of  the 
thief. 


278 


WrCLIF'S 


Spiritual  safe- 
guards. 


The  hour  of 
death. 


peire.  But  blesse  we  us  wi))  ]?e  Trinite,  and  j?enken  on  him  in 
J)is  cais ;  and  a^ens  j^e  firste  synne  ])enke  we  mekeli  on  Goddis 
power,  how  God  is  stronger  ))an  ]?e  fend,  and  wi]?outen  him 
mai  we  nou^t  do.  And  sich  ]70U5t  of  J)e  Fadir  of  Hevene 
shulde  overcome  ]je  fend  in  hour  of  de]?.  A3ens  \q  secounde 
synne  of  ]je  fend  we  shulden  Jjenke  on  God  ])e  Sone,  how 
kyndeli  he  is  spouse  to  us,  and  bou3te  us  wi])  his  precious 
blood,  and  how  he  mai  not  parte  fro  us,  but  5if  oure  unkynde- 
nesse  be  in  cause;  how  fair  and  good  a  spouse  is  Crist,  and 
how  foul  is  ]?e  fend ;  and  bi  sich  ])0U3tis  Crist  wolde  5eve  vertue 
to  men  to  overcome  ^e  fend,  whanne  he  tempti]?  man  in  hour 
of  de|>  to  ])enke  on  lecherie.  A5ens  dispeir  we  shulden  |)enke 
on  goodnesse  of  Jje  Holy  Goost,  how  oure  good  God  may  not 
leeve  us,  but  5if  oure  folic  be  in  cause ;  and  3if  we  hav  synned 
nevere  so  moche,  and  nevere  so  longe  have  leien  in  synne, 
axe  we  God  mercy  in  oure  ])0U5te,  and  have  we  sore  we  for  Jiis 
synne,  and  God  is  redi  to  for5eve  it,  how  ever  J>at  preestis 
fallen. —For  })e  fend  may  be  awey  fro  mannis  soule,  but  not 
God ;  and  ]je  mercy  of  God  is  more  ])an  is  envie  of  ]?e  fend, 
and  goodnesse  of  God  is  more  J)an  is  hate  of  ])e  fend.  What 
shulde  move  men  to  dispeire,  si]?  Jjei  may  so  li3tli  be  saif  ? 

And  no|)ing  is  more  in  mannis  power  j^an  is  J)0U3t  of  his  soule, 
but  we  mote  have  alone  drede  to  oure  God  in  ]7is  hour ;  si]?  we 
witen  l^at  olde  synne  may  be  so  hard  jjanne  in  oure  soule,  Jiat 
we  shal  not  be  jjanne  in  power  to  a3enstonde  tempting  of  J>e 
fend.  For  as  a  jerde  mai  growe  so  greet,  and  be  so  stiif  in  his 
streng])e,  ]?at  men  shal  not  wrijje  it,  ]?ou5  J>ei  wolde  never  so 
fayn,  so  synne  may  growe  in  man,  and  be  so  strong  in  tyme 
of  dej>,  ])at  ri3twisnes  of  God  wole  lette  man  to  obeie  Jeanne 
]>us  to  God.  pis  drede  of  God  shulde  we  have,  and  algatis  in 
hour  of  de|) ;  and  ))is  is  a  good  defence  a3ens  |>e  fend  and  dis- 
peir. But  ])is  mote  be  alone  drede,  and  hope  in  J>e  love  of  God; 
how  ]?at  God  ha]?  more  love  ])an  ]>e  fend  ha]?  envye ;  for  Goddis 
love  is  wi])0uten  ende,  but  })is  envie  is  foul  and  feble ;  and  ])is 
envie  mai  not  do  but  in  vertue  of  Goddis  love;  for  love  ])at 
God  love])  ri3twisnesse  maki])  ovcrcomyng  in  ])is  hour.  Lord ! 
si]>  good  God  5eve]>  us  streng})e  to  love  him,  and  to  hope  in 
him,  and  })e  fend  mai  not  lette  to  ]>enke  on  ])is  3ifte  of  God, 


SERMONS. 


279 


what  man  shulde  dispeire  of  God,  in  our  ^  ])at  God  departi}?  \q 
soule  ?  God  suffrij)  j^e  fend  to  have  power  to  haste  a  man  to 
his  dej),  but  gode  God  wole  nevere  suffre  ]jat  ne  man  mai  freH 
J?enke  on  him ;  and  ^if  ])is  power  be  for  barrid  ^  synne  of  man 
is  j?e  cause,  and  resouns  of  ]?e  fend  ben  blindid  in  jjis  matere. 
pe  fend  putti])  to  us  grete  synnes  J?at  we  have  done  in  work 
and  ]?ou5t,  and  for  gretenesse  of  )jes  synnes  Goddis  ri3twisnes 
ha]>  hardid  us.  But  ]jis  foole  shal  wel  wite  how  Jjat  we  wolen 
answere  here.  We  graunte  mekeli  ]?at  we  have  synned  in 
Jjou^t,  and  word,  and  in  dede ;  but  we  wite  ])at  Goddis  grace  is 
moche  more  ])an  al  oure  synne.  And  ]?is  fool  knowij?  not  how 
J?at  God  ha])  mekid  us  now,  for  we  felen  ]?e  grace  of  God,  how 
we  hopen  in  his  goodnesse,  and  sorowen  for  oure  synne.  And 
])is  )>e  fend  knowi]?  not,  but  jit  j^e  fend  argue]?  ]?us  :  algatis  sum 
man  mote  be  dampned ;  but  who  shulde  be  dampned,  but  ])0U, 
})at  ]?us  hast  ben  unkynde  to  God  ?  Here  we  answeren  to  ])e 
fool,  ]?at  he  taki]?  a  ])ing  Jjat  is  so}?,  but  how  can  ])is  fend  prove 
]7at  Goddis  rijt  wole  have  me  dampned .?  si]?  Y  have  hope  in  my 
soule,  ]?at  is  hid  to  ]?e  fend.  And  wel  Y  woot  ]?e  fend  knowi]? 
not  J?is  pryvy  ordenaunce  of  God,  as  he  knewe  not  his  owne 
dampnyng,  how  God  shope  it  to  blis  of  seintis.  But  jit  ]?e  fend 
argue]?  }>at  alle  ]?ingis  ]?at  shal  come  mut  nedis  come  bi  ]?e 
ordenance  of  God,  and  }?us  ]?e  fend  mote  have  of  me  a  glorious 
victorie.  But  here  we  answere  to  ]?is  fend,  and  graunte  him  }?at 
he  taki]? ;  and  so  he  mut  nedis  be  dampned  for  folic  ]?at  he  is 
inne;  for  he  travaili]?  bisili  to  have  victorie  of  us,  but  jit  we 
hopen  J?at  he  shal  faile,  bi  sparclis  of  grace  ]?at  we  felen.  And 
w^el  we  witen  as  bileve,  jif  ]?e  fend  overcome  us,  it  shal  not  be 
glorious  to  him,  but  more  to  his  dampnacioun;  for  ever  ]?e 
more  harm  ]?at  he  doi}?,  ever  ]?e  worse  shal  he  be  punishid. 
And  so  men  ]?at  shal  be  dampned  wi]?  him  shal  be  ever  peyne- 
ful  to  him,  for  he  shal  ever  for]>inken  ]?at  he  dide  so  myche 
yvel.  And  so  ]?e  fend,  concludid  in  insolible,  shal  ever  for}?inke 
and  like  togidere.  What  man  ]?at  knowi]?  ]?is  foolis  castis 
shulde  be  overcomen  wi}?  })is  fend,  si]>  oure  good  God  is  so 
nyje,  and  his  mercy  is  so  greet,  and  folic  of  }?is  proude  fend 
in  bostinge  of  ]?ingis  }?at  he  knowi]?  not  is  so  stynkinge  bifore 
God,  and  so  knowun  to  Goddis  children .? 

^  houre,  E.  ^  forharrid,  E. 


Reflections 

against 

despair. 


28o 


WFCLIF'S 


J?E  Gospel  on  feestis  of  many  Confessours. 


The  mission  of 
the  Apostles 
and  their 
successors. 


[SERMON     LXXXIII.] 

Mi  sit  Jesus  duodecim  discipulos. — Matt.  x.  [5.] 

pis  gospel  telli]?  how  preestis  shulden  traveile  in  Goddis 
cause,  and  how  kynde  Jjat  \€\  shulden  be  bo]je  to  God  and 
to  ]?e  peple.  For  wordis  seid  to  Cristis  disciplis  shulden  teche 
us  preestis  how  we  shulden  do,  si]?  we  shulden  be  vikeris  of 
hem ;  and  ellis  Crist  bindi]?  us  bi  no  lore.  And  ]?us  a  prest 
dampne))  himsilf  ]?at  sei|>  J^at  Crist  spekij?  not  here  to  him ; 
for  he  sei])  in  a  maner  ])at  he  is  j^e  fendis  child.  And  for  his 
unkyndnes  Crist  wolde  not  bidde  him  do  Goddis  work,  but 
do  as  yvel  as  he  mai;  and  Crist  ))erafter  shal  dampne  him; 
and  ]>is  man  beri})  upon  him  mater  of  his  dispeiring.  And  ])is 
shulde  moove  prestis  alle  to  fille  ])e  wordis  ]?at  Crist  bad ;  for 
if  ]?ei  dispisen  ]jes  wordis,  ]?ei  mai  dispeire  as  fendis  children. 
And  ]5us  bojje  bishopis  and  freris  beren  her  dispeir  wij>  hem, 
and  jjis  will  not  be  shaken  of,  but  5if  ]?ei  leven  her  olde  synne, 
and  suen  J>e  love  of  Crist  jjat  he  techij?  in  ])is  gospel. 

pis  gospel  telli]?  how,  Jesus  sente  hise  twelve  disciplis^  and 
comandide  hem  :  Go  y  not  out  a5ens  my  bidding  in  to  weie  of 
hepene  men,  and  entre  y  not  into  citees,  |)e  which  ben  oj  Sama- 
ritans, pese  wordis  moten  be  wel  undirstondun  to  jje  witt 
))at  God  speki]?  hem;  for  Crist  himsilve  wente  ofte  tymes  to 
Gentilis  and  Samaritans ;  and  he  biddi])  at  his  departing  ])at 
]jei  shulden  teche  alle  folk ;  and  ])us  |)es  Gentile  folk  weren 
turned,  many  moo  ]?an  weren  of  Jewis.  And  herfore  seien 
holi  men  })at  Crist  tau5te  ordre  in  preching,  how  men  shulde 
first  go  to  her  kyn,  and  first  moove  hem  to  turne  to  God ;  and 
3if  God  telde  hem  unablite^  of  her  kyn,  ])ei  shulden  speke  to 
o|)er.  And  to  |>is  entente  dide  Crist,  and  tau^te  hise  apostlis  to 
do.     And  so  men  seien  comunli  j^at  Crist  here  forbed  goinge 

'  \>e  inablite,  E. 


SERMONS. 


281 


in  to  I'C  weie  of  Gentile  folk ;  but  he  forbed  not  to  go  to  hem .  I 
but  Crist  biddij?  rajs>cr  go  to  J^e  sheep  pat perischiden^  of  pe  hous 
of  Israel.  And  it  seme])  ]?at  ])es  sheep  })en  \q  men  j)at  shal  be 
saif ;  for  all  })es  ben  of  Goddis  hous,  and  men  ]?at  seen  God  in 
hevene.  And  alle  J)es  weren  in  point  to  perishe  bifore  Cristis 
treu]?e  was  teld  to  hem.  To  j)es  folk  shulden  men  preche ;  for 
Cristis  word  wole  florishe  in  hem,  and  mede  and  worship  is  in 
hevene  to  men  ]>at  prechen  to  ]?is  peple.  Crist  had  hem  go  and 
preche  pis : — pat  pe  kingdom  of  hevene  shulde  neiy.  And  J)is  is 
so]?;  for  Crist  shal  come  to  his  laste  jugement,  and  rekene 
sharpli  wi]>  hise,  bo|)  wi]?  servauntis  good  and  yvele.  And  Crist 
is  ofte  clepid  in  |?e  gospel  |?e  kingedom  of  hevene,  for  he  is 
heed.  And  J^is  bileve,  among  ojjer,  shulde  meve  men  to  turne 
to  Crist.  For  love  of  ]?is  gode  Lord  and  drede  of  his  ponish- 
inge  shulde  be  two  sporis  to  Cristene  men  for  to  drawe  in 
Cristis  30k;  but  wanting  of  bileve  maki]?  many  men  dolle^ 
in  ]?is. 

And  fyve  maneres  enjoyne]?  Crist  to  his  prechours  for  to 
kepe.  First,  ]?at  pei  shal  hele  sike  men,  o]?er  of  bodili  sykenesse, 
or  jjerwi]?  of  goostli  sekenesse.  Bo]?e  ]?es  hadde  Cristis  apostlis, 
but  we  have  unne|>e  )?e  toon ;  for  we  have  greet  grace  of  God 
^if  we  heele  men  fro  synne.  And  we  failen  in  jjis  craft  whanne 
we  bosten  of  oure  power,  and  leven  Cristis  lore,  or  ^  to  lyve  or 
to  preche.  pe  secound  manere  Jjat  we  shulden  have  shulde  be, 
to  reisen  up  deed  men;  and  ]?is  mai  be  on  two  maneris.  As  it 
was  seid  of  |>e  firste,  algatis  we  shulden  traveile  to  reise  up  men 
deed  bi  synne ;  for  }>is  is  more  J^an  ))e  firste,  and  eende  wher- 
fore  J>e  firste  is  good.  And  jif  we  don  oure  diligence  j^at  God 
haj?  50vun  us  power  to,  we  mai  lijtli  do  ]?es  two ;  for  synne  is 
])icke  sowen  in  londe.  pe  |)ridde  cure  ]>at  we  shulden  do,  we 
shulden  hele  leprouse  vien.  And  si]?  lepre  is  heresie,  a  synne 
bi  J)e  whiche  men  ben  defoulid,  we  have  power  to  do  ]?is  wondir, 
jif  we  worchen  after  oure  power;  and  00  lepre  left  unheeUd 
mai  enblemisshe  many  folk.  And  ]?us  we  shulden  be  diligent 
to  worche  ]?is  wondir  in  ]je  Chirche ;  for  o  leprous  mai  foule 
a  flok,  and  a  flok  mai  foule  a  more*,     pe  four|)e  work  \2X 

^  So  E;  perichiden,  A.  ^  dul,  E.  ^  o^er,  E. 

»  A  tainted  flock  may  taint  a  whole  moor. 


Five  rules  for 
preachers. 


282 


WFCLIF'S 


Attack  upon 
the  friars. 


Tithes  and 
offerings  suffi- 
cient for  the 
support  of 
the  clerg-y. 


preestis  shulden  do  shulde  be,  ]?at  pei  shulden  caste  out  fendis. 
And  l^is  we  done  on  betere  manere  jif  we  casten  out  synnes  fro 
men;  for  ech  synne  ha])  a  fend,  jjat  goi]?  whanne  ]?is  synne 
goi]7.  But  )?e  fend  on  two  maneres  is  in  diverse  men.  In 
sum  men  he  is  to  tempte  hem,  al  if  he  be  not  in  her  soule: 
In  sum  men  he  is  incorporate,  as  in  men  J^at  have  synne; 
and  in  ]?es  soulis  ])e  fend  dwelli]?,  as  who  shulde  dwelle  in  his 
house,  pe  fifte  manere  Jjat  prestis  shulden  have  shulde  be 
Jjankfula  traveilinge ;  for  ^if  Jjei  wolen  have  j^ank  of  God,  ]?ei 
shulden  here  lie  symonie,  and  neij^er  sille  her  preching  ne  o]?er 
workes  ])at  \€\  done.  And  J^is  forgeten  many  men,  bo]?e  more 
prestis  and  lesse ;  for  popis  wolen  have  ]?e  firste  fruytis  for 
benefices  \2X  \€\  5yven,  and  bishopis  an  hundrid  shillingis  for 
halewynge  of  oo  Chirche^;  and  lordis  wolen  have  longe  service 
for  o  Chirche  })at  \€\  jyven,  and  J?is  is  wor]>  jeer  bi  jeer  moche 
rente  or  moche  moneie.  And  howevere  we  speken,  God  woot 
wel  how  ])is  chaffaringe  is  maad,  pryvyli  or  apertli ;  for  God 
knowi])  al  kyn  |>ingis,  and  God  biddij?  us  do  Jies  dedis  and 
hope  nojte  here  for  hem ;  for  jif  we  hopen  to  be  here  re- 
wardid  oure  hope  perishi]?  to  have  blisse. 

And  wi])  J)is  synne  ben  freris  bleckid  J?at  shapen  to  preche 
wynnyng  here;  and  herfore  \€\  prechen  J>e  peple  fablis  and 
falshede  to  plesen  hem.  And  in  tokene  of  ]7is  chaffare,  \€\ 
beggen  after  J?at  ]?ei  have  prechid;  as  who  sei]?,  jyve  me  ]>i 
moneie,  ])at  Y  am  wor])i  bi  my  preching.  And  |)is  chaffare  is 
sellinge  of  preching,  however  ])at  it  be  florishid.  Soj^eli  preestis 
mai  medefulli,  after  J^er  sermouns,  ete  wi]j  folk ;  but  not  calenge 
for  her  sermouns,  nei])er  bi  dette  ne  bi  custome.  And  herfore 
seien  many  preestis,  J>at  no  men  )?at  have  cure  shal  lyve  but  on 
Goddis  part,  as  on  dymes  and  on  offringis;  and  so  bi  clene 


»  That  is,  gratuitous. 

^  This,  if  ever  really  exacted,  must 
have  been  an  excessive  charge.  Ori- 
ginally, the  bishop  was  to  receive 
nothing  for  consecrating  a  church; 
but  by  degrees  the  custom  crept  in 
of  allowing  a  reasonable  '  procura- 
tion,' not  for  the  consecration  itself, 
but  for  the  expenses  of  travelling, 
lodging,  &c.,  which  it  entailed  on 
the  bishop.      The  amount   of  this 


procuration  varied,  says  Gibson,  in 
different  dioceses.  He  had  collected 
scarcely  any  information  on  the  sub- 
ject, beyond  the  single  fact  that  in 
the  time  of  Archbishop  Warham 
(circa  1530)  the  sum  of  £10  was 
paid  for  the  consecration  of  three 
churches  in  the  diocese  of  Bath  and 
Wells,  or  at  the  rate  of  £3  6s.  M. 
for  each  consecration.  {Codex,T\\..  ix, 
cap.  I.) 


SERMONS. 


283 


titil  of  almes  shulden  }>ei  have  goodis  )>at  \d  have.     For  jjus 
lyvede  Crist,  hi5est  pope.    What  art  ])0u  jjat  wole  not  lyve  Jjus  ? 
wolt  |)0u  be  gretter  }>an  Crist  J)at  is  Lord  of  al  J)is  world  ?    Also 
|)is  manere  is  more  meedeful  to  men  })at  shulden  fynde  jjes 
preestis,  and  more  meke  and  lesse  worldli  to  prestis  }>at  shulden 
be  susteyned.     And  so  it  is  on  bo]?  sidis  more  vertuous^  ]?an 
}->es  rentis  now.     And  |?anne  God,  wi]?outen  doute,  biddij?  |)at 
l^is  manere  be  kept.     Who  dredi]?''^  ]?at  ne  it  is  more  mede  man 
to  5eve  wel  his  charite  jjan  to  5yven  his  worldeli  dette  which  he 
owe])  bi  worldli  lawe  ?     And  who  dredi]?  ])at  ne   it  is  more 
meke  to  be  paied  on  Goddis  part  ])an  to  calenge  bi  worldis 
titil  more  ])an  Goddis  lawe  axi]) }     For  ])is  were  neer  to  Poulis 
reule,  J)at  preestis  shulden  be  paied  of  foode  and  hiliyng  wi]?- 
outen  more  worldli   richesse ;    and   ])anne  our  titil  my^te  be 
groundid;  and  o]?er  is  feyned  of  \q  fend.     Also  men  my5ten 
bi  conscience  ^yve  good  men,  and  take  fro  truauntis^  betere  ]?an 
\t\  now  done.     And  so  ])is  were  Goddis  wille,  bi  what  resoun 
shulde  he  have  dymes  and  oflfringis  of  \q  peple  ]?at  lyve])  in 
lustis  and  in  ydiines,  and  profiti])  not  to  ]>is  peple .?     Certis  })is 
were  a  fendis  lawe,  to  5yve  Goddis  part  to  sich  men.    And  so 
comunes  weren    excludid   of  false  jyvynge  to    alyens ;    as  to 
popis,  and  cardinals,  and  siche  Antecristis  disciplis.    pei  weren 
also  excusid  of  ^ifte  to  persouns  ])at  ben  lordis  clerkis,  ])at  lyven 
unclerkliche ;   and  ])ei  weren  excludid  wel  of  ])es  Chirches  ])at 
ben  aproprid  to  ^yve  Goddis  part  to  men  which  ben  of  ])e 
fendis  covent^.     And  cursinge  noie])  not  to  man,  but  ^if  he 
lyve  a5ens  resoun.     Freris  wolen  have  ano])er  titil,  and  plete 
and  fi5te  for  siche  goodis;  but  ])is  is  Goddis  lawe,  however  J)e 
fend  termyne.      And   ])us    curatis    shulden  not    selle    no   kyn 
service  ])at  j^ei  done ;  but  do  freeh,  and  taken  a^en  almes  ])at 
men  wolen  5yve  hem;    and  never  more   curse,   ne    plete    for 
sich  almes  of  ])e  peple,  but  flee  sich  lawis  ])at  techen  ])is,  as 
])ei  weren  lawis  of  Anticrist.     And  ])us  preestis   shulden  lyve 
clenli  bi  Goddis  lawe,  as  ])ei  diden  first.     And  ])us  men  shulden 

^  So  E;  verities,  A.  ^  tirauntis,  E. 

^  *  who  dredi|> '  means  '  who  can  ^  That  is,  parishes,  the  tithes  of 

doubt : '  compare  the  expression,  so  which  were  impropriated  to  monas- 

constantly   occurring   in  these   ser-  tic  communities,  which  then  served 

mons, — '  it  is  no  drede.'  the  cures  from  their  abbey  or  priory. 


284 


WrCLIF'S 


What  may  pro- 
perly be  given 
to  priests. 


I  Cor.  ix.  II. 


The  parables 
of  the  hidden 
treasure,  the 
pearl  of  great 
price,  and  the 
net  cast  into 
the  sea. 


Fs.  Ixxviii.  2. 


wijjdrawen  her  bond  fro  freris  ]?at  beggen  whanne  \€\  have 
prechid;  for  ]?ei  ben  coupable  bi  consente  \2X  3even  hem  on 
]jis  manere.  For  al  ]jis  chaunging  shulde  be  free,  \2X  man 
shulde  do  bi  Goddis  titil. 

And  Jjus  seij)  J)e  gospel  here,  Sip  we  token  freeli  of  God  we 
shulden  freeli  ^yve  to  men,  for  hope  of  more  mede  in  hevene. 
But  here  Jje  peple  shulde  be  tau;!  how  |>ei  shulden  freeli  5yve 
])ingis  jsat  ben  nedeful  to  preestis,  for  tyme  J?at  ]?ei  shulden 
serve  hem ;  for  Jjus  5eve))  God  to  his  servauntis  J)ing  nedeful 
to  his  service,  and  man  ^eve]?  to  his  bodi  J)ing  nedeful  to  serve 
him.  And  herfore  Poul  seij>  it  is  litil  ^if  we  taken  ]?ing  nedeful 
to  us.  But  first,  er^  men  done  symony,  ]?ei  shulden  travaile 
wi]?  her  hondis,  or  go  to  anoJ)er  peple,  or  ra|?er  sterve  in  her 
bodi.  But  ]?is  wolde  falle  late  or  never,  but  ^if  oure  synne  be 
in  cause.  And  ]?us  men  ]?enken  jjat  prestis  mai  take  almes  of 
her  parishis,  and  go  to  scole,  and  gadere  hem  lore  to  teche 
hem  efte  J^e  wey  to  hevene ;  but  jjis  is  fer  fro  dwelling  of 
lordis^,  or  from  oj^er  unhoneste  liif,  or  from  wendinge  to  Rome 
to  gete  a  fattere  benefice.  Myche  J>ing  shulden  men  knowe 
here  J>at  is  hid  bi  ])e  fend,  and  lettij?  service  of  Cristis  Chirche 
j>at  he  ordeynede  to  be  done. 


PE  Gospel  on  Feestis  of  oon  Virgyn  and  Martir. 

[SERMON     LXXXIV.] 

Simile  est  regnum  caeloriim  thesauro. — Matt.  xiii.  [44.] 

pis  gospel,  in  jjre  parablis,  speki]?  of  virgines ;  and  here  men 
reden  it,  whanne  )>ei  seien  of  a  virgyn  ]?at  was  virgin  and  martir, 
as  was  ]?e  heed  of  virginis.  pese  J?ree  parablis  ben  |)e  laste  of 
sevene  j^at  Crist  seide  togidere  in  ])e  gospel  of  Mathew.  For 
God  spake  ofte  in  parablis ;  as  David  propheciede  of  him, 
and  sei)),  in  Cristis  persone,  Y  shal  opene  my  mou|>  in  parablis 
and  shal  speke  in  proposiciouns  Jjat  weren  beyng  and  hidd  at 


or,  E. 


wiY  lordis,  E ;  which  seems  the  better  reading. 


SERMONS. 


285 


J)e  bigynnynge  of  j>e  world.  Parablis  on  good  manere  tellen 
many  faire  treu]?is ;  and  |'us,  for  many  causis,  Crist  spake  ofte 
in  parablis. 

pe  first  parable  of  jjes  ]?ree  is  seid  j)US  of  Crist ;  p^  rewme 
of  hevene  is  like  to  tresoiir  hid  in  pefeld^pe  which,  whanne  a  man 
findip,  hidip  \  and  for  joie  perof  goip  and  sellip  al  pat  he  hap, 
and  goip  and  hiep  pat  feld.  pe  rewme  of  hevene  is  ofte  taken 
for  heed  of  ]?is  rewme,  })at  is  Jesus  Crist,  for  he  is  in  manere 
al  ]ns  rewme,  sij?  Crist  is  in  manere  ech  part  of  himsilf.  And 
so  J>e  rewme  of  hevene,  of  which  Crist  speki]?  here,  is  Goddis 
word,  oure  Lord  Jesus  Crist,  pis  feld  is  undirstonden  J^e  fei]? 
of  Holi  Writt,  and  Goddis  word  is  hid  everywhere  in  ]jis  feld ; 
for  every  part  of  Holi  Writt  tellij)  Goddis  word, — \^  olde  law 
in  figure,  and  \q  gospel  expressly.  Man  findij?  |?is  tresour, 
whanne  he  taki]?  ])e  fei]?  of  Goddis  Sone  of  hevene,  ]?at  is  ^it 
hid ;  for  bileve  is  a  Jjing  hid  to  men  ]>at  bileven,  sij)  bileve  is 
a  ]3ing  ]jat  men  kyndeli  seen  not.  And  so  si3te  of  bileve,  ]jat 
is  an  hid  si^te,  is  ofte  tymes  clepid  no  si5te,  but  treu]?e.  He 
hidij?  ]?is  tresour  founden  in  J)is  feld  \2X  kepi]>  Holi  Writt  in 
forme  of  her  wordis,  and  kepi)?  ])e  witt  of  it  in  his  soule;  for 
no  man  shulde  presume  to  amende  Holi  Writt,  but  kepe  it  in 
|?e  fourme  ]?at  God  himsilf  ha]?  ^ovun  it.  He  goij?  for  joie  and 
sillij)  alle  his  goodis  to  bigge  |)is  feld,  and  after  to  traveile 
|)erinnne.  He  ha]?  first  joie  of  ])is  foundun  tresour,  for  man 
ha|)  moche  joie  of  his  ri^t  bileve.  He  sillij?  al  |?at  he  ha|>,  ]jat 
renounsi]?  al  his  er]?eli  goodis,  and  ^eve]?  him  to  Jjou^t  and  studie 
of  Hooli  Writt.  And  ]?us  he  biggi|>  |)is  feld  for  erjjeli  sub- 
staunce,  as  prestis,  |>at  wolen  be  pore  for  to  be  Cristis  disciplis, 
and  occupien  her  wittis  in  wordis  of  J>e  gospel.  And  al^if  ])is 
be  wisdom  to  jugement  of  God,  it  is  holden  foli  to  men  of  jje 
world ;  but  jugement  of  God  mai  no  wey  faile,  and  jugement 
of  ]je  world  is  algatis  fals  and  failinge.  And  so  ])is  chaffare  of 
])is  feeld  is  wiys  ^  and  profitable ;  for  rotis  of  bileve  hid  in  ]jis 
feld  springen  out  into  erbis  and  wel-smellinge  flouris.  And  J)is 
susteyne})  |>e  Chirche  here,  and  bringi]?  it  to  blis ;  and  o)?er 
worldli  profitees  ben   nou^t  to   ])is  profite.     And  })us  shulden 


The  hidden 
treasure. 


*  So  both  A  and  E.     The  Wydiffite  versions  render,   '  whiche  a  man 
l>at  findib  hidit>.'  "^  wise,  E. 


0,86 


WFCLIF'S 


The  pearl  of 
great  price. 


Is.  Iv.  I. 


bishopis  and  prelatis  chaffaren,  and  studie  in  Holi  Writt,  and 
leeve  worldli  richesses,  and  |>anne  J>ei  mitten  be  doctours  and 
disciplis  of  Crist. 

pe  secounde  parable  of  Crist  is  seid  in  ])es  wordis;  E/i 
soone  pe  rewme  of  hevene  is  liche  to  a  man  marchaund pat  sotn^te 
good  margantees ,  and  zvhanne  he  hadde  foundun  oon  presciouse 
margaj'ite,  he  wente  out  and  selde  al  pat  he  hadde,  and  bougie 
pis  margarite.  pe  rewme  of  hevene  is  clepid  here  ])e  Chirche, 
waundringe  after  Crist ;  for  Crist,  heed  of  al  |)e  Chirche,  bigan 
})e  newe  Testament;  and  fadirs  of  Jjis  lawe,  wi]?  vertues  of 
Crist,  mai  be  clepid  here  j^e  kyngdom  of  hevene.  pis  man  ]?at 
chaffare]?  here  is  clepid  ech  man  ]?at  comij?  to  Goddis  lawe  and 
lyvejj  jjerafter.  pes  margaritees  ben  treu|?is  foundun  in  Goddis 
law :  pis  o  margarite  is  Goddis  word,  treuj^e  of  alle  treujjis, 
oure  Lord  Jesus  Crist,  and  ]?e  same  tresour  j?at  was  bifore 
foundun.  Clerkis  seien  J?at  margarites  ben  prescious  stones 
foundun  in  \^  see  wijsinne  shellefishe ;  and  ])ei  ben  on  two 
maneres:  sum  hoolid^  and  sum  hool.  And  margaritis  ben 
a  cordial  medecine,  and  ])ei  maken  faire  mennis  atire,  and 
conforten  mennis  hertis.  pis  oo  margarite  is  oure  Lord  Jesus 
Crist,  foundun  in  tribulacioun  of  see  of  ])is  world ;  and  o|)er 
margarites  ben  lymes  of  Crist,  foundun  in  shellis  of  smale  se  ^ 
fishes,  pe  manheed  of  Crist  is  a  margarite  J>at  worshipi]?  his 
Chirche  and  conforti])  mennis  hertis.  pe  shelle  of  ]?is  fishe  is 
bodi  of  Crist,  ]?at  was  stable  and  stef  ^  in  all  his  temptaciouns. 
And  he  wi]?  his  martiris  weren  hoolid  margarites.  And  so 
Crist,  bi  his  two  kyndis,  is  o  margarite,  holid  and  unholid ; 
for  Cristis  Godheed  mi^te  not  be  hoolid ;  but  his  manheed 
was  hoolid,  as  shewen  his  fyve  woundis.  And  to  bigge  ))is 
margarite  many  seintis  han  travelled  in  jje  state  of  grace,  and 
bicamen  ful  herty ;  for  })is  medecine  of  margarites  haj?  con- 
fortid  alle  martiris,  and  made  hem  herty  for  to  die  for  ]?e  love 
of  treujje.  Confessouris  and  virgynes  ben  maad  faire  bi  })is  mar- 
garite, and  ech  state  of  men  ]jat  shal  be  saaf  in  hevene.  Alle 
})es  men  sellen  her  goodis,  as  we  have  seid  bifore,  and  bicn  j>is 
margarite  wi])Outen  any   chaunging.     For,   as  Ysay  sei|j,   sich 


^  bolide,  E. 


see,  E. 


siiffe,  E. 


SERMONS. 


287 


men  bien,  wi|)Outen  silver  and  wijjout  chaunging,  bo|)  wyn 
and  mylk.  For  men  }iat  chaffaren  wi]>  God  and  bien  hem 
hevene  lesen  not  jjat  |)ei  5yven,  but  hav  alle  j^ingis  betere  ])at^ 
\>Q\  hadden  bifore,  and  bi  a  stabler  titel. 

pe  ]?ridde  parable  ])at  Crist  telli]?  is  told  in  ])es  wordis :  E/t 
soone  pe  rewnie  of  hevene  is  liche  to  a  net  sent  in  to  pe  see,  and 
gaderinge  in  him  alle  mafier  of  fishe ;  pe  which  7iet,  whafine  it 
was  fillid,  pei  pat  ledden  it  out,  [and]  ^  sitting  bi  pe  brinke, 
chesideji  good  fishes  in  to  her  vessilis,  and  senten  out  yvel  fishes. 
So  shal  it  be  in  eendi7ige  of  pis  world ;  angels  shal  wende  out  and 
shal  departe  yvel  men  fro  juste  men,  and  shal  sende  yvel  men  in 
to  pe  chymeney  of  fier  ;  per  shal  be  wepinge  and  gnashing  of  tep^. 
And  after  Crist  axip  hem  ivhere  pei  undirstondefi  alle  pes  pingis, 
and  pei  seideti,  -^he.  And  Crist  seide  to  hem,  ])etfore,  ech  tau'^t 
writere  in  pe  rew?ne  of  hevene  is  liche  to  an  housebonde  man  pat 
bringip  forp  of  his  tresour  bope  newe  pingis  and  olde. 

pis  rewme  of  hevene  is  J)is  fi^tinge  Chirche,  sent  into  Jje  see 
of  ])is  world.  And  ]?is  Chirche  haj?  lawis  knyttide  togidere ; 
and  in  J)e  myddis  jjerof  is  Crist,  a  blessid  worm^,  |>at  alle 
men  coveiten  kyndeli.  And  so  alle  maner  of  men  ben 
gaderid  into  Cristis  Chirche ;  but  on  two  maners  ben  men 
in  ])is  Chirche.  Sum  men  ben  in  })is  Chirche,  and  eke  of 
|?is  Chirche ;  and  |)es  men  mai  not  wende  out  of  J>is  nette. 
And  o|)er  men  ben  oonli  in  ]jis  Chirche  and  not  of  j^is 
Chirche,  and  j^es  men  wenden  out;  and  in  figure  herof, 
Petre  fisshide  twyes;  firste  bifore  Cristis  dej>,  and  ]>anne 
his  net  was  broken ;  and  eft  after  Cristis  dej>,  and  toke  many 
grete  fishes;  and  al3if  J)ei  weren  so  many,  \q  net  was  not 
broken.  For  alle  J>es  men  ]?at  God  ha]?  ordeyned  to  hevene, 
mai  not  wend  out  of  \<t  nett  ]?at  is  of  Goddis  lawis,  sij>  \€\ 
moten  holde  hem  in  J>e  bondis  of  jjc  ten  comandementis. 
And  so  Crist  taki]?  in  his  Chirche  two  manere  of  juste  men. 
Sum  men  \zX  he  ordeyne])  ever  to  be  in  blisse,  and  j^es  mai  not 

^  The  construction   requires   the  tynge  bysidis  he  biynke,  chesiden, 

omission  of  the  conjunction,  which  &c.' 

however  is   found   both   in   A  and  b  fjie  'worm'  must  signify  here 

E.    The    earlier    Wychffite   version  the  bait  that  is  put  in  the  net  to 

renders,  '  men  ledynge  out,  and  sit-  attract  the  fish. 


The  net  cast 
into  the  sea. 


288 


WFCLIF'S 


The  duties 
of  bishops. 


be  dampned  for  strengjje  of  Goddis  ordenaunce.  And  sum 
men  ben  in  Cristis  Chirche  juste  for  a  tyme,  ]>3.t  fallen  fro 
Cristis  Chirche  for  her  owne  folie,  si])  ]>ei  breken  Goddis  heestis, 
and  lasten  ever  J)us  unkynde.  But  ]>es  fishes  gon  not  but 
wilfulli  out  of  Goddis  net.  But  ])is  net  is  nevere  ful  bifore  ]?at 
men  ben  in  ]>e  Chirche,  as  many  as  God  wole  have  saved,  wij? 
o|)er  J)at  he  wole  have  dampned.  Aungels  of  hevene  ben  ])0 
}>at  sitten  on  j^e  banke  and  draw-un  |)is  nett  in  ]?e  see  of  ]?is 
world,  and  bringen  hem  to  Crist  at  ])e  daie  of  doom.  And  so 
]>\s  fishinge  lasti]j  in  tyme  of  bo])e  lawis ;  but  ]>es  angels  de- 
parten  yvel  men  fro  juste  men ;  and  bringen  juste  men  to 
hevene,  and  senden  yvel  men  to  helle.  And  ])us  dwellingis  in 
hevene  for  dyverse  holi  men  ben  diverse  vesselis  into  which 
jjei  ben  takun.  And  J?e  chemyney  of  fier  is  J)e  fier  of  helle ; 
for  alle  sich  manere  of  fier,  glowing  of  jjikke  mater,  shal  be 
closid  in  helle  at  ]>e  daie  of  dome.  And  how  J>is  shal  be  fillid 
|)e  gospel  telli])  after,  pe  weping  ])at  shal  be  in  helle  is  sorewe 
Jjat  dampned  men  shal  have  ;  and  gnashing  of  her  tee])  is  harm 
of  her  lesing ;  and  ]>is  is  more  peyne  Jian  ]>q  firste  is. 

Alle  ])es  ])ingis  undirstonden  Cristis  discipHs;  for  oure  good 
maistre  tau3te  hem  more  speciali.  And  herfore  ech  bishop 
and  ech  curate  in  }>e  Chirche  shulde  cunne  ])is  lessoun,  to  teche 
it  to  ])&  peple.  For  at  ])e  dai  of  dome  ])es  uncunnynge  prelatis 
])at  can  not  })is  lore  shal  be  unknowun  for  to  come  to  blisse ; 
and  })erfore  we  shulden  ou])er  denye  for  to  be  prelatis,  or,  3if 
we  ben  prelatis,  we  shulden  cunne  Goddis  lawe,  and  preche 
it  to  ]?e  peple,  ^if  we  wolen  come  to  hevene.  And  ])us  se[]> 
Crist  of  sich  goode  prelatis,  ]>at  herfore  ech  writere,  tau^t  ]>\is 
of  God,  is  liche  to  an  housebonde  man  ])at  ordeyne]?  for  his 
hous ;  si])  a  prelate  shulde  more  ordeyne  for  goostli  fode  ])an 
an  housebonde  shulde  ordeyne  for  bodili  fode  to  his  folk. 
And  as  ])is  ordeyning  is  betere,  for  ])e  soule  passi])  ]>e  bodi, 
so  ])is  defaute  of  goostli  foode  is  more  dampnable  bifore  God. 
And  ]>es  prelatis  ben  not  writeris  ])at  ben  tau^t  of  God,  for 
nei])er  ]>ei  ben  writun  in  ]>e  book  of  liif,  nei])er  ]>ei  can  write 
vertues  in  mannis  soule.  And  so  ]>es  doumbe  men  ben  not 
writeris  in  ]>e  rewme  of  hevene,  but  ra])er  doumbe  foolis  in  ]>e 
rewme  of  helle ;  for  as  ]>e  fend  is  a  king,  so  he  ha])  a  rewme ; 

WYCLIF. 


SERMONS. 


289 


and  alle  men  |>at  shal  be  dampned  mai  be  clepid  J^e  rewme  of 
helle.  And  ]?es  ben  rewme  of  ]je  fend,  si|)  he  is  jjer  alj^er-kyng. 
But,  as  a  good  housebonde  serve))  his  meyn^  wi]?  olde  fruyte 
and  wij)  newe,  j^at  ben  of  two  3eris,  so  a  good  prelate,  |>at 
shulde  teche  his  peple,  shulde  cunne  two  Goddis  la^vis,  and 
how  \q\  acorden  togider,  and  teche  his  peple,  and  knowe  two 
weies  S  to  go  ]?e  weye  of  hevene,  and  flee  |)e  weie  of  helle,  and 
cast  out  now  J)e  ritis  of  \e  olde  lawe.  But  mandementis  of 
|>e  olde  lawe  ben  evermore  newe ;  and,  in  tokene  herof, 
a  bishop  haj?  a  mytre  |)at  ha]?  two  homes,  oon  behinde  and 
ano])er  bifore ;  and  ]>es  two  homes  bitokenen  |)at  jjei  cunnen 
two  Goddis  lawis ;  and  jif  J>ei  tokene  falsly,  he  is  a  fals  prelate, 
and  an  horned  devyl  to  be  dampned  in  helle. 


Of  a  Virgyn  and  not  Martir. 

[SERMON     LXXXV.] 

Smile  est  regnu7n  coelorum  decern  virginibus. — Matt.  xxv.  [i.] 

pis  laste  sermoun  of  jje  Comoun  is  red  in  two  manere  of 
festis : — in  feste  of  o  virgine,  not  martir,  and  in  festis  of  many 
virgins ; — and  it  tellij)  \q  state  of  \q  Chirche,  bo|>e  now,  and  at 
|)e  daie  of  dome ;  and  speciali  bi  j^is  part  )?at  shulde  quyke  ]?e 
tojjer  half.  For,  ri^t  as  a  man  is  maad  bo|?e  of  bodi  and  of 
soule,  so  ))is  Chirche  shulde  be  maad  of  actyves  and  con- 
templatyves.  And,  for  ])is  spiritual  part  shulde  be  more  worj>i 
])an  |>e  to|?er,  as  J^e  soule  is  betere  ])an  ]?e  bodi,  ]>erfore  it  haj? 
name  of  al  j^e  Chirche.  Crist  sei]>  })us  at  j)e  bigynnynge : — 
P^  rewme  of  hevene  is  like  to  ten  virgifiis,  J?e  which  token  her 
lampis,  ajid  wente  ^  out  a'^ens  pe  spouse  and  his  ivyf;  but  fyve  of 
hem  were  foolis,  and  fyve  of  hem  weren  ware.  But  pe  fyve  foolis 
token  her  la?}ipis,  but  pei  token  not  oik  wip  he?7i :  pes  oper  fyve 
war  virginis  token  oile  in  her  vesselis  wip  her  lavipis. 

pis  rewme  of  hevene  is  ])is  Chirche :  ])es  ten  virginis  ben  \€\ 


*  and  teche  his  ptiple  (wo  weyes,  E. 
SERMONS,  U 


^  wenten,  E. 


Symbolical 
lueaiiinfj  of  the 
bishop's  mitre. 


The  parable 
of  the  ten 
virgjins. 


Interpretation. 


290 


WFCLIF'S 


jjat  ben  spiritual,  as  ben  prestis,  and  religious,  and  many  oj^er 
in  \e  Chirche ;  for  as  \q  soule  shulde  quykene  ])e  bodi,  so  ]?es 
shulden  quykene  |?e  actyve  part.  But  |?es  ten  virginis  ben 
partid  in  two,  in  fyve  foolis  and  fyve  wise.  Alle  j^ei  ben  vir- 
gyns  herfore,  for  j^ei  ben  chast  of  bodi,  and  kepen  hem  from 
outward  synnes  ]>at  mai  be  knowun  to  si^te  of  men.  And  bo])e 
]?es  partis  ben  in  fyve ;  for  \e  wise  shal  be  in  hevene  evere  in 
a  sercle  of  blisse,  as  fyve  is  noumbre  in  a  sercle^;  and  |>e 
toj^er  fyve  foolis  shal  be  dampned  in  helle  wi|)Outen  eende. 
And  as  a  sercle  ha{?  noon  eende,  so  shal  not  peyne  of  ]jes 
ypocritis.  And  )?us  telli])  Crist  fair,  how  bo]?e  jjes  partis  ben 
fyve.  pis  oile  is  ri5t  devocioun^,  ]jat  alle  jjes  virgyns  shulden 
have,  pes  vesselis  of  Jje  virginis  ben  jje  poweris  of  her  soulis ; 
for  ri^t  as  a  vessel  holdi]?  oile,  so  ])e  power  of  )>e  soule  shulde 
holde  rijt  devocioun  in  alle  \>e  workes  ]?at  man  doi)?.  And  ri5t 
as  oile   maki|>  \q  bodi   soft,  and  ever  more  fleti]>    above,   so 


a  Fyve  is  noumbre  in  a  sercle.  On 
the  mysterious  virtues  and  signifi- 
cance supposed  by  the  ancients  to 
reside  in  the  number  five,  the  reader 
may,  if  he  cares  to  do  so,  consult 
the  treatise  in  Plutarch's  Moralin, 
U(pl  Tov  Et  rov  kv  AiX.(pois,  and  Sir 
Thomas  Browne's  Garden  of  Cyrus. 
The  relation  of  five  to  the  circle,  and 
also  to  the  sphere,  is  arrived  at  in 
two  or  three  ways.  Pkitarch  as- 
cribes to  Plato  the  opinion  that  if 
there  are  more  worlds  than  the  one 
which  we  inhabit,  there  must  he  Jive, 
neither  more  nor  less ;  and  that,  even 
if  there  be  only  one,  that  one  may 
be  considered  as  compounded  out  of 
five  subordinate  worlds, — the  four 
elements,  and  the  sky,  or  fifth  essence, 
'  to  which  alone,'  he  says,  '  amongst 
all  bodies,  the  property  of  revolving 
in  a  circle  naturally  appertains.'  The 
apparent  revolution  of  the  celestial 
sphere  round  the  earth  is  evidently 
intended.  Again,  Sir  Thomas  Browne, 
in  noticing  the  singular  frequency  of 
the  quinary  arrangement  in  nature, 
observes  (it  is  a  thing  indeed  which 
many  have  observed  independently) 
upon  the  very  large  number  of  flowers 
which  ha\e/ive  petals,  as  if  that  was 


the  simplest  and  most  fundamental 
division  of  a  circle  into  sectors. 
'  Five-leaved  flowers  are  commonly 
disposed  circularly  about  the  stylus, 
according  to  the  higher  geometry  of 
nature,  dividing  a  circle  by  five  radii, 
which  concur  not  to  make  diameters, 
as  in  quadrilateral  and  sexangular 
intersections.'  {Garden  of  Cyrus,  p. 
526,  ed.  Bohn.)  The  next  para- 
graph begins, — '  Now  the  number 
of  five  is  remarkable  in  every  circle,' 
but  as  I  cannot  understand  the  rea- 
soning which  follows,  I  forbear  to 
quote  it  In  a  curious  statement 
quoted  by  the  editor  of  Browne 
from  Mr.  Colebrooke,  it  is  clearly 
shown  that  the  simplest  distribution 
of  groups  of  objects  round  a  central 
and  interior  group  is  a  quinary  ar- 
rangement, while  at  the  same  time, 
when  the  groups  come  to  be  mul- 
tiplied indefinitely,  it  is  necessarily 
spheroidal.  The  reader  will  remem- 
ber also  the  quinary  grouping  of 
animals  by  Mr.  Macleay,  once  so 
famous,  and  the  remarkable  vindi- 
cation of  the  theory  in  the  Vestiges  of 
the  Natural  History  of  the  Creation. 
^  See  p.  247,  note  A. 


SERMONS. 


291 


devocioun  of  men  maki]?  hem  soft  in  her  traveile,  and  makij) 
hem  ever  more  H^t  to  bisie  hem  for  hevenU  blisse.  pes  lampis 
ben  goode  workes  in  kynde,  })at  bo])  ])es  partis  of  virgins  done ; 
but  })es  lampis  brennen  not  ne  shynen  bifore  God,  but  jif  jjei 
have  ri3t  devocioun  in  ])e  workes  ]>at  |)ei  done.  And  as  oile 
ha]>  moche  of  ]>q  eir  and  of  jie  fier,  wel  medhd  wi]?  water,  so 
men  of  ri3t  devocioun  han  mouche  of  hevenli  j^ou^tis,  and  also 
myche  of  charite.  And  her  tribulacioun  seme])  litil,  and  herbi 
ben  \)Q\  li^t  and  glad  to  go  ])is  litil  wey.  And  J)us  Crist,  heed 
of  J>e  Chirche,  was  glad  here  to  renne  his^  wey;  for  he  hadde 
greet  desire  to  sufFre  peyne  for  mannis  kynde.  And  so  of  his 
oile  shulden  we  take  part  in  goinge  of  oure  traveilous  weie. 
pes  fyve  foolis  hadden  lampis,  but  ]>ei  hadden  noon  oile  wi]? 
hem ;  for  many  men  in  j)is  lyf,  bo])e  oon  and  o]?er,  don  myche 
good ;  but  hem  wanti]?  ri^t  devocioun,  bi  which  ]>ei  shulden  go 
li^t  to  hevene.  For  al  oure  traveile  here  in  er])e  shulde  be  don 
for  ])is  ende;  to  meete  wij?  Crist  and  his  Chirche  ri3tli  at  J>e 
dai  of  dome.  And  j^e  Chirche  J^at  come]?  from  hevene  wi]? 
Crist  at  ])e  dai  of  dome  is  clepid  ]?e  wif  of  Jesus  Crist ;  for  })ei 
ben  weddid  ever  togidere. 

It  were  for  to  telle  here  how  devocioun  wanti]?  in  clerkis ; 
as  popis  taken  ]?er  stat  here  for  a  foule  devocioun,  to  be  wor- 
shipid  in  |)is  world  and  have  moche  of  worldli  lordshipe.  And 
so  done  |)es  cardinalis  and  |)es  bishopis  also.  Curatis  taken 
benefices  for  ]>e  same  cause,  but  lesse  ;  and  preestis  taken  her 
ordris   for  devocioun   of  ten  mark  ^ ;    religious   possessioneris 

^  \>is,  E. 

respecting  the  salaries  of  non-bene- 


*  for  devociotm  of  ten  mark.']  This 
sounds  like  a  phrase  in  common  use 
at  the  time,  as  if  one  were  to  say 
now  that  a  curate  took  orders  for 
his  £100  a  year.  The  passage  is  of 
some  importance,  as  showing  that, 
in  spite  of  the  efforts  both  of  the 
court  and  the  bishops  to  keep  down 
the  salaries  of  priests,  the  average 
rate  of  pay  to  a  working  priest, 
(the  passage  has  nothing  to  do  with 
the  parsons  of  livings,)  in  the  reign 
of  Richard  II,  was  ten  marks,  or 
£6  13s.  4t/.  per  annum.  It  may  be 
as  well  to  take  this  opportunity  of 
putting   together  a   few   particulars 


ficed  clerks  in  England  between  the 
thirteenth  and  fifteenth  centuries. 

A  constitution  of  Stephen  Lang- 
ton,  dated  in  1222,  thus  regulates 
the  pay  of  vicars  perpetual : — 

'  Statuimus,  ut  vicario  perpetuo  ad 
minus  reditus  quinque  Marcarum  as- 
signentur,  qui  scilicet  pro  quinque 
Marcis  solet  dari  ad  Firmam  ;  nisi 
forte  in  illis  partibus  Walliae  sit . . . .' 
where  the  parish  is  too  poor  to 
afford  so  high  a  stipend. 

Five  marks  then  were  esteemed  a 
competent  salary  in  the  early  part  of 
the  reign  of  Henry  III.     Nearly  a 


The  indevotion 
and  worldliness 
of  the  clergy, 
from  the  Pope 
downwards. 


U   2 


292 


WrCLIF'S 


for  devocioun  of  her  bely;  and  many  freris  taken  her  stait  to 
lyve  lustli  in  |)is  world,  for  ellis  )>ei  shulden  be  laborers,  and 
\yvt  hard  lyf  in  lewid  stait.  And  so  devocioun  of  clerkis, 
fro  Jje  firste  to  \q  laste,  is  studie  of  avarice,  and  no  trewe  devo- 
cioun ;  and  so  freris,  in  her  statis,  wanten  ri3t  devocioun ;  for 
jjci  taken  not  her  degres,  nei]?er  in  scole,  ne  in  ofifice,  for  ri3t 
devocioun  to  renne  ]>e  weie  j?at  Crist  ha])  tau3t.  And  |)ei  wolen 
not  be  confessours,  —  speciali  of  lordis  and  ladies, — for  \q 
devocioun  j^at  J^ei  have  for  to  make  her  soulis  clene,  but  for 
devocioun  of  worldli  likyng,  J)at  ])ei  taken  wij?  })es  folk,  (for  |)us 
])ei  ben  exempt  from  cloistre  and  from  risyng  at  mydnyjt,  and 
fro  fastinge  in  her  fraitour  ^  ^,  and  ojjer  workes  of  obedience,)  and 

^  f^^y'oy,  E. 

century  and  a  half  later  the  standard 
had  varied  but  very  little.  In  a  con- 
stitution of  1362  Archbishop  Islep 
ordains  that  a  priest  simply  cele- 
brating '  annals,'  or  masses  by  the 
year,  for  the  repose  of  departed 
souls,  shall  be  satisfied  with  five 
marks  a  year,  but  that  if  he  have 
also  cure  of  souls,  he  shall  receive 
six  marks.  Following  up  this  con- 
stitution, the  act  of  36  Edw.  Ill 
(1363)  prohibits  under  penalties  any 
layman  from  paying  more  than  five 
marks  a  year  to  a  priest  residing  in 
his  house,  and  having  no  cure  of 
souls. 

The  next  fifty  years  witness  a 
rapid  change  in  the  value  of  money. 
Archbishop  Sudbury  orders  that  the 
stipends  which  Islep  had  fixed  at  five 
and  six  marks,  shall  for  the  same 
duties,  '  on  account  of  the  changed 
times,'  be  raised  to  seven  and  eight 
marks  respectively.  But  these  were 
doubtless  the  minimum  rates,  and  in 
practice  more  was  usually  given. 
There  is  even  distinct  evidence  that 
ten  marks  was  a  customary  rate  of 
salary  for  a  priest  to  ask.  The  act 
of  2  Henry  V  (1414),  after  reciting 
the  act  of  Edw.  Ill  previously  men- 
tioned and  setting  forth  that  the 
priests  '  which  now  be '  will  not 
serve  but  for  twelve  marks,  or  ten 
inarlis  by  year  at  the  least,  to  the 
great  damage  of  the  king's  liege 
people,  enacts  that  seven  and  eight 


marks  shall  be  the  legal  salaries, 
unless  by  special  license  of  the  or- 
dinary ;  nine  marks  not  to  be  ex- 
ceeded even  in  that  case. 

But  the  changing  times  soon  ren- 
dered this  statute  ineffectual,  if  it 
was  not  ineffectual  from  the  outset. 
A  constitution  of  Archbishop  Chi- 
chely,  dated  in  141 5,  ordains  that 
all  through  the  province  of  Canter- 
bury the  stipends  of  needy  vicars 
shall  be  augmented  as  a  general  rule 
to  at  least  twelve  marks  a  year,  if  the 
pai  ish  revenues  equal  that  amount. 

The  above  particulars  are  found 
in  Gibson's  Codex  Juris  Ecclesiastici 
AngUcani,  pp.  748,  755,  938-9. 

In  the  provmce  of  York  the  rates 
appear  to  have  been  lower.  From 
the  Tes'ainenta  Eboracen&ia,  published 
by  the  Surtees  Society  (vol.  ii,  p.  1 18) 
it  appears  that  at  York,  in  the  middle 
of  the  fifteenth  century,  the  customary 
payment  in  respect  of  a  single  mass 
was  fourpence  Thus  in  a  will  dated 
in  1446  we  find — 'Lego  ad  quinde- 
cim  missas  pro  anima  mea  in  ecclesia 
Sti  Nicholai  apud  Novum  Castrum 
super  Tinam  Vs.*  And  the  ordinary 
annual  payment  at  the  same  period, 
to  a  priest  celebrating  masses  for 
the  repose  of  souls,  was  in  York- 
shire seven  marks. 

In  preparing  this  note  I  have  been 
greatly  assisted  by  Professor  Stubbs. 

•''  Fraitour,  or  frey'.our,  is  a  cor- 
ruption of  refectorium,  in  old  French, 


SERMONS. 


293 


lustis,  )>at  Jjei  have  wij?  ladies,  ojjer  jjan  )?ei  shulden  have  at  horn. 
And  jjus  ])es  laste  folk  semen  virginis ;  but  jjei  ben  foule  putis. 
And  assaie  her  wordis  and  her  lyves,  and  )>anne  \>om  maist 
betre  wite.  Defaute  in  ^  oile  of  ^  o|)er  beggers  jjat  ben  walkinge 
in  |)is  world  mai  men  see  jjat  take  hede,  and  of  o}>er  pore  men 
bojje,  as  trowauntis  can  feynen  hem  sike  and  defourme  hem  in 
bodi;  and  ])is  is  foul  ypocrisie  and  no  ri3t  devocioun.  So  it 
is  to  drede  to  many  J)at  ben  pore  and  lyven  chast,  jjat  ])ei  shal, 
at  ]?e  dai  of  dome,  wante  oile  in  her  lampis. 

Buf  whafine  pis  spouse  made  divelling,  alle  pes  virgmes  napten 
and  sJepten.  Bi  which  wordis  God  undirstondij)  many  faire 
wittis.  And  goode  napping  of  J^es  fyve  wyse  virginis  is  short 
dej?  |)at  ]?ei  have  here  to  tyme  of  \q  dai  of  dome.  For  ])is  dej? 
is  clepid  slepinge ;  but  jjes  foolis  slepen  ever  bi  slepe  of  ever- 
lasting synne.  And  so  Jies  ten  al  togidir  slepten  and  nap- 
piden  on  J)is  manere ;  but  foolis  slepten  J>is  longe  sleep,  a  part 
here  and  a  part  in  helle.  And  jjus  dwelling  of  ]?is  spouse  is 
abidinge  to  J?e  dai  of  dome.  Certis  at  mydni^t  was  maad  a  crie : 
Lo  !  pe  spouse  comep^  go  y  out  ayns  htm.  pa?me  risen  up  alle 
pe  virgyns,  and  maden  per  lampis  /air.  And  pes  foole  virginis 
seiden  to  pes  wise  virgyns  ;  ^yve  y  to  us  of  yure  oile,  for  oure 
lampis  hen  quenchid.  And  pes  wise  virgyns  answer  iden  and  seiden, 
Lest  it  suffice  7iot  to  us  and  to  yu,  go  y  raper  to  hem  pat  sellen 
oile,  and  bie  y  oile  to  yu  silf.  And  while  pet  iventen  to  hie  oile, 
pe  spouse  cam.  Arid  pes  virgyns  pat  weren  redi  entriden^  in  wip 
pe  spouse  ;  and  anoon  pe  "^ate  was  shut.  "* 

pis  myddil  of  ]?e  ny5t  is  j^e  tyme  Jjat  Crist  shal  come  to  ]?e  laste 
dome.  For  certein  enchesoun  }?is  tyme  is  ny5t ;  for  it  is  derk 
and  unknowun  to  men  whanne  it  shal  be,  and  whe})er  ])ei  shal  go 
J>anne  to  hevene  or  to  helle.  And  it  is  Jje  myddel  for  ]?is  en- 
chesoun.   It  is  after  |?e  derknesse,  ]?at  goij?  bifore  jjis  jugement, 


0/,  K 


in,  E. 


refreiior.  It  means  the  dining-hall 
of  a  monastery.  In  later  times  the 
word  was  further  corrupted  to  Frater- 
house.  Thus  Davies,  in  his  Ancient 
Rites  and  Mo?mfne?its  of  the  Chirch  of 
Dia-hatn  (1672),  says,  '  In  the  south 
alley  of  the  cloisters  is  a  fair  large 
hall,  called  the  Frater-House,  finely 


^  So  E ;  entyide,  A. 

wainscoted  on  the  north  and  south 
sides,  as  also  on  the  west.'  See  Hal- 
liwell's  Glossary.  Benoit,  in  his 
Chronicle  of  the  Dukes  of  Nor- 
mandy, 1.  10998,  writes, — *  Cloistre 
i  fist  faire  e  dormor,  Celier,  quisine. 
e  refreitor.' 


Interpretation 
continued. 


294 


WFCLI  F'S 


and  bifore  ]?e  derknes  ]>at  ever  shal  be  in  helle.    pis  crie  is  warn- 
ynge  of  aungels,  ]?at  shal  be  to  ]>is  daie,  jjat  Poul  clepid  j^e  laste 
trompe,  and  sum,  Gabrielis  horn,    panne  shal  it  be  seid  in  sen- 
tence :  Lo,  now  come))  \)Q  spouse  of  holi  Chirche ;  go  56  a5ens 
him.    And  J)is  bidding  of  God  shal  not  be  a5enseid.    And  ])us 
men  J)at  shal  be  savyd  and  dampned,  shal  rise  a3ens  j^is  daie  of 
dome,  and  make  hem  redi  to  answere  of  dedis  Jjat  ]>e.\  have 
done.     And  jjanne   her  conscience    shal   be    open  of  alle   |>e 
lyves  ]?at  J^ei  have  led.    And  ]>us  shal  ]>es  foolis  wite  ]?at  hem 
failide  devocioun,  and  herfore  J?ei  shal  be  dampned,  but  ^if  ]?ei 
can  excuse  hem.     pe  axing  of  ]>es  foolis  of  men  j^at  shal  be 
saif,  is  a  privy  wishinge  of  ])es  founed  virgyns,  Jjat  J^ei  taken 
part  of  devocioun  of  seintis;    and  wel  mai  jjes  be  foolis  j^at 
jjanne  have  siche  desiris.    But  jjes  men  ]?at  now  dremen  an  ac- 
cident wij)Outen  suget  mai  falle  aborde  wi]?  jjese  foolis,  and  axe 
j)is  as  possible.      pe  answere  of  J^es  wise  virginis  telli]?  treuj^e 
to  ])es  foolis,  how  devocioun  j^at  Jjei  have  suffici|>  not  for  hem 
bo])e ;  and  J^erfore  shulden  j^ei  go  to  seintis,  jjat  sellen  in  weye 
devocioun.     But  ])at  tyme  is  passid  now ;  and  so  moten  nedis 
jjei  dispeire.     And  in  tyme  jjat  |?ei  J^enken  J^us,  how  ])ei  shulden 
have  lyved  ri3tfulli,  and  have  had  devocioun  in  good  workes 
])at  J>ei  diden,  come]?  Crist  to  ])e  dome,  and  taki|)  to  heven  just 
men.     Alle  j^es  jjingis  have  ordre  of  kynde,  al  if  J^ei  hav  not 
ordre  of  tyme.     At  pe  laste  comefi  pes  founed  virgyns^  and  seien 
to  Crist  in  pis  wise :  Lord,  Lord,  opene  to  us.     And  Crist  an- 
swerip  unto  hem  :  Sopeli,  I  seie  to  '^ou,  I  knowe  y)u  not :   GoiJ? 
forj)  30ur  weie.     And  per/ore,  wake  y,  seip  Crist,  for  y  knowun 
not  pe  daie,  ne  pe  hour,     pis  comyng  of  jjes  fool  virgins,  after 
|)at  seintis  ben  in  blisse,  is  grutchinge  of  her  conscience  a3ens 
Goddis  jugement ;  and  criyng  of  openyng  of  Crist  is  languish- 
ing to   come  to   hevene.     But  answere  |)at  Crist  3eve])   a3en, 
is  stabling  of  her  peyne  in  helle ;  for  ]?ei  shal  ])anne  be  certein 
Jjat  her  double  peyne  in  helle  moot  nedis  be,  bi  Cristis  juge- 
ment, for  her  wickid  lyving  here.     And  so  her  double  criyng 
Jjanne  is  her  unfamous  conscience ;  for  Jeanne  hem  shal  wante 
fame,  bojje  of  j^is  world  and  of  })e  toj^er.     And  ])us,  as  Crist 
concludij)  ofte,  alle  manere  of  men  shulde  wake,  si|>  }5ei  knowen 
not  J^e  daie  of  dome,  ne  hour  in  which  J>ei  shal  be  deed. 


SERMONS. 


295 


PROPRIUM     SANCTORUM. 

[Bishop  Bale,  in  the  later  edition  of  his  Summarium,  dated 
Basle,  1559,  thus  enters  the  following  series  of  sermons  for  the 
Propriiim  Sanctorum  on  his  list  of  WycliPs  works  : — 

In  Evangelia  festivalia,  lib.  I.  '  Hoc  Evangelium  historice  narrat.' 

The  writer,  whether  Wyclif  or  not,  composed  the  thirty-eight* 
sermons  which  follow  upon  gospels  which  he  took,  partly  from  the 
Proprium  de  Tempore,  partly  from  the  Proprium  Sanctorum  or 
Sanctorale,  of  the  Sarum  Missal.  The  title  '  Proprium  Sanctorum  ' 
is  not  therefore  strictly  appropriate.  Those  on  gospels  taken 
from  the  'Proper  of  the  Season'  are  ten  in  number,  and  are 
numbered  in  the  present  edition  LXXXIX  to  XCVII  and  CIV. 
The  offices  for  the  first  nine  of  the  festivals  thus  included  in 
the  writer's  plan,  stand  all  in  close  juxtaposition  in  the  Sarum 
Missal,  except  that  the  office  for  St.  Thomas  of  Canterbury  (Thomas 
a  Becket,)  comes  between  those  for  the  Holy  Innocents  and  the 
Sixth  Day  after  Christmas,  and  St.  Sylvester  precedes  the  Cir- 
cumcision. The  omission  of  St.  Thomas'  feast  by  the  writer  is 
perhaps  significant,  and  may  be  taken  as  the  first  premonitory 
symptom  of  the  storm  raised  against  the  Archbishop's  memory,  and 
against  the  popular  devotion  to  him,  in  the  reign  of  Henry  VIII.] 


pE  Gospel  on  Seint  Andreus  Evyn. 

[SERMON     LXXXVI.] 

Stahat  Johamies. — John  i.  [29.] 

pis  gospel  tellij)  in  storie,  how  Crist  gederide  his  disciplis, 
and  sei]>,  ])at  Joon  stood  and  two  of  Joones  disciplis,   mid  Joon 
biheld  Jesus  wa7idringe,  and  seide  ]?us  of  him :  Lo,  pe  lombe  of 
God.     Joon  Baptist  was  bifore  Crist  to  make  ]>q  weie  redi  to 


*  By  an  error  of  the  scribe  these 
sermons  are  numbered  as  thirty- 
seven  only  in  MS.  Bodl.  788,  the 
same  number  being  assigned  to  ser- 


mons CIV  and  CV ;  and  the  mis- 
take is  repeated  in  Dr.  Shirley's 
Catalogue. 


John  sending 
disciples  to 
Christ. 


29*^ 


WFC  LI  F'S 


Comparison 
between  the 
behaviour  of 
John  the  Bap- 
tist and  the 
friars. 


him ;  and  al  his  entent  was  to  hi^e  Crist  and  his  ordre.  And 
})us  whanne  he  clepide  Crist  jje  lombe  of  God,  he  tolde  Jje 
innocence  of  Crist,  and  how  he  shulde  die  for  man.  And  ])is 
was  figurid  in  sleying  of  \q  Pask  lombe.  For  as  jje  Pask  lombe 
was  offrid  of  oo  jeer  wijjouten  -wemm,  so  Crist  was  ofifrid  at 
Pask  to  bie  his  Chirche,  of  jje  firste  preest ;  and  ])is  preest  is 
bo])e  God  and  man.  And  j^us  Crist  is  ]>q  lomb  of  God;  and 
as  a  lomb  ha]?  no  kyndeli  gendrure,  but  it  is  clene  wi]?outen 
scabbe,  so  Crist  was  evermore  a  virgyn,  and  clene  wi|)OUten 
ony  synne,  Aftd  two  disciplis  of  Joon  her  den  him  speke,  and 
sueden  Jesus.  And  Jesus  hcrnede  ayn  and  saw  hem  suyng  him, 
and  seide  to  hem  :  What  seke  y  ?  And pei  seiden  to  Crist,  Maistre, 
where  dwellist  pou  ?  And  Crist  seide  to  hem,  pat  pei  shulden 
come  and  see.  pei  comen  a?td  sawen  zvhere  Crist  shulde  dwelle, 
afid  divelliden  wip  him  pat  dai ;  and  it  was  as  pe  tenpe  hour. 
And  oon  of  pe  iivo  disciplis  was  Andreu,  Symondis  hroper,  pat^ 
her  den  peir  maistir  Joon  speke  |)us,  and  sueden  Crist  for  good 
entent. 

So|)li  Joon  Baptist  hadde  disciplis,  to  make  hem  redi  to  Cristis 
ordre.  And  |>is  priour  grutchide  not,  but  was  fayne  J^at  \€\ 
wenten  to  Crist ;  for  he  synne]?  hugeli  }>at  of  two  goodis  chesij? 
]?e  worse.  And  wolde  God  ]?at  oure  newe  ordris  wolden  wel 
undirstonde  ])is  storie.  panne  ]?ei  shulden  preise  Crist  and  his 
ordre,  and  be  mekeli  his  disciplis,  and  make  ])er  disciplis  redi 
to  come  to  Cristis  ordre,  and  grutche  not  for  ]?ei  wenten  out 
fre  from  hem  to  Cristis  ordre.  For  certis  Baptistis  ordre  was 
betre  ]?an  ben  alle  J>es  newe  ordris,  and  he  grutchide  not  but 
was  ful  fayn  ]?at  }?ei  jeden  fro  him  to  Crist.  And  so  shulden 
alle  J?es  privat  patrons  be  fayn  of  ]?er  disciplis  whanne  ]?ei 
wenten  fro  ]?er  ordre,  and  camen  freli  to  Cristis  ordre ;  for 
Cristis  ordre  is  betere  ]?an  is  hern,  as  we  taken  here  of  bileve. 
And  ]7us  alle  J?es  synnen  gretli,  ]?at  taken  ]?is  worse  and  leven 
J?e  betere.  And  it  is  a  fcndis  envie,  on  ]?is  manere  to  harme  ])er 
bre]?ren,  and  algatis,  for  a  pride  bifore,  to  hie  a^en  Crist  j^er 
rotun  ordre.  And  3if  J^ou  seie  ]?at  }?is  skile  wente  for]?  ^,  5if  Crist 
were  dwelling  here  in  er}?e,  and  gedride  to  him  ^  disciplis  as  he 


'  So  E :  A  has  and. 


for\'e  wente,  E. 


^  hym,  E. 


SERMONS. 


297 


dide  in  Baptist  tyme;  but  now  Crist  is  went  to  hevene,  and 
men  gaderen  to  hem  disciplis;  certis  |)is  feyned  skile  wolde 
distrie  alle  Jjes  ordris.  For  ]?er  patroun,  as  )>ei  seien,  is  went  to 
hevene,  and  dwelU]?  wi]>  Crist.  And  5if  ]>er  ordre  dwelli]>  aftir, 
muchil  more  shulde  Cristis  ordre,  sij?  Crist  is  ever  wij)  his 
discipHs  o]?erwise  |)an  |?es  patrouns  mai.  And  where  |)0U 
seiest  })at  ])es  ordris  gederen  discipHs  unto  Cristis  ordre,  certis 
jianne  jjei  erren  foulli,  to  cloute  ))us  to  Cristis  reule ;  as,  if  men 
varieden  ])us  fro  ])er  reule,  ]?ei  wolden  seie  |)ei  broken  ]jer 
ordre,  si]?  ])es  ordris  acorden  more  togidere,  ]?an  ony  of  J)es  and 
Cristis  ^  ordre,  J)at  is  comoun  to  Cristyn  men,  and  was  bifore 
jjes  ordris  bigan.  Lord !  si])  ])es  ordris  wolden  bere  hevy  \>2X 
men  wenten  to  ano]jer  ordre,  how  shulden  not  Crist  and  hise 
bere  hevy  })at  men  wenten  out  of  Cristis  ordre?  and  moche 
more  ^  ^if  fendis  lettiden  to  come  a3en  freeli  to  Crist,  pis 
synne  wole  Crist  juge,  ])at  is  weie,  treujje,  and  liif,  how  men 
letten  to  wenden  his  weie.  And  errour  wole  not  excuse,  si}) 
Poul  wende  he  hadde  do  wel  plesing  God  whanne  he  blas- 
femyde.  pis  prisonyng  in  ])es  ordris,  ])at  letten  men  to  go 
freeli  out  of  hem  to  Cristis  ordre,  is  worse  ])an  ony  o])er  sect, 
and  liik  to  ])e  fendis  ordre,  ])at  letti})  men  to  go  from  him.  For 
fro  Crist  mai  men  go  freeli  unto  \e  fend ;  but  ])is  condicioun  of 
])e  feend,  foundun  in  })es  ^  newe  ordris,  is  sprongen  to  popis  and 
to  kyngis  bo})e,  ])at  consenten  and  helpen  herto. 

])is  Andreu  fond  first  his  broper,  pat  is  seid  Symound,  and 
seide  to  him  :  We  han  foundun  Messi^.pe  which  is  pe  grete  Crist. 
It  was  comun  in  ])e  olde  lawe  ])at  a  greet  profete  shulde  come 
of  ]>e  kynrede  of  Jewis,  and  bringe  hem  to  ful  freedom;  and 
})is  was  clepid  Messias,  and  Crist  bi  o  witt.  And  Andrezv  ledde 
■Petre  to  fesus  ;  and  Jesus  biheld  Petre,  and  seide,  pou  art  Symont, 
be  sone  of  Johanna :  pou  shalt  be  callid"  Petre,  and  be  maad 
capteyn  of  apostlis,  for  vertues  })at  Y  see  in  })ee.  On  pe 
morewe  wolde  Crist  go  out  into  Galile,  and  fond  Philip,  and 
seide.  Sue  me.  pis  Philip  was  of  Bepsaida,  pat  was  citee  of 
Andreu  and  Petre.  And  Philip  fond  Nathanael,  and  seide  to  him 
on   ])is  manere :    Him  pat  Moises  hap  ivritun  in  pe  lawe  and 

^  So  E;  A  has  Anticristii,  which  gives  no  sense.  ^  So  in  E  ;  om.  A. 

^  So  E;  A  ha,s  ])is.  '  Mes^y,  E.  ^'clepid,  E. 


Acts  xxvi.  9. 


298 


WYCLIF'S 


Christ  teaches 
his  divinity. 


I  Cor.  ii.  6. 


prophetis,  we  han  /ounden,  Jesus,  Josepts  sone,  0/  Na-^areJ^,  And 
Naihanael  seide  to  Philip,  Of  Na'^areJ?  viai  sum  good  be?  And 
Philip  seide  to  Nathanael pat  he  shulde  come  ajidse  Jesus.  Jesus  saw 
Natha7iael  coniyng  to  him,  and  seide  of  him  :  Lo,  verili,  a  man  of 
Israel  in  whom  is  noo  gile.  And  Nathanael  seide  to  Crist :  Wher- 
of  hast  Jou  knowe  me  ?  Jesus  answeride  and  seide  to  him,  Bifore 
pat  Philip  clepide  pee,  whanne  pou  ivas  undir  pe  fige  tree,  Y  saw 
pee.  And  here  Crist  techij?  his  Godhed  in  a  maner  bi  his 
speche  }>at  he  seij>  here.  Nathanael  was  a  wise  man,  and  J>erfor 
spak  more  sutilli.  For  as  Poul  sei]?,  we  speken  wisdom  among 
wise  men.  Crist  telli]>  here  to  Nathanael  how  he  saw  him  undir 
jje  fige  tree,  pat  mote  be  bi  his  Godhede ;  for  bodili  si^t  cam 
not  J)anne.  And  Jjus  jjat  Crist  knewe  ]?e  hert  of  Nathanael  was 
bi  his  Godhede.  And  j)us  Crist  tellij?,  but  privyly,  whereof  he 
knewe  Nathanael, — for  of  his  Godhede  he  knewe  him,  as  Crist 
mente  in  hise  wordis.  Ajid  Nathanael  answeride  and  seide  to 
Crist :  Maister,  pou  art  Goddis  so?ie,  and  pou  art  king  of  Israel. 
Jesus  answeride  and  seide  to  him.  For  V  seide  to  pee  pat  V  saw  pee 
undir  pe  fige  tree,  pou  hilevest ;  perfore  pou  shall  se  more  pan 
pese.  Arid  Crist  seide  to  pes  inen  togider,  Sopeli,  I  seie  to r^ou,  y 
shal  se  hevene  open,  and  auftgels  of  God  steynge  up  and  comynge 
doun  upon  me,  al  if  Y  be,  mannis  sone. 

In  ])is  story  mai  we  see  many  treujjis  J)at  we  shulden  trowe. 
First,  how  proctours  of  Crist  shulden  gete  disciplis  to  him  bi 
skilful  mevyng  ^  of  Goddis  lawe,  )>at  J?ei  mijten  freeli  come  to 
Crist,  and  not  bi  chaffaryng  of  erj^eli  |?ingis,  as  ])ese  newe  ordris 
chafifaren.  Men  jjat  comen  to  ]?es  dowid  ordris  [and]  ^  bringen 
Jjer  cloJ)ing  wij>  hem,  bo]?e  for  her  bedde  and  bak ;  for  richesse 
letti]?  to  5yve  hem  J>ese ;  and  over  ]?is  J>ei  moten  bringe  bo])e 
a  cuppe  and  spone  to  drynke  and  ete  |?eir  potage ;  for  on  ]?es 
Jjingis  is  Jjer  ]?ou3t.  In  ))es  ordris  of  J^ese  beggaris  \€\  have 
contrarie  maner ;  for  \€\,  al  ful  of  disseit,  not  wi|?outen  gile  as 
Na]?anael,  wij>  divers  and  litil  ^iftis,  and  false  wordis,  disseyven 
children.  For  )>ei  abiden  not  to  ful  age,  as  weren  Andrew,  Peter, 
and  Philip ;  but  bifore  men  have  discrecioun  in  J^eir  childhode 
))ei  ben  \m>  begiUd.     And  so  |)e  first  part  of  J>es  ordris  telli]> 


ynovyng,  E. 


■^  om.  E;  rightly. 


SERMONS. 


299 


how  J)ei  shal  ever  be  nedi,  and  j^at  o|)er  latter  part  telli]? 
how  |)ei  shal  ever  be  bigilid ;  but  on  neij^er  of  |?es  maners  chees 
Crist  his  disciplis ;  but  ]jes  men  likli  ben  oblishid  unto  fendis — 
to  ]?e  fend  jjat  is  Mammon,  and  to  ]?e  fadir  of  lesingis.  And 
bo|)e  ))es  ben  fendis,  as  ben  alle  J^at  shal  be  dampned.  But 
here  j^es  ordris  fagen,  and  seien,  we  knowun  not  j^es  entrees, 
for  ]>es  ordris  wij?  possessiouns  bi  \\s  cause  taken  men  wi|> 
goodis,  ]?at  ]>e  worlde  slmlde  knowe  ]jat  ]?ei  take  not  beggers, 
but  riche,  as  jiei  shal  ever  be.  pe  freris  seien,  J>ei  taken  in 
children,  for  j?ei  ben  moost  innocentis,  and  li3t  to  norishe  in 
Goddis  lawe,  as  ]?ei  ben  at  ]>e  bigynnyng.  But  nei])er  of  |)es 
grounden  hem  in  Goddis  lawe  bi  ]jer  dedes.  pe  firste  word  of 
j>e  firste  ordre  techi]?  how  he  partij>  wi]?  |>e  tojjer  patroun,  and  ])e 
to|?er  parti]?  wij?  him  in  synne,  as  seintis  parten  in  good.  Sojjli 
})es  possessioners  maken  in  J>er  professioun  Jjat  J)ei  professen 
povert,  chastite,  and  obedience  to  Crist,  and  at  ]je  bigynnynge 
]?ei  moten  nedes  professen  ]?e  contrarie.  And  in  tokene  of  ])e 
firste,  ]?at  Jjei  han  renounsid  ^  povert,  and  ben  oblishid  to  worldli 
richesse,  |>ei  bringen  her  cuppe  and  her  spone,  in  tokene  ]jat  to 
drynke  and  pulment  ]?ei  ben  oblishid  bifore  o]?er;  and  bojjc 
})es  ben  no  povert  to  sue  Crist,  but  ]?e  contrarie.  pes  freris,  J)at 
oblishen  ]?er  bre])ren  bi  falshed  and  o]?er  giles,  maken  jjer  pro- 
testacioun  J)at  ]?ei  forsaken  after  treuj^e ;  and  in  reule  of  J>e  fadir 
of  lesingis  ])ei  wolen  drawe  to  ]?e  dej)  dai.  And  5if  disseit  of 
5ong  men  bi  Goddis  lawe  shulde  be  dampned,  muche  more 
disseit  of  children  J)at  wanten  discrescioun,  but  han  |)er  eldris 
for  l^er  keperis ;  for  ]>ei  wittis  wanten  kyndeli  ^.  And  si])  God 
sei])  in  his  lawe,  ]jat  whoso  steli]?  a  man,  he  shal  be  kild  bi 
Goddis  lawe,  it  seme]?  Jjat  alle  J>es  benperis  shulden  be  kild  of 
God  by  skile ;  for  si]?  ])efte  is  taking  of  o]?er  mennis  J)ingis, 
a^ens  ])e  wille  of  ]?e  lord,  it  seme]?  ]?at  J^is  takyng  of  children, 
]?at  freris  shulden  have  bi  noo  lawe,  is  taking  of  o]?er  mennis 
jjingis,  for  taking  of  fadirs  ])ing  and  modirs.  And  ])is  tresour 
is  moost  presciouse  and  ful  costli  to  ]?es  fadirs.  And  where  it 
be  a^ens  ]?eir  wille,  examine  hem,  and  ]?ei  shal  telle.  And  }?es 
children  comen  in  bi  ]?efte,  and  ]?ei  ben  ]?eves  in  al  her  lyf,  to 

^  So  E;  re?iotmsi\),  A. 
a  That  is,  are  naturally  deficient. 


Hypocrisy  of 
the  reirulars. 


Ez.  xxi.  16. 


300 


wr  CLIP'S 


Why  Natha- 
nael  was  not 
chosen  to  be 
an  apostle. 


Why  some 
apostles  were 
left  for  a  time 
in  the  world. 


caste  how  J>ei  shal  cleke  to  freris  alle  J>e  goodis  jjat  ]?ei  mai 
geten,  ou]jer  of  ]jer  frendis  or  of  oj^er,  bi  what  menis  |?at  )?ei  can 
caste.  And  |)es  ordris  folwen  more  to  fendis  |)an  don  Jje  firste 
ordris  of  Mammon. 

Over  ])is,  men  douten  comunly,  whi  Crist  chees  not  Na- 
thanael,  si]?  he  was  witty  and  good  to  be  Cristis  apostle.  But 
here  men  seien  comunli  ]?at  ]?er  ben  many  chesingis  of  Crist. 
Crist  chesi]?  sum  to  his  disciplis  for  to  come  afterward  to 
blis.  And  ])us  men  supposen  J>at  Crist  ches  jjis  Nathanael ;  for 
Crist  preiside  him  ful  myche,  and  algatis  of  ^  virtu  of  treu])e. 
And  ]jus  Crist  haj>  many  disciplis  Jjat  ben  hid,  as  Nathanael,  as 
was  Joseph  and  Nicodeme  and  o]?er,  til  Jjc  dale  of  dome ;  for 
ever  Cristis  ordre  shal  laste,  and  tellen  here  o])er  ]?er  defautes. 
But  ]?is  Nathanael  was  to  wiis  to  be  chosen  Cristis  apostle,  for 
Crist  wolde  shewe  bi  miracle,  bi  rude  ^  men  to  turne  J>e  world. 
And  J)us  he  wolde  make  up  of  fisheris  and  o]?er  comunes  his 
apostlis,  and  make  hem  passe  in  witt  and  wisdom  alle  o]?er 
men  of  |>is  world. 

But  5it  men  douten  comunli  how  Crist  chees  here  jjes  |?ree 
apostlis,  and  toke  hem^  not  anoon  wi]?  him,  but  lete  hem  wende 
into  J^e  world  and  lyve  comun  lyf  as  laborers,  as  it  was  tau^t  in 
Petre  and  o])er.  But  here  we  trowen  ]jat  Crist  dide  ]?us  to  con- 
founde  ]?es  cloistreris ;  for  Crist  wiste  wel  j?at  \€\  shulden  come 
and  disseyve  muche  of  |)is  world,  and  seie  ]jat  it  falli])  not  to 
hem  to  labore,  ne  dwelle  out  of  Jjer  cloistre,  si]?  J?ei  passen  ojjer 
men  in  newe  signes  \2X  \€\  han  founden.  And  to  distrie  J)is 
ypocrisie  dide  autor  of  religioun  jjis : — he  chees  not  |>es  dis- 
cipUs  unto  cloistre  ]>at  he  dwelte  inne,  but  into  place  removable, 
as  was  Moises  tabernacle.  And  J>is  is  better  ordre  here ;  si)> 
here  we  have  noo  citee  dwellinge,  but  here  we  seken  Jje  blisse  of 
hevene.  And  ]?us  wente  Crist  on  jje  morewe  in  to  ]?e  contre  of 
Galile.  But  men  seien  comunli  ]?at  Crist  clepide  ofte  his  dis- 
ciplis :  first,  to  be  homely  wi])  him,  and  leve  sumwhat  of  worldli 
curis ;  after,  whanne  jjci  weren  more  ripe,  to  suen  him  bo]>e  dai 
and  nijt,  and  si)),  after  his  resureccioun,  to  don  |jer  hi^e  apostlis 
workes.     And   ])us  was  Poul    chosun  to  be  apostle   after  J)e 


««,  E. 


busloiise,  E. 


^  So  E;  om.  A. 


SERMONS. 


301 


assencioun  of  Crist ;  and  anoon  he  wcnte  and  prechide  and 
dide  as  hi^est  apostle  shiilde  do.  And  algatis  we  ben  taujt  bi 
Crist  to  flee  prisonyng  of  men  as  |?eves.  But  5if  |>ei  wolen 
dwelle  wi)>  Crist,  )?ei  shulden  freeli  do  J)er  werkes,  and  avente 
hem  in  j?is  world,  and  be  not  weddid  wij>  er]?eli  |)ingis.  Soj)  it 
is  )?at  Crist  sum  tyme  constreynede  men,  shewinge  his  Godhede; 
as  Crist  smot  Poul  doun,  and  turnede  his  herte  to  love  of  him. 
But  he  wolde  jjat  his  ordre  stood  in  pacience,  mekenesse,  and 
charite,  and  speciali  to  turne  ]?e  world  fro  richessis  and  lustis  of 
bodi :  but  ]jes  newe  religious  reversen  Crist  in  alle  ])es  ]?ingis. 


f'E  Gospel  on  Seynt  Andreus  Day. 


[SERMON     LXXXVII.] 

Amhulans  Jesus  juxta  mare  Galilee. — Matt.  iv.  [18.] 

pis  gospel  of  Mathew  telli])  how  Crist  clepide  foure  apostlis : 
Petre  and  Andrew,  James  and  Joon,  fro  craft  of  ]?er  fishing. 
And  so  seij?  Mathew  Jjat  Crist  wandride  hi  pe  water  of  Galile. 
Ebreus  clepen  ech  water  a  see;  and  so  ech  ryver  is  a  see. 
And  })is  ryver  of  Galile  likide  Crist  ofte  to  wende^  biside  it. 
Crist  saw  }>es  foure  brejjeren  j^at  weren  fisheris  in  ]?is  water. 
First  he  saw  Symoimd  Petre,  and  Andreu  pat  was  his  hroper, 
putting  per  nett  into  pe  water  ;  for  pei  weren  fisheris.  And  he 
seide  to  hem,  Come  after  me,  and  Y  shal  make  ■^ou  to  be  maad 
fisheris  of  men.  Crist  spak  ofte  bi  his  manhede,  and  dide 
worship  to  his  Fadir ;  as  here  Crist  bad  J>es  two  disciplis  ]>at 
l^ei  shulden  come  after  him,  — neijjer  go  bifore  him  ne  come 
aside  in  J?er  lyvyng, — but  as  \€\  sawen  |)er  maistre  lyve,  so 
shulden  \€\  sue  him  in  \€\x  lyf.  And  herfore  Crist  reprovede 
Petre,  as  |>e  gospel  telli)?  after,  and  seide;  Go  bihinde  me, 
Sathanas,  for  j?ou  savorist  not  Goddis  ]?ingis.  Crist  clepide 
not  j?es  two  apostlis  to  his  chaumbre  to  ete  applis ;  but  in  |)e 
comun  feld,  he  clepide  hem  fro  worldli  traveil,  and  tolde  hem 


The  calling  of 
Peter  and 
Andrew  and 
the  two  sons 
of  Zebedee. 


>  go,  E. 


302 


WFCLIF'S 


The  gospel  in 
everj'  part  true 
and  self-con- 
sistent. 


Attack  on  the 
friars. 


Papal  appoint- 
ments to 
bishoprics 
and  benefices 
discussed. 


of  a  betere  traveile,  in  which  ])ei  shulden  take  men.  And  pes 
two  anoon  lefien  per  netits,  and  per  boot,  and  sueden  Crist. 
Mathew  telli]?  not  how  fer  jjes  apostlis  sueden  Crist;  but  oo 
|>ing  we  trowen  as  bileve, — ]?at  no  gospel  contrariej?  to  o]?er, 
and  no  part  of  |je  gospel  is  fals ;  but  ech  part  acordij)  to  ojjer. 
We  trowen  also  ]?at  Jesus  Crist  mevede  j)es  men,  boj^e  wi]?inne 
and  wi|)Oute,  and  shewide  his  vertue  in  ]?er  soulis,  and  made 
hem  bowe  to  his  bidding.  But  God  forbede  ]?at  we  shulden 
trowe,  for  men  wolen  not  bowe  to  us,  j?at  we  shulden  clepe 
hem  worldli,  contrarie  to  Cristis  cleping,  or  ellis  grounde  a 
newe  ordre,  as  we  wolden  passe  Crist.  For  if  we  wolen  holde 
Cristis  ordre,  we  moten  nedeli  sue  Crist.  And  J)us  it  seme]?  ^ 
to  many  men  J>at  patrouns  of  ])es  newe  ordris  gon  bifore  Crist, 
as  Sathanas  ;  and  leeven  and  dispisen  his  ordre. 

Ajid  Jesus  goinge  forp  pennes,  saw  op  ere  two  breper  en,  James 
and  Joon,  ivhiche  weren  Zebedees  children  ;  and  wip  pis  Jadir 
in  pe  boot,  beetinge  per  nettis  to  take  fishe.  And  Crist  clepide  pes 
two  brepereji ;  and  pei  anoon  lejten  per  fiettis,  and  per  Jadir,  and 
sueden  him;  for  |?es  two  disciplis  weren  meevyd  of  Crist,  as 
o])er  two,  and  it  seme]?  ]?ei  loveden  more  Crist,  for  ]?ei  leften 
more  ])er  fadir ;  and  ]?us  j^ei  weren  wor]>i  of  Crist,  si]>  J>ei 
loveden  him  so  muche.  For  Crist  sei]?,  whosoever  love}?  ony 
man  more  |?an  him,  he  is  not  wor|>i  of  him,  and  so  not  wor|>i 
of  heveifli  blis.  It  is  told  ofte  bifore  of  alle  ])es  newe  ordris, 
how  Jjei  ben  not  groundid  in  Crist,  ne  in  ony  dedis  ]?at  he  dide. 
pei  done  sumwhat  Jjat  is  good,  and  many  ]?ingis  amys ;  and 
so  stondi]?  ]?er  cloutid  reule,  bo]?e  in  good  and  in  yvel ;  and  Jjus 
is  Macometis  lawe  and  conjourisons  maad.  And  shortli,  noon 
yvel  is  suffrid,  but  ^if  it  be  groundid  in  good. 

But  it  were  to  wite  over,  whe]?er  ]?ese  chesingis  J^at  preestis 
maken,  and  ))is  dowyng  ]jat  ])ei  have,  ben  groundid  in  Goddis 
lawe.  And  trewe  men  witen  wel  ]?at  bo]?e  ]jes  reversen  Crist. 
As  anentis  })is  chesing,  foolis  maken  J)is  resoun.  Crist  chees 
him  apostlis,  and  prelaUs  shulde  sue  Crist,  and  speciali  popis 


a  Two  leaves  of  the  MS.  E  (Douce 
321)  are  here  wanting;  the  hiatus, 
beginning  at  this  point,  extends  to 
the  words  '  muche  in  gloterie,'   in- 


clusive, on  p.  306.  The  text  is 
therefore  solely  dependent  on  A, 
up  to  that  point. 


SERMONS. 


3^?, 


and  bishopis ;  whi  shuldcn  not  pci  chese  curatis  ?  for  ellis 
shulden  officeris  perishe,  and,  bi  defaute  of  hem,  Goddis  hous. 
And  |)us  |>es  two  j^ingis  wolen  sue  :  |>at  ojjer  popis  shulden  not 
sue  Crist,  or  ellis  )>ei  shulden  chese  prelatis,  as  jje  popis  lawe 
techi|>.  pe  secounde  J^ing  })at  sue]?  here  is  foule  inconvenient, 
]7at  |)e  pope,  Cristis  viker,  ]?at  ha}?  his  Chirche  for  to  kepe, 
shulde  lete  jje  Chirche  perishe  for  defaute  of  siche  chesinge. 
And  it  is  fittinge  |)at  \e  pope,  |)at  haj?  more  witt  and  autorite, 
shulde  ordeyne  for  |?is  chesing,  sij?  he  is  heed  of  holy  Chirche. 
Here  we  shal  suppose,  first,  ])at  we  speken  in  ]?is  mater,  as  if 
\q  pope  hadde  not  ^it  ordeyned  lawis  of  sich  eleccioun,  but 
how  Goddis  lawe  and  resoun  wolde  teche  for  to  worche  here ; 
and  j)anne  many  men  })enken  ])at  }>is  eleccioun  shulde  not  be, 
si|>  it  mai  not  be  groundid  in  resoun  ne  in  Goddis  lawe.  And 
to  |?e  resoun  jjat  is  maad  for  })e  contrarie  part,  we  shal  suppose 
j)at  ech  man,  but  algatis  ]>q  pope,  shulde  sue  Crist.  But  ^it, 
for  dignite  of  Crist,  men  shulden  ever  putte  him  bifore,  and 
5yve  to  Crist  a  worjnnes  ]?at  mai  oonli  acorde  to  him,  for  ellis 
Crist  were  not  abbot  over  alle  ojjer  men,  and  maister  over  alle 
hise  bre])eren,  as  he  is  boj^e  God  and  man.  And  Jjus  ech  o]?er 
preest  shulde  mekeli  sue  Crist,  and  nei]?er  go  evene  wij?  Crist, 
ne  bifore  him,  as  dide  Petre,  and  ])erfore  he  was  clepide 
Sajianas,  and  beden  go  bihynde  Crist.  And  |)us  a  perel  in  |?e 
Chirche,  j^at  Poul  tau5te  for  to  come,  is,  |)at  Anticrist  hi^e  him 
above  Crist,  bo))e  God  and  man.  And  |>us  we  graunten  ]?at 
Crist  chese  to  him  apostlis  and  o]?er  disciplis,  ojjerwise  ])an  ]>e 
Pope  of  Rome  mai  or  can  chese  him  servauntis ;  si})  Crist  was 
bo|)e  God  and  man,  and  knewe  alle  j^ingis  })at  shulde  be,  and 
wiste  fulli  what  was  best,  and  wrou^te  ever  wi}?oute  defaute. 
And  })us  sei})  })e  gospel  bifore,  }?at  disciplis  sawun  where  Crist 
shulde  dwelle;  for  alle  };ingis  jjat  Crist  dide  he  shulde  do  so 
for  |)e  beste.  And  J)us  ^if  Crist  chees  disciplis,  jje  pope  shulde 
not  })erfore  chese  \\i?. ;  for  \>e  pope  mai  not  be  evene  wi]?  Crist, 
in  witt,  ne  in  autorite  ;  but  he  shulde  sue  Crist  here  as  diden 
Cristis  apostlis  bifore.  Goddis  lawe  telli]?,  whanne  ))ei  chosen 
Mathi  as  })e  twelfj^e  postle  of  Crist  in  })e  stede  of  Scarioth,  ]?ei 
kepten  |>is  ordre  in  \\s  eleccioun :  \e\  chosen  two,  }je  whiche 
})ei  wisten  moost  able  to  be  apostle,  and  moo  |)ei  wolden  have 


2  Thess.  ii.  4. 


3^4 


WFCLIF'S 


The  Pope's 
proceedings 
appear  to 
identify  him 
■withAntichrist. 


chosen  jif  )jei  hadden  knowe  siche  moo ;  but,  for  ])ei  knewun 
not  ]>e  beter  of  Joseph  and  Mathi,  j^ei  putten  it  in  Goddis  juge- 
ment  whe]?er  of  ]>es  two  Crist  wolde  have;  and  preieden  ful 
devouteli,  si]>  Crist  knewe  \q  hertis  of  men,  |)at  Crist  shulde 
shewe  whe|?er  of  ]?es  two  he  hadde  chosen,  bi  casting  of  lottis. 
And  sijj  Petre  and  ojjer  apostlis  weren  in  Jjis  chesinge,  and  ]?ei 
weren  moo,  and  more  witti,  ]?an  |>e  Pope  of  Rome,  it  seme]? 
|)at  he  shulde  after  hem  make  his  more  elecciouns.  Apostlis 
chosen  preestis  in  contres  |>at  ]>ei  wenten  bi,  and  maden  hem 
dwellinge  curatis ;  and  |?ei  hadden  myche  goodis.  But  apostlis 
weren  algatis  pore  men  and  overseeris ;  for  j>is  poverte  was 
perfeccioun  ])at  felde  more  to  hem.  For  Crist,  her  alj)er 
maister,  was  moost  pore  man.  But  o])er  fourme  of  chesinge  can 
we  not  grounde  in  Goddis  lawe.  And  si]?  Crist,  God  and  man, 
chees  so  fewe  men  in  |)is  office,  and  ]?e  pope  chesi])  so  many, 
wijjoute  si^t  in  Godhede,  it  seme]?  J^at  he  is  hied  over  Crist, 
and  so  over  al  ]?at  is  seid  God.  For  certis  Crist  my^te  not 
make  al  Jjes  eleccions ;  si]?  Crist  ne  my^te  not  chese,  but  ]?at 
he  saw  |)e  Godhede  chese.  But  popis  chesyn,  for  moneie  or 
for  preier  of  princis,  many  men  jjat  ben  unable  to  here  haly  water 
in  chirchis  ^  Lord !  si])  Crist  my5te  not  do  J?is, — and  \\s  ]?ei 
taken  for  excellence, — how  sich  men  hien  hem  not  above  Crist 
and  al  ]>at  is  God !  for  certeinli  Crist  my^te  not  make  siche 
elecciouns.  pes  men  suen  not  Crist,  as  diden  Peter  and  ojjer 
apostlis,  but  algatis  gon  bifore  Crist.  And  so  Crist  clepide 
hem  Sa|)anas ;  sij)  Crist  accepti}?  not  persones,  but  taki])  ech 
man  as  he  is  wor]>i,  sum  men  goode  and  sum  men  fendis,  after 
]?at  jjei  suen  Crist.  And  ])us  it  seme]>  to  many  men,  ^if  ])e 
Pope  wolde  be  Cristis  disciple,  he  shulde  leeve  J>es  elecciouns, 
or  use  hem  as  Petre  dide.  Wei  Y  woot  })at  Crist  forsook  to 
juge  in  temporal  goodis ;  and  ]^is  jugement,  evyl  done,  is  myche 
worse  to  ]?€  juge.     And  ])us  aposdis  makinge  preestis  hadden 


»  '  men  t>at  ben  unable  to  bere  haly 
water  in  chirchis.']  This  may  either 
mean  laytnen,  —  men  who  are  not 
qualified  to  discharge  even  the  hum- 
blest ecclesiastical  function, —  or,  as 
I  am  more  inclined  to  believe, 
clerks,  so  ignorant  and  incompetent 
as  to  be  unfit  even  for  the  duty  of 


an  acolyte  in  carrying  the  Asper- 
sorium  with  holy  water,  for  the 
priest  to  use  in  the  ceremony  of  the 
Aspefges.  To  bere  is  the  expression, 
not  to  use,  for  the  act  of  sprinkling 
could  only  be  performed  by  a  priest. 
See  Ferraris'  Bibliotheca,  articles 
Aspersorium,  Aqua  Benedicta,  Ordo. 

WYCLIF. 


SERMONS. 


3^5 


shewing  of  God ;  for  ellis  j^ei  hadden  do  folili  in  j^ingis  |>at  }>ei 
knewen  not.  And  ^if  j>e  pope  lefte  |)is  )?ing  for  peril  })at  lie]? 
jjerinne,  holi  Chirche  shulde  not  perishe,  but  profile  more  ]jan 
it  doi}>  now.  For  jjanne  weren  bishopis  ful  apostlis  and  pore 
men  as  |)ei  weren  first,  and  not  chargious  to  ])Q  peple,  but 
doinge  |)ingis  ]?at  felde  to  hem.  And  so,  wi]>outen  sich  signes, 
mi^te  ]?e  chirche  be  wel  governed.  And  ])us  is  )?is  resoun  as- 
soilid  ])at  was  first  maad  for  ]?e  pope,  |)at  he  mot  nede,  for  Cristis 
love,  and  for  love  of  his  Chirche,  be  ])us  occupied,  for  prelacie 
]?at  holi  Chirche  must  nedis  have.  Certis  ]>is  is  a  false  ground 
and  mychel  harm  come])  ])erof.  But  whanne  o  blinde  ledi]) 
a  blynde,  ])ei  fallen  boj^e  in  J^e  lake.  And  ])us  seien  men,  Jjat 
coveitise  of  worshipis  and  worldli  goodis  blinden  prestis  bi 
symonye,  ])at  al  ])e  chirche  fari])  ])e  worse.  And  ]?us  mai  men 
see  here.  If  })es  prelatis  wolden  sue  Crist,  and  putte  his 
Chirche  out  of  peril,  J^ei  shulden  leve  ])is,  as  Crist  dide.  But 
bo])e  }?is  chesing  of  ]?e  pope,  and  o}>er  ])ing  Jjat  bringi}?  ^  herto, 
is  brou5t  in  bi  })e  fend,  and  not  bi  Cristis  autorite.  For  certis 
Crist  mi5te  not  himsilf  make  ])es  elecciouns.  But  as  ]?ei  seien, 
}>e  pope  mai  make  a  lew^id  man,  for  money,  a  greet  bishop  on 
his  chirche ;  but  ]?is  is  chirch  of  wickide  men. 

And  ]jus  alle  })es  popis  lawes,  biside  ])e  lawis  ])at  Crist  made, 
and  alle  ]>e  dedis  })at  he  doi]?  ])at  ben  not  groundid  in  Cristis  liif, 
ben  ful  venym  to  ]>e  chirche, — ^if  a  man  durste  seie  })us, — and 
popis  lawis  beren  no  streng])e  a5ens  men  ])at  holden  Jjis.  Lord, 
what  vertue  is  in  }?is  lawe  ! — })at  5if  two  han  \q  popis  grace, 
at  o  tyme,  in  oo  cuntre,  where  many  benefices  mai  falle,  he  J^at 
presenti])  first  his  grace,  he  shal  be  sped  bifore  ]?e  to]?er.  It 
ha])  fallen  ofte  tymes,  and  so  mai  it  falle  hereafter,  Jjat  two  men 
have  grace  at  oo  tyme  of  oo  collacioun,  and  ]?e  more  unable 
man,  ])at  lovej?  more  worldli  good,  presentij?  first  his  grace  to 
patrons, — for  Scarioth  slepi]?  not, — and  Jeanne,  bi  vertue  of  ]?is 
lawe,  shal  })is  fend  be  putt  bifore,  and  })is  good  man  putt 
bihynde.  But  ])is  is  yvel  fruyt  of  lawe ;  and  God  my^te  not 
make  ])is  lawe,  for  God  my^te  not  do  amys.  How  mai  ony 
viker  of  Crist  sue  Crist  in  doinge  ])us .?  But  certis  he  goij?  bifore 


SERMONS. 


a  That  is,  contributeth, 
X 


3o6  WFCLIF'S 

Crist,  or  ellis  on  o]>er  side  weie.  What  woot  J)e  pope  )je  stat 
of  contreis  of  many  hundrid  myle  from  him  ?  And  wordis  of 
false  coveitouse  men  shulden  not  in  ])is  lede  ]>e  pope;  but 
he  shulde  lyve  as  Crist  ha]?  tau^t,  and  not  ])us  blyndeli  lede  j>e 
Chirche.  Of  J?is  comen  a  ]?ousand  errours,  ]?at  siche  prelatis 
fallen  ynne.  pei  seien  ])at  jjei  mai  not  synne  in  j>is  state,  as 
Crist  my^te  not ;  for  Crist  ha]?  hi3t  to  his  Chirche,  ]?at  he  shal 
never  faile  to  it ;  and  ])us  jje  pope  is  God  in  er]>e,  and  ]?e  moste 
blessid  fadir.  Sich  heresies  ben  sowen,  jjat  a  man  ]?at  lovede 
Crist,  shulde,  for  to  suffre  dee]>,  a^ens  stonde  ]?es  heresies ;  for 
it  were  all  oon  to  seie  ]?us,  and  to  putt  Anticrist  above  Crist. 


On   EIjTEh   DAY   OF   SEYNT   ANDREU  a. 


[SERMON     LXXXVIIL] 


The  necessity 
of  penance. 


Postquam  autem  traditus  est  Johannes. — Mark  i.  [14.] 

pis  gospel  telli]),  as  o]?er  bifore,  of  chesing  of  Cristis  Apostlis. 
And  it  seme]?  \2X  Crist  prechide  first  whanne  Baptist  was  taken 
to  prisoun.  And  5if  Crist  prechide  privyli  bifore  Baptist  was 
enprisound,  \2X  was  in  anojjer  manere ;  for  Crist  wolde  jeve 
Baptiste  his  time.  After  pe  iyme  pat  Joon  was  traied  in  to  pe 
prisoun  of  Eroude  cam  Jesus  in  to  Galile,  prechinge  pe  gospel  of 
Goddis  rewfne;  and  seide,  pat  tyme  is  fulfillid,  and  pe  rewme 
of  God  shal  come.  Matheu  telli]>  how  Crist  bigan  to  preche 
fro  ]?e  tyme  \2X  Joon  was  taken,  and  toke  ])e  same  word  for 
his  teme  ]>at  Baptist  toke  whanne  he  prechide : — Do  je  pen- 
aunce,  for  ]?e  rewme  of  God  shal  come.  It  is  knowen  of 
Goddis  lawe,  how  mannis  kynde  was  exilid  for  synne  of  our 
firste  fadir  ]jat  stood  muche  in  gloterie^;  and  so  resoun  of  God 
axide  Jjat  comyng  ajen  of  ])is  rewme  shulde  be  gete  bi  penaunce 
contrarie  to  gloterie.      And  herfore  Crist,  oure  first  fadir  in 


a  There  is  an  office  for  the  octave 
of  St.  Andrew's  Day  in  the  Sariim 
missal,  and  from  it  the  writer  took 
the  gospel  here  preached  upon.    The 


Roman  missal  has  no  office  for  the 
day. 

"  See  note  on  p.  302. 


SERMONS, 


307 


spiritual  gendrure,  tau5te  us  for  to  do  penauncc  contra rie  to 
Adam's  lore ;  and  Baptist,  \>2X  was  Cristis  spouse  ^,  taujte 
bifore  Jje  same  lessoun.  And,  for  Goddis  kingdom  is  to  come, 
and  not  wi|?outen  sich  penaunce,  ech  man  jjat  wole  have 
hevene  shulde  be  aboute  to  do  sich  penance.  And  Jjus  J^e 
cause  of  Crist  is  pleyn  to  men  ])at  wole  undirstonde  it.  And 
j)is  forjjinking  is  not  ynow^,  but  5if  trouj^e  be  joyned  ])erwi]?. 
And  herfore  sei|)  Markus^  Gospel: — Forpenke  y  and  irowe  y 
to  pe  gospel.  Penaunce  disposi|>  a  man  to  take  byleeve  over 
a  beest,  and  Jeanne  bileve  ordeyne}?  him  to  be  groundid  in 
o]jer  vertues. 

And  Jesus  wendinge  forper  hiside  pe  see  o/Galtle,  saiv  Sy  mount, 
and  Aiidreu  his  broper,  cas tinge  her  nettis  in  to  pe  water;  for 
pes  two  weren  fisheris.  And  Jesus  seide  to  hem,  Come  y  after 
me  and  Y  shal  make  yii  to  be  maad  fisheris  of  men;  for  my 
Fadir  shal  m.ake  |>is.  And  anoon  pei  leften  per  nettis  and  sueden 
him,  as  his  disciplis. 

It  is  noo  drede  Crist  movede  })es  men,  bi  his  Godhede,  in 
j>er  soule,  and  disposide  hem  to  religioun  fro  ]?e  tyme  }mt  he 
5af  hem  witt ;  for  siche  men  wolde  Crist  have  to  grounden 
men  in  Goddis  lawe.  But  here  men  douten  comunli  whi  Crist 
lovede  Jjus  fisheris,  and  hunteris  he  lovede  but  litil,  as  Lameth 
and  Esau.  But  here  shulden  we  bileve  ]>at  Crist  accepti]?  noo 
persones ;  but  after  }>at  he  maki]>  hem  good,  he  lovij?  hem  more 
or  lesse.  And  so  fisheris  weren  betere  men,  and  jjerfore  Crist 
lovede  hem  more.  But  jit  stondi])  ]?e  doute  moved,  whi  Crist 
made  not  hunteris  betere  men  jjan  fisheris,  si)>  it  is  more  gentil 
craft.  Here  is  no  greet  questioun ;  for  God  mai  worche  as  he 
wole.  But  5it  men  seien  here,  J^at  fishing  is  |>e  porer  craft,  and 
more  acording  to  men,  and  neer  ]je  state  of  innocence;  and 
j?erfore  Crist  lovede  it  |)e  more.  So]?eli  men  hunten  in  Lenten, 
and  gentil  men, — to  have  ]?er  game,  whanne  ])ei  have  noon  oJ>er 

*  Markis,  E. 


»  St.  Gregory  (Homil.  xx.),  in 
commenting  on  the  text,  *  He  that 
hath  the  bride  is  the  bridegroom,' 
says,  '  ac  si  [Johannes]  diceret :  ego 
sponsus  non  sum,  sed  amicus  sponsi 
sum.'    But  our  author,  possibly  from 


imperfectly  remembering  the  pas- 
sage, calls  John  the  Baptist  the 
spouse  of  our  Lord,  a  title  of  dignity 
which  I  cannot  fmd  was  ever  con- 
ferred upon  him  by  any  of  the  Fa- 
thers or  Doctors  of  the  Church. 


Calling  of 
Simon  Peter 
and  Andrew. 


Reasons  for 
our  Lord's  sup- 
posed prefer- 
ence of  fisher- 
men to  hunters. 


X   2 


3o8 


WVCLIF'S 


Church  endow- 
ment and  its 
evils. 


avauntage,  aljif  J^er  travaile  be  bisie  and  muche.  But  not  so 
comunli  falli]>  ]?is  in  fishing.  And  fishis  ben  ner  \q  elementis, 
and  not  so  like  to  mannis  fleish ;  and  j^erfore  men  holden  an 
ordre  to  ete  fishe  and  leve  fleish ;  and  ])us  fishe  is  neer  to  mete 
J>at  man  shulde  have  in  Paradise,  and  sleying  of  fishe  is  fer]?er 
from  sleying  of  men  |?an  is  sleying  of  erj^eli  beestis,  which  fleish 
heweris  usen.  And  God  wolde  ]?at  man  hadde  orrour  of  sleying 
of  his  broj^er;  but  now  men  usen  a  newe  craft  ^  to  slee  men 
comunli,  more  j^an  ]?is  craft  was  usid  fro  ]>e  tyme  |?at  God  was 
born ;  and  seien,  jjat  preestis  shulden  usen  ]?is  craft  betere  and 
more  meedefulli  ]?an  shulde  seculer  men,  as  preestis  shulden  be 
lordis  over  hem.  And  ]?is  lore  is  tau^t  bi  freris  bi  myche 
merit  feyned  jjerto.  But  what  men  ]>q\  shulden  kille,  o]?er  \qx 
brel?eren  or  aliens,  ]?ei  holden  ^it  in  ]>eii  purs ;  al^if  ]>ei  prac- 
tisen  on  J>er  brej?eren.  But  ])is  peple  is  wyde  scaterid, — sum 
in  Engelond,  and  sum  wi]?oute.  And  |)es  moo  freris  wijjouten 
seien  ])at  men  shulden  moost  kille  English ;  and  so  lesse  errour 
at  bigynnynge  growij)  to  mykil  and  perilous. 

But  leve  we  j^is  doute  here,  and  trete  we  of  j^e  Chirche 
dowyng ;  for  bi  ]?is  mo  men  travailen  bi  symonie.  For  many, 
bi  ]?e  fendis  cast,  loven  to  be  hye  prelatis,  for  lordship  and 
richesse,  more  |)an  to  quykene  jje  Chirche  after  \&  poverte  of 
Crist.  And  we  supposen,  as  declarid  bi  twelve  lawis  of  J^e  two 
testamentis,  j^at  preestis  and  clerkis  shulden  be  pore,  as  Crist 
was  wijj  hise  Apostlis.  And  in  tokene  of  ]?is  poverte,  ]?es  freris 
ben  pore,  as  Jjei  seien ;  and  5it  ]?ei  passen  Scarioth  in  averice 
and  worldli  goodis.  And  herfore  })es  blasfemes  seien  ]jat  beg- 
ging is  medeful,  and  j)at  Crist  tau5te  hem  to  begge.  And  J>us 
Jjes  traitours  ben  maad  riche.  Men  have  proved  ofte  tymes  ]?at 
preestis  shulden  not  jjus  be  riche,  ne  J>us  be  dowid  in  temporal 
lordship.  Bi  men  of  resoun,  or  of  Goddis  half,  it  is  knowun  j^ing 
ynow5  jjat  sum  tyme  weren  preestis  pore,  and  l^anne  ])ei  shulden, 
bi  Cristis  lawe,  profite  to  ]>e  Chirche  after  j^er  power;  but 
dowing  maki]?  hem  lesse  of  power,  and  ]?ei  profiten  not  more 
};an  j)ei  mai.    And  so  bi  J)is  dowyng  ]?ei  ben  more  holden,  and 


°-  a  newe  craft.  This  seems  to 
refer  to  the  recent  introduction  of 
gunpowder,    the    invention    or   the 


re-discoveiy  of  a  friar,  Roger  Bacon, 
into  the  art  of  war. 


SERMONS. 


309 


lesse  done,  pat  |)ei  ben  more  holden  bi  j?is  dowynge  is  lijt  to 
prove  bi  mannis  lawe ;  for  siche  a  rente  or  benefice  mot  axe 
sum  reward  a5en,  but  no  reward  is  more  fittinge  })an  spiritual 
office  of  preestis.  And  j>at  dowyng  maki])  hem  lesse  of  power 
mai  men  shewe  bi  ]>is  maner.  pei  have  no  more  of  kyndeli 
witt  ])an  preestis  hadden  bifore  ]>e  dowynge ;  and  si)?  Jjes  wittis 
ben  moche  occupied  about  dowing  and  worldli  l^ingis,  |>ei  have 
lesse  witt  to  be  occupied  aboute  God  and  hevenli  |)ingis.  And 
no  man  of  witt  ha|)  drede  ]?at  ne  j?e  world  and  worldli  ]?ingis 
distracten  a  man  fro  God  and  his  service  in  spiritual  ])ingis. 
And  so  it  seme]?  |)at  prestis  moten  nede  o|?er  seie  |?at  ]?ei  weren 
ydil  bifore  \t  dowing,  or,  bi  dowing,  ]?ei  ben  more  unablid  for 
to  serve  God,  and  to  profite  to  his  Chirche,  and  helpe  goostU 
to  ony  man.  And  here  it  seme]?  ])at'  ]?es  prestis  ben  moche  ^ 
unholden  to  seculer  lordis  bi  \e  dowyng  })at  \q\  have  take ;  for 
}>ei  ben  harmed  so  myche  ])erbi.  And  so  folic  on  bo])e  partis 
bringi]?  in  harm  in  ech  side ;  for  no  man  doi]?  a5ens  God,  but 
jif  he  have  harm  anoon.  And  it  is  knowun  bi  Goddis  lawe 
]7at  traveile  bi  Cristis  ordenance  disposi]?  a  man  to  have  grace, 
and  to  be  more  loved  of  Crist.  And  jif  preestis  lyveden  as 
Crist  ordeynede,  ]?ei  shulden  more  encrese  in  vertues,  and  pro- 
fite more  to  hem  and  to  ]>q  Chirche  ]>an  ]?ei  done  reversynge 
Crist.  And  no  man  ])at  witt  ha])  wole  seie,  ])at  Crist  3eve]) 
preestis  more  grace,  for  ]>q\  ben  unkynde  to  Crist  and  leven 
]>e  ordenance  ])at  he  jaf  hem.  And  over  ])is,  it  is  knowen, 
])at  he  J)at  love]?  his  God  more  shulde  more  profite  to  Cristis 
Chirche,  and  betere  love  his  nei5bour.  But  bileve  techi))  us 
Jjat  God  biddi])  men  to  love  him  of  al  ]?er  herte,  of  al  \tx  Uif, 
of  al  ]?er  mynde,  and  of  al  })er  streng])e ;  so  ]?at,  after  ])e  3iftes 
of  God,  a  man  is  holden  more  to  serve  him.  And  so,  si}) 
prestis  shulden  not  be  idil,  but  do  good  after  ])eir  power,  Jjei 
shulden  profite  to  Jje  Chirche  bifore  dowyng,  as  ]7ei  my^ten. 
But  bi  double  folic,  brou^t  in  bojje  in  clerkes  and  worldli  lordis, 
prestis  ben  of  lesse  power,  bo])e  to  serve  God  and  his  Chirche. 
And  noo  drede  God  axi]?  acountis  of  ])is  foltish  chaff'ering. 
But  here  \t  fend  techi]>  his  clerkis  to  seke  after  feyned  an- 


An  objection 
answered. 


1  om.  E. 


3IO 


WFCLIF'S 


Earthly  learn- 
ing unneces- 
sary, if  we  have 
the  lore  of 
Christ. 


Another  ob- 
jection. 


sweris.  And  J?ei  seien,  first,  ]?at  bi  jjis  dowyng  |)ei  ben  in 
quiet  and  in  pees,  and  so  ]?ei  serven  God  betere,  as  Jjei  bi 
resoun  ben  more  holden.  And  J?us  ]?ei  ben  holden  in  scole 
to  lerne  philosophris  lore,  ojjer  weie  J)an  Jjei  shulden  be,  5if  ])is 
dowing  wantide  hem.  Here  Cristen  men  shulden  wite  ])at  ])e 
fend  medli]?  soj^fastnes  wi|?  falshede  to  bigile  Jie  folk,  and  turne 
hem  fro  Cristis  lore.  So]?eli  men  lernen  of  gentil  craft  ^  bi 
occasioun  of  dowing,  but  not  so  muche  as  done  jjese  beggers ; 
for  fadir  of  lesingis  mai  more  in  hem.  Cristene  men  shulde 
lerne  Goddis  lawe,  and  holden  hem  paied  j^erof;  and  in  ])is 
mesure,  and  in  ]?is  nombre,  and  in  ]>is  wei3te,  shulden  J)ei 
lyven  here,  and  abiden  lore  in  hevene  Jmt  men  shulden  have 
over  J?is.  For  ]jis  lore  ]?at  Crist  tau3te  ys  ynow5  for  Jjis  liif. 
And  5if  men  lyven  after  him,  Jjei  shal  have  lore  as  |>ei  have 
nede ;  and  |)us  ]?is  dowing  maki]?  lore  J>at  doi|j  harm  to  Cristis 
Chirche,  boj^e  lore  of  vanite,  and  J>erto  lore  of  mennis  lawis. 
Crist  5af  lore,  ])e  which  he  lovede,  |)at  he  wolde  teche  Cristen 
men ;  and  oj^er  lore,  and  more,  over  ]?is,  wolde  Crist  J>at  were 
suspendid.  But  3it  men  replien,  and  seien,  J>at  bi  ]?is  dowyng 
prestis  ben  many;  and  so,  in  multitude  of  clerkis,  doij?  ])is 
dowing  muche  profit ;  for  clerkes  wolden  not  be  so  many  but 
5if  ]jis  dowyng  were  here.  God  techi]?  trewe  men  to  graunte 
|>at  dowyng  and  feyned  begging  maki]>  to  m.ultiplie  prestis  more 
]?an  God  himsilf  ha|?  ordeyned;  for  God  coude  ordeyne  noo 
kyn  |?ing,  but  in  mesure,  noumbre  and  wei5te.  God  wolde  not 
)>at  alle  weren  preestis,  ne  alle  kny^tis,  ne  alle  laboreris;  but  of 
alle  ]?es  ]?ree  partis,  God  wolde  make  his  Chirche  in  mesure. 
And  3if  J?ou  seist  j?at  men  faylen  witt  to  ateyne^  to  Goddis 
noumbre,  lyve  men  wel,  and  God  wole  teche  how  muchel 
shulde  be  noumbre  of  preestis.  For  defaute  of  Goddis  lawe 
makijj  defaute  in  J?is  noumbre.  Lerne  men  wel  Goddis  lawe, 
and  it  shal  teche  mesure  in  \>\s,  if  men  prechen  wel  J)is  lawe, 
and  hiden  it  not  fro  \>q  peple.  Wel  I  rede  in  Goddis  lawe, 
whanne  God  wolde  have  myche  travaile  in  beryng  of  ]>q  taber- 
nacle and  sacrificis  of  many  beestis,  he  wolde  have,  of  twelve 
kynredis,  but  o  kynrede  of  Levy,  to  serve  his  folk  for  preestis 

^  atteyne,  E. 
a  gentil  craft  appears  to  mean  what  we  call  secular  knowledge. 


SERMONS. 


3^1 


and  dekenes.  And  jit  he  wij^drowj  many  of  hem  and  unablide 
hem  to  serve  God  jms  for  sykenesse  jjat  he  sente  hem.  And  to 
alle  ))es  preestis  and  dekenes  God  lymitide  but  dymes  and 
offringis.  Lord  !  jif  Cristene  men  wolden  be  paicd  of  ))e 
mesure  of  Goddis  ordenance,  and  have  j>e  twelfj^e  part  of^ 
clerkis^,  and  jyve  her  dymes  and  offringis  to  hem  and  hyris^ 
to  lyve  bi,  jit  it  were  now  ynowj,  si]>  Apostlis  wi]?  lesse  goodis 
prolitiden  more  to  Cristis  Chirche.  And  )?us  wi|?drawe  we 
kyngis  clerkis  and  clerkis  j^at  ben  in  lordis  housis,  and  algatis 
Jjese  reUgious  ]?at  ben  to  charge  of  Cristis  Chirche ;  and  passe 
we  not  j)anne  }>e  ten)?e  part,  to  dowe  clerkis  over  oure  God, 
and  he  wole  teche  us,  bi  rijt  liif,  in  what  noumbre  we  shulden 
have  clerkis. 


}:is  IS  J'E  Gospel  Ht  is  rad  on  Cristemasse  Evyn. 

[SERMON    LXXXIX.] 

Cum  esse/  desponsafa.  — Matt.  i.  [i8.] 

pis  gospel  telli])  of  Cristis  bir])e,  how  his  modir  was  pore 
womman,  and  sei]?;  Whanne  Joseph  was  weddid  to  Marie,  ]?e  which 
Marie  was  Jesus  modir  ^,  bifore  pat pei  shulden  com  togtdere,  she 
was  founden  of  her  housebonde,  havynge  of  pe  Holt  Goost ;  for 
Joseph  perseyved  wel  ]?at  oure  Ladi  was  wi])  childe.  Here  holy 
doctours  seien  J^at  Joseph  was  weddid  wij>  Marie,  and,  bifore 
J)ei  shulden  go  to  bedde,  Marie  was  gret  of  ])e  angel,  and  con- 
seyved,  of  J^e  Holi  Goost,  Jesus  oure  Savyour.  So]?eli  \q  Holi 
Trinite  made  J)is  concepcioun ;  but  sij)  charite  is  proprid  to  ])e 
Holi  Goost,  and  moost  charite  was,  jjat  God  wolde  make  him- 
silf  man,  it  is  so]?  |?at  Crist  was  conseyved  of  Jje  Holi  Goost. 
And  bi  |?is  ]?e  two  oj^er  Persones  ben  not  excludid,  but  includid. 
Crist  was  conseyved  in  oure  Ladi  of  her  clene  blood  wi])Outen 

^  om.  E.  2  heris,  E.  ^  So  in  E :  A  includes  the  whole  clause, 

except  the  word  Marie,  in  the  quotation. 

^  That  is,  *  if  but  a  twelfth  part  among  the  Jews,  devoted  themselves 
of  the  population,  as  was  the  case       to  the  service  of  the  altar.' 


The  nativity 
of  Christ. 


312 


WVCLIF'S 


man,  and  hadde  anoon  mannis  forme,  and  growide  in  hir  as 
ojjer  done.  And  ])us  Joseph,  bi  ly3t  touching,  or  ellis  bi  \q  lore 
of  God,  perceyvide  ]?at  she  was  wij?  childe,  and  wolde  not  dis- 
seyve  oure  Ladi.  And  seintis  seien  ])at  Crist  was  conceyved 
after  ]?is  weddinge ;  for  Crist  wolde  be  conseyved  in  wedlok  of 
his  fadir  and  modir;  and  ellis  my^ten  ]?e  Jewis  forsake  Crist  as 
unlawful,  and  not  |?e  greet  bihi3te  prophete.  And  so  Joseph 
shulde  have  oure  Ladi  more  unsuspect,  and  m.ore  love  Crist, 
and  betere  kepe  him  as  his  lawful  sone,  and  serve  him,  and 
nurishe  him.  And  so  we  ben  more  certified  of  maidenhed  of 
oure  Ladi ;  for  Joseph,  5if  he  wiste  ^  hir  have  knowe  man  bifore, 
for  repreef  he  wolde  have  told  it.  And,  iox  Joseph  was  a  just 
man  and  loved  of  God,  God  tolde  him  hi  an  angel  pat  he  shulde 
not  drede  to  take  Marie  to  his  wif,  Ech  word  of  |>is  gospel 
shulde  be  take  bi  his  sentence.  And  so,  si]?  Joseph  was  a  just 
man,  God  myjte  not  faile  to  him,  how  he  shulde  do  in  jjingis 
jjat  weren  hid  to  him.  It  is  seid  comunli,  bi  processe  of  Lukes 
gospel,  ]?at  oure  Ladi,  fro  ]?at  she  was  grett  of  Gabriel,  as  Luk 
tellijj,  wente  to  Elizabeth,  and  dwelte  wi]?  her  a  long  tyme,  and 
in  al  J?is  tyme  Crist  growide  in  her  wombe.  And  whanne  she 
cam  hoom  to  Joseph,  he  my5te  betere  knowe  hir  wi]?  childe ;  but 
Joseph  wiste,  bi  Goddis  lawe,  ]>at  5if  oure  Ladi  were  corrupt  in 
])is  caas,  she  shulde  be  punishid;  but  he  coude  not  prove  |)is, 
and  so  he  w^olde  not  defame  oure  Ladi,  ne  put  hir  up  to  mannis 
jugement;  si]?  he  trowide  ]?at  oure  Ladi  my^te  conceyve  J?us 
bi  }?e  Hooli  Goost.  Not  J?at  ]?e  seed  of  })e  Holi  Goost  was  put 
in  to  oure  Ladi,  but  ]?at  God,  of  hir  blood,  gedride  in  place  of 
hir  wombe ;  and  wi]?outen  o]?er  seed,  God  formede  J?is  bodi,  and 
3af  it  soule.  And  ]?us,  bi  |?e  aungel's  lore,  Joseph  was  afer 
enfourmed,  and  not  of  alle  )?ingis  togidre,  but  now  a  litel,  and 
now  a  litil ;  and  }?us  he  shulde  betere  lyve  bi  feij?,  and  hope,  and 
charite ;  for  bi  whiles  he  shulde  be  confortid  bi  speche  of  })is 
aungel,  al  ^if  he  apperide  to  Joseph  for  ]?e  tyme  ])at  Joseph 
slepte.  And  ]?is  is  a  beter  si3t  ]?an  ben  comune  dreemes  of 
men.  And  Joseph  was  clepid  DaviJ?is  sone,  for  he  shulde 
|?enke  j?at  Crist  was  bihi3t  for  to  come  of  Davi})is  kynde ;  and 

'  hadde  wiste,  E. 


SERMONS. 


313 


so  myjte  he  muse,  and  ))enke  how  Marie  myjte  )jus  be  wij) 
childe.  And  he  hadde  noon  occasioun  to  have  Marie  suspect, 
for  })is  tyme,  and  jjes  wordis  of  \>q  aungel,  moveden  Joseph  to 
|)is  treu])e  :  for  pat  pat  is  horn  in  her  is  of  the  Noli  Goost.  Wei 
he  wiste  ]jat  ech  man  is  maad  of  |)e  Holi  Goost,  but  J)is  aungel 
mente  sumwhat  ellis;  for  ellis  his  speche  hadde  be  veyn. 
And  so  Joseph  undirstood  J?at  Marie  hadde  conceyved  bi 
myracle ;  and  to  |?is  witt  he  was  disposid,  but  not  to  no  ^ 
more  ^it. 

])e  aungel  seide  pat  Marie  shulde  here  a  child,  and  he  shulde 
clepe  his  name  festis,  as  Gabriel  hadde  seid  bifore.  And  si]? 
Jesus  is  savyour,  bi  ])is  Joseph  Jjoujte  more;  and  speciali,  sij? 
})is  aungel  seide,  \2X  pis  fesus  shulde  save  his  peple  fro  per  synnes. 
And  ])at  is  moche ;  for  J)anne  he  shulde  bojje  have  a  peple,  and 
shulde  save  it  fro  synne,  Jjat  oonli  God  mai  do.  A  man  mai 
save  fro  bodili  perilis,  but  oonh  God  mai  save  fro  synne ;  and 
speciali  fro  J?e  laste  synne,  ]?at  maki}>  a  man  be  dampned  in 
helle. 

Here  men  douten  comounli,  si]?  alle  men  shulden  sue  Crist, 
how  preestis  shulde  not  have  peple  j^at  were  suget  to  hem.  And 
si]>  ]>Q  peple  shulde  serve  to  prestis  and  do  hem  worldH  wor- 
shipis,  it  seme])  ])at  for  worship  of  God  men  shulden  ])us  ^yve 
hem  rentis,  and  ])us  encreese  hooli  Chirche  in  devocioun  of 
dowyng.  Here  we  graunten,  as  we  seiden  next »,  ]>at  ech  man 
after  Crist  shulde  sue  him,  fer])er  or  nerer,  or  ellis  he  come]? 
never  to  hevene.  And  herfore  Crist  ledde  comun  lyf,  nei])er  to 
large  ne  to  streit,  }?e  which  Hif  my^te  be  ensaumple  to  alle  men 
of  ])is  world.  But  jit  Baptist,  ne  ony  o])er,  myjte  not  passe 
Crist  in  o  vertue ;  for  Cristis  fasting  was  betere  ])an  ony  o]?er 
fastyng  myjte  be,  and  his  passioun  was  more  as  his  charite  was 
gretter.  But  sij)  Crist  dide  al  ])ing  so  ]?at  he  myjte  not  be 
amen  did,  he  myjte  not  take  worldli  lordship  to  \e  worship  of 
his  Chirche,  for,  if  he  hadde,  he  hadde  fuylide  ^  his  stait,  and 
fordone  him  and  his  Chirche.  And  ])is  wisten  apostlis  wel, 
and  dwelten  ]>erfor  in  ]>qx  povert.  And  ]?us  pore  staat  of  men  is 
liker  to  staat  of  innocence  ])an  is  rich  worldli  staat,  seme  it 


^  om.  E. 


^  So  E ;  A  has  foilid. 
See  page  310. 


Poverty  the 
proper  state  of 
ecclesiastics. 


3H 


WFCLIF'S 


nevere  so  glorious.  And  ]5us  ))e  pope,  takinge  dowing,  —  were 
it  Silvester  or  oJ>er, — foulide  ^  ]?e  Chirche  and  dide  it  harm  ojjer 
weie  Jjan  Crist  my5te  do.  And  so  it  is  not  bileve  jjat  ne  ]>is 
pope  synnede  myche.  But  men  supposen  ]?at  he  hadde  sorewe 
in  his  ende  for  ]?is  synne;  and  so  we  supposen  now,  ])at  bi 
grace  J^at  Crist  ^af  him,  he  is  a  seint  now  in  hevene,  as  oJ?er 
men  Jjat  token  )?is  dowyng.  But  oJ>er  apostlis,  bi  oure  bileve, 
passen  in  heven  sich  staat ;  for  it  is  bine]?e  bileve  jjat  ]?es  popis 
ben  in  hevene,  si]j  bileve  of  holi  writt  sei]>  not  J>at  ]7ei  ben 
seintis.  And  so  for  blyndenes  of  j?is  world  |)ei  token  to 
worship  |?at  was  shame.  And  Crist  my3te  not  have  do  ]?us,  for 
Crist  my^te  not  have  synned.  And  ]?us,  where  ypocritis  seien 
|>at  J>is  dowing  doi])  worship,  it  doij?  myche  shame  to  men,  jif 
rijt  bileve  coude  conceyve  it.  For  shame  of  synne  is  \t  moste 
J>at  ech  man  shulde  eschewe,  for  it  bringi)>  to  ]>e  moste  shame, 
]>at  shal  be  at  jje  dale  of  dome.  Wei  Y  woot  ]?at  fendis  lymes 
wolen  argue  a^ens  J)is  sentence,  and  disprove  oure  wordis  here ; 
but  jugement  of  ]>q.  firste  treujje,  and  his  Hif,  wi]?  his  reule, 
techi]?  us  sumwhat  here  how  ])is  is  Goddis  treuj)e.  And  sich 
lordship  of  preestis,  wi]>  ojjer  synnes  ))at  comen  after,  may  dis- 
troie  rewmes  here,  and  do  harm  to  al  \q  Chirche.  For,  si]>  sich 
lordship  is  rote  of  batailis  and  divisiouns,  it  mai  falle  bi  J)is 
synne  |)at  prestis  taken  fitting  fro  lordis;  and  so  J>es  lordis 
shulden  lyve  as  vikeris,  and  ]7es  prestis  shulden  lyve  as  kny3tis. 
And  ))us  my5te  Cristis  religioun  be  reversid  for  ])e  more  part. 
And  prelatis,  bojje  more  and  lesse,  mai  assente  to  J)is  sentence, 
and  freris  mai  falle  wi]?  hem,  and  chide  bi  wordis  J>at  it  is  so]> ; 
as  it  falli])  in  jjis  tyme  )jat  prestis  fi5ting  is  preisid,  ^he,  for 
a  feyned  cause,  Jjat  noon  in  ]?is  world  can  grounde.  And  after 
jjis  synne  mai  falle,  ]?at  ladies  ben  taken  privyly,  and  afterward 
apertli,  fro  |)er  hosebondis,  bi  preestis.  And  ]?is  wey  may 
fi5ting  falle  wij>inne  rewmes  and  distrye  hem ;  for  preestis  mai 
coveiten  to  myche  of  rewmes,  and  chef  lordship  of  hem.  God 
shilde  us  fro  sich  perils ;  for  5if  |)ei  fallen  in  oure  tyme,  maoy 
helpers  shulden  |)ei  have  of  Anticristis  clerkis  ]>at  darken  now. 
For  Goddis  lawe  sei}>  )?us ;  })at  J)ei  ben  cursid  of  him  ))at  bowen 

^  So  E  ;  A  has  foilide. 


SERMONS. 

fro  Goddis  comandementis ;  and  ]?is  cursing  is  more  to  charge, 
for  J^is  Lord  mai  not  erre.  And  herfore  alle  men  shulden 
defende  Goddis  lawe  on  jjer  manere ;  for  litil  errour  in  ])is  lawe 
wole  growe  to  a  greet  harme. 

Crist  axijj  here  mekenes  and  poverte,  wij?  verri  pees;  and 
algatis  in  hise  preestis  ]?at  ben  hier  in  degree;  and  ever  j^e 
iii^ere  |)at  \>e\  ben,  |?e  more  |)ei  shulde  have  of  j?es  vertues.  And 
5if  ])0U  seie,  |)at  Jjes  richessis  ben  goode,  and  Cristis  prestis  ben 
more  wor|n ;  whi  shulde  not  ]?ei  have  ])es  goodis  passinge  bifore 
o|?er  men  ?  many  sich  blynde  resouns  ben  maad  bi  Anticristis 
clerkis ;  as  sum  men  arguen  for  J)6ves,  |?at  ]>e\  ben  more  hardi 
men,  whi  shulden  ]?ei  not  have  ]?e  goodis  ]?at  |?ei  robben  fro 
o)>er  men  ?  Speciah,  si]?  bi  Goddis  lawe  alle  Jjingis  shulden  be 
comune.  But  here  men  seien,  |?at  J?eves  ben  hardi  but  to  do 
synful  dedes,  and  j^ei  ben  ]?e  moste  cowardis  in  doinge  of  dedes 
of  vertue.  And  as  a  corde  is  a  good  ]?ing,  and  ]je  tree  is  a  good 
J)ing,  but  3it  J^e  hanging  on  ])e  galewis  is  harmful  to  ]?is  ]?ef ;  so 
worldli  goodis  ben  good,  but  mysuse  of  hem  is  yvel.  For  God 
ha])  put  alle  J?ingis  in  mesure,  and  passyng  ])erof  is  foul  and 
yvel ;  as  many  creaturis  ben  good,  and  habitude  of  hem  is  yvel. 
And  Goddis  lawT  techi]?  ])is  ordre,  and  which  of  }?is  is  better  ])an 
o])er.  Certis,  worldli  richesse  is  good,  but  not  so  good  as  ben 
vertues ;  and  clo]?is  of  \q  ordris  ben  good,  but  not  so  good  as 
ordre  in  soule.  Goddis  lawe  techi}>  in  what  ordre  hise  servantis 
shulde  use  his  goodis ;  and  mesure  of  ])is  ordre  is  betere  J?an  is 
havynge  of  ])es  goodis.  And  ])us  w^e  graunten  ]?at  preestis 
shulden  have  peple  J)at  were  suget  to  hem,  but  first  suget  to 
Cristis  lawe ;  and  ])us  ])ei  shulden  have  ])is  peple  for  J)e  traveile 
and  ])Q  service  ])at  ])ei  shulden  do  to  J)is  peple.  But  Crist  ha]? 
in  ano]?er  manere  peple,  and  alle  goodis  of  ])is  world ;  for  he 
is  bo])e  God  and  man,  ])at  mai  faile  in  no]>ing. 


3^5 


?^>^E&^^^ 


3i6 


WVCLIF'S 


The  Nativity. 


J-^'E  Gospels  of  \>tl  firste  masse  and  >e  secunde  on 

Cristemasse  Morwenyng  ben  ex[pounded]  ^ 

in  oon  sermoun  togidere,  as  it  sue}?. 

[SERMON     XC] 

Exiit  edictwn  a  Cesar e  Augusto. — Luc.  ii.  [i.] 

pis  dai  men  singen  ]?ree  massis  in  worship  of  ]?e  Trinite; 
but  \e  jjridde  and  ]je  moste  is  of  ]?e  manhede  of  Crist,  ]>e  which 
is  bo]3e  God  and  man  for  ]?e  love  of  mankynde.  pe  gospil 
of  J)e  firste  masse,  and  of  ])e  secounde  also,  tellen  what  |?ingis 
bifellen  in  ]je  bir})e  of  J)is  child,  pe  Emperour  of  Rome  was 
jjanne  in  his  flouris,  and  in  pees  on  ech  side,  as  ]?is  autour 
of  pees  ordeynede.  Men  seien  jjat  ))is  emperour  was  clepid 
Octavian ;  and  in  J^e  two  and  fourtijje  3eer,  whanne  he  was  in 
moost  pees,  was  Crist  born,  God  and  man,  in  ]?e  lond  undir 
J)is  emperour.  Men  seien  also,  j?at  ]?is  Cesare  was  moost  in 
generalte  and  larges,  and  pees  of  his  lordship ;  for  more 
generali  J)an  ojjer  hadde  he  lordship  of  ]?is  world.  Of  Julius 
he  took  ]?is  name  to  be  clepid  Cesare ;  and  August  he  was 
clepid,  for  he  alargide  ^  Jje  empire.  ])is  emperour  sente  a  co- 
7?iatidemefit  to  al  ]?e  peple  of  his  empire,  to  discryve  alle  his  londis, 
]?at  was  wel  ny^  al  J>ts  world.  And  he  biga?t  at  Sirie,  for  it  was 
myddil  of  his  empire.  And  so  Syryne  ^  b  j,at  was  Jjere  cheef 
undur  |)e  emperour,  bigan  to  make  j)is  discripcion,  and  gaderide 
tribute  to  ])e  emperour.  And  Jjus  my3te  ]je  emperour  wite 
what  peple  he  hadde  in  his  empire,  and  what  J^ei  my^ten  helpe 
him  in  tyme  of  nede,  in  men  and  moneie.  And  ]?us  he  devidide 
)jis  rewme  in  J^ree  partis,  )>at  men  shulden  come  in  nyne  ^eer 
to  Rome,  and  bringe  tribute  for  her  lond.  But  al  ]?is  is  passid 
now ;  for  \q  pope  and  his  covent  ha]?  ^  so  put  doun  Jje  em- 

^  Restored  conjecturally ;  the  MS.  (A)  has  only  the  letters  e  x,  followed 
by  the  long  stroke  of  a  /».  ^  Siryfie,  E.  ^  ban,  E. 

'"^  '  Augustus,'  as  if  from  augeo. 
''  In  the  authorized  version,  '  Cyrenius  governor  of  Syria.' 


SERMONS. 


3^7 


perour",  ])at  litil  rewmes  tellen  lijt  by  him.  And  so  dukes, 
and  eerlis,  and  lesse,  wolen  fijte  wi]?  him,  and  dispise  him. 
And  so  wente  alle  of  Jude,  J)at  was  ny  Sirye,  to  make  per  profession 
in  her  owne  citee.  Ech  man  hadde  an  heed  toun  |>at  was  next 
to  his  dwelling,  and  ]>at  was  clepid  his  citee ;  and  smn  men 
clepen  it  cheping  toun  b. 

And  foseph  ivenie  fro  Nazareth  pat  zvas  a  toun  in  Gal  He  iJt 
to  pe  toun  of  Bedleem  pat  was  sett  in  fudee.  For  bo]?  Joseph 
and  oure  Ladi  weren  |)e  hous  of  DaviJ? ;  and  Jjc  cite  of  Beed- 
leem  was  Davi|>is  bi  sum  propirte,  for  Davij)  was  borne  in  |)at 
citee,  as  ])e  Book  of  Kingis  tellij).  And  so  Joseph  wente  wij) 
Marie,  )?at  was  his  wyf,  in  to  Bedelem,  to  make  |?is  professioun 
Jjat  J)e  emperour  bad  make,  pei  brou5ten  an  oxe  and  an  asse 
wij)  hem,  as  men  seien,  for  |)is  enchesoun; — Marie  was  greet 
\vij>  childe ;  l^erfore  she  rood  upon  an  asse ;  jje  oxe  \€\ 
brou3ten  for  to  selle ;  for  Jewis  haten  begging.  And  Bedleem 
was  fillid  of  men  bifore  \q\  camen  to  J?e  toun;  and  so  jjei 
hadden  noon  herborwe,  but  dwelten  in  a  comune  stable,  and 
J)es  two  beestis  wiJ?  hem,  til  tyme  cam  to  use  hem. 

And  it  felle,  ivhile  pei  weren  jjere,  oure  Ladi  bare  hir  child, 
pe  which  was  hir  firste  child,  for  him  she  bar  and  noon  oJ?er. 
And  j?is  is  maner  of  Goddis  lawe,  to  clepe  sich  children  first 
born, — not  for  o])er  was  born ;  bifore  ne  after  Crist  she  bar 
noon  o]?er.  And  she  wrapte  Crist  wip  clopis,  and  pictte  him  ifi 
pe  cratche,  for  she  hadde  no  betere  place  to  put  him  in  al  ]?e 
hous.  And  so,  as  men  singen  and  trowen,  Crist  lai  bifore  an 
oxe  and  an  asse.  And  bree]?  of  ]?es  two  beestis  kepte  him 
hoot  in  ]>is  cold  tyme. 

And  herdis  weren  in  pe  same  contre,  wakifige,  and  keping  pe 
hour  is  of  pe  711-2,1  upon  per  flok.  For  ))is  was  maner  in  Judee, 
whanne  \e  m^t  was  lengest,  to  kepe  ]>er  sheep  and  wake  jjat 


a  This  is  an  interesting  allusion 
to  the  enfeebled  condition  of  the 
*  Holy  Roman  Empire '  since  the 
fall  of  the  Hohenstanfen  dynasty, 
which  was  truly  brought  about,  as 
the  writer  says,  by  the  popes  and 
their  adherents.  The  emperor  at 
this  time  reigning,  Wenzel  or  Wen- 
ceslas,  whose   sister,  Anne  of  Bo- 


hemia, was  married  to  our  Richard 
II,  was  so  utterly  weak  both  in 
character  and  resources  that  the 
princes  of  the  empire  deposed  him 
a  few  years  later,  and  elected  in 
his  room  his  brother  Sigismund. 

^  That  is,  market  town ;  as  in 
Chipping  Norton,  Chipping  Camp- 
den,  Chippenham,  &c. 


3i8 


WVCLIF'S 


ni^t.  And  so  men  seien  ))at  Crist  was  bore  at  j^e  myddil  of 
J)is  ny5t,  for  ]?e  myddil  persone  in  Trinite  lovede  myddil  in 
many  ]?ingis.  And  lo,  pe  aungel  of  pe  Lord  stood  bi pes  keerdis, 
and  derenesse  of  God  shynede  ahoute  hem,  and pei  dredden  bi  greet 
drede.  But  pe  atmgel  seide  to  hem,  Wole  y  not  drede,  for  loo, 
Y  telle  '^ou  a  greet  joie  pat  shal  be  to  at  pe  peple.  For  pis  dale 
is  born  to  us  a  Savyour,  pat  is  Crist  pe  Lord,  in  pe  citee  of 
Davip.  And  pis  shal  be  tokene  to  '^ou  :  ye  shal  fynde  pe  child 
wlappid  wip  clopis,  and  put  in  pe  cratche,  as  Y  shal  telle  50U. 
And  sudeynli,  per  was  maad  wip  pis  atmgel  a  multitude  of 
hevenli  kny^tis,  heryinge  God  and  seiynge ;  Glori  be  to  God 
in  hiyste  hevenes,  a  fid  pees  be  to  mejt  in  erpe  which  ben  of 
good  wille. 

Here  mai  we  see  how  Crist  lovede  comun  povert  on  many 
maners ;  for  he  chees  to  be  herborid  in  comun  place,  wi]?outen 
pryde,  and  wijjouten  worldli  helpe  boj^e  of  men  and  of  wymmen, 
and  he  chees  a  pore  cradil  ]?at  \q  child  was  put  inne.  But  he 
hadde,  passinge  o|>er,  a  pryvylegie  in  many  ]?ingis ;  for  he  was 
born  wijjouten  peyne  or  sorewe  of  his  fadir  and  modir.  For 
as  he  brak  not  Maries  cloister  whanne  ]?at  she  was  maad  wi)) 
childe,  so  he  brak  not  his  modirs  wombe  whanne  he  cam  out 
of  }>is  cloister.  And  so  |)es  just  folk  bifore  God  weren  betere 
]?an  myche  worldli  peple,  kingis  or  lordis  and  ladies,  and^  wi]? 
myche  fare  of  ]?is  world;  for  J)is  bir)?e  was  glorious,  neer  ]?e 
staat  of  innocence,  pe  secounde  confort  of  Cristis  bir])  was 
of  J)es  many  aungels ;  for  \€\  weren  betere  ))an  many  lordis, 
and  her  song  was  of  greet  confort.  Ofte  tyme,  in  |)e  olde 
law,  apperiden  aungels  to  men,  but  not  in  sich  a  multitude, 
ne  in  siche  a  joieful  speche. 

And  whanne  |)e  aungels  wenten  fro  hem,  pes  herdis  spaken 
to  hem  silf  Passe  we  into  Bedleem,  and  se  we  pis  word  pat  is 
maad,  pat  pe  Lord  hap  maad,  and  shewid  to  us.  And  pei  came 
hastinge,  and  fond  pes  pree  persones,  Marie  and  foseph,  and  pe 
y)ng  child  putt  in  pe  cratche.  And  whanne  pes  heerdis  sawen 
pis  ping,  pei  knewen  of  pe  word  pat  was  seid  to  hem  of  pis  child 
bi  )je  aungel.     And  alle  ))e  men  of  \q  contre  pat  herden  pis, 

^  om.  E. 


SERMONS. 


319 


wondriden,  and^  of  pes  ping  is,  pat  weren  seid  of  pe  heerdemen 
io  hem.  But  Marie  kepte  alle  pes  wordis,  and  bare  hem  to- 
gidere  in  her  herte.  And  no  drede  she  hadde  greet  confort, 
and  undirstonding  over  ojjere  men.  And  pes  heerdis  turneden 
ayn,  glorifiynge  and  heryinge  God  ift  alle  pingis  pat  pei  her  den 
and  sawen,  as  it  was  seid  to  hem. 

We  supposen  \2X  aungels  ledden  hem  to  |)is  place  in  Beed- 
leem,  and  confortiden  hem  many  gatis,  bojje  in  bodi  and  in 
soule.  And  j^ei  wisten  bi  |>es  aungeHs,  and  bi  ]?e  good  will 
J)at  J>ei  hadden,  how  j>ei  shulden  have  pees  in  er})e ;  and  her- 
fore  \€\  herieden  God.  And  so,  ^if  we  taken  hede,  Crist  hadde 
company  of  jjie.  First,  of  his  fadir  and  of  his  modir,  |)at  weren 
bo|)e  holi  folk;  after,  of  herdemen  Jjat  lyveden  symple  and 
holi  lyf.  And  ))es  weren  licli  mo  }?an  two,  and  nyj  jje  state 
of  innocence;  for  God  lovede  Abel  betere  |?an  Cayn  Jjat  was 
his  broj?er.  And  jje  first  was  an  heerde,  and  |)e  toj^er  a  tiliyng 
man ;  and  tiliyng  men  have  more  of  craft  j>an  have  heerdis 
in  ]3er  dedis.  And  as  God  lovede  Jacobes  sones,  J?at  weren 
alle  heerdemen,  so  he  lovede  |)es  heerdis  \2X  camen  for  to 
visite  Crist.  And  so  ])is  nativite  of  Crist  was  more  Jjan  ony 
o|jer,  5he,  and  more  }>an  Adames  makyng,  whanne  he  cam 
into  J>is  world ;  for  oure  Ladi  and  Joseph  passiden  Adam  and 
Eve,  and  )je  company  of  aungelis  passiden  frendis  \2X  weren 
wib  oure  firste  eldris;  and  Jjes  heerdis  ])at  camen  to  hem  pas- 
siden Adams  children.  And  algatis  ])e  birj?  of  Crist  passide  ^ 
o|)er  dedis  ]?at  ever  God  dide ;  for  it  is  more  to  make  God  man, 
])an  to  make  ])is  world  of  nou3t.  It  is  maistrie  to  make  a 
virgyn  bere  a  child,  and  dwelle  a  virgyn,  more  |>an  to  make 
Adam  of  erj>e,  or  to  make  Eve  of  Adams  ribbe ;  but  it  is 
wijjouten  mesure  more  to  make  God  to  be  a  man.  For  here 
mennis  wittis  moten  faile.  But  oon  ensample  ha])  kynde 
50vun  us :  as  ])e  spirit  \2X  is  mannis  soule  is  ]?e  same  persone 
wi]?  him,  so  jje  secounde  persone  of  God  is  j)e  same  persone 
wi)>  }>is  man.  But  diversite  is  greet  here  and  jjere,  whoso  wole 
loke.     Leeve  we  ])is  and  speke  we  of  vertues.     For  |)is  child 

^  So  E  ;  passideti,  A. 

*  Literally  rendered  from  the  Vul-       sunt,  et  de  iis  quae  dicta  erant   a 
gate, — '  omnes  qui  audierant  mirati       pastoribus.' 


TIic  holy  com- 
pany present 
at  the  Nativity. 


Reflections  on 
the  Nativity. 


320 


WFCLIF'S 


is  Goddis  virtue,  and  wisdom  of  |?e  Fadir  of  hevene.  But  ])is 
is  bi  his  Godhede ;  and  mo  redelis  ^  ]?an  we  can  telle  ben  so|> 
of  Crist  bi  his  two  kindis.  And  jif  we  taken  good  hede  of 
him,  Crist  is  ]?ree  kyndis,  and  o  persone ;  for  Crist  is  Godhede, 
and  bodi,  and  soule,  and  ech  oon  of  ))es  ])ree.  And  so,  as  sum 
men  seien,  Crist  is  sevene  J^ingis,  and  ech  of  hem :  for  his 
spirit  is  j^ree  J?ingis,  and  his  bodi  o])er  ])ree  ])ingis,  and  Crist  is, 
over  ])is,  his  Godhede,  but  oonli  oo  persone  of  it.  And  so,  as 
sevene  is  ful  nombre  of  universite  of  Jjingis''^,  so  Crist  is  ful 
rewme  of  hevene,  and  of  ])is  world;  for  al  ]?is  world  bi  him 
is  betirid,  and  as  who  made  a  newe  world.  For  ech  creature 
of  ])is  world  is  beterid  bi  his  birj>.  For  man  is  beterid  si]?  he 
is  bou^t  and  maad  Goddis  sone  and  his  eire,  and  jjerwi]?  jje 
bro]?er  of  Crist,  which  is  bo]?e  God  and  man;  angelis  in 
hevene  be  beterid,  si]?  ]?ei  have  more  felouship,  and  sich 
felouship  of  seintis  makij?  hem  more  glad  togidere.  And  ]>us 
alle  ])e  fendis  in  helle  ben  beterid  a^ens  ]?er  wille ;  for  Jjer  cum- 
pany  is  maad  lesse,  and  |?ei  have  harm  of  many  felowis. 

Al  jjis  world  bodili  shulde  serve  to  God  and  to  man  ;  and  it 
wantide  Jjis  eende  til  ]jat  Crist  was  maad  man ;  for  bifore,  ]?is 
world  fau^te  wi])  God  and  tormentide  man,  but  fro  jjat  ]?is  pees 
was  maad,  God  made  J)is  world  to  serve  man.  And  herfore 
aungelis  in  hevene,  for  Cristis  incarnacioun,  wolden  not  take 
kneling  of  Joon,  but  seiden,  ]>at  jjei  weren  his  servantis,  and 
servantis  of  his  brej)eren;  and  J)is  ]?ei  fulfillid  in  dede.  And 
so  ech  part  of  ])is  world  shulde  joie  for  ]?is  nativite ;  but  ])e 
fendis  maken  sorewe,  for  old  envie  ]>at  ]?ei  have.  And  for  J?ei 
shulden  make  ioie,  j^ei  synnen  in  ]?is,  and  harmen  hemsilf.  And 
herfore  Crist  is  clepid  a  pesible  kyng  in  J)e  Chirche;  for  he 
made  pees  in  al  J)is  world,  and  lefte  fi3tinge  for  more  pees. 
For  man  fi^ti})  wijj  jjre  enemys,  to  have  more  blessid  pees  in 
hevene.  And  so,  as  many  men  seien,  alle  ])ingis  comen  for 
j?e  beste ;    for  alle  comen  for  Goddis  ordenance,  and  so  ]?ei 

^  ridelis,  E. 


**  The  number  seven,  formed  from 
the  union  of  the  triad,  the  '  perfect ' 
number,  with  the  tetractys,  which 
Pythagoras  venerated  so  profoundly, 
itself  prime  and  masculine,  marking 


the  number  of  the  planets,  &c.,  &c., 
has  been  held  sacred  from  the  ear- 
liest times.  See  the  article  on 
'  Arithmetic  *  in  the  Encyclopaedia 
Brilannica. 

WYCLIF. 


SERIlfONS. 


321 


comen  for  God  himsilf;  and  so  allc  jjingis  j)at  comen  fallen 
for  )>e  bestc  |)ing  }?at  mai  be.  Moreover  to  ano})cr  witt  men 
seien,  })at  |ns  world  is  beterid  bi  every|)ing  })at  falli))  |)erinne, 
where  j^at  it  be  good  or  yvel ;  so  moche,  |>at  )?is  world  is  betere 
for  synne  |>at  is  punishid  in  hello;  for  it  falli})  to  oure  Lord 
to  have  a  prisoun  and  prisoneris,  and  do  his  merci  to  hem,  and 
savore  more  his  seintis  in  hevene.  And  herfore  seij?  Gregori  ^, 
j^at  it  was  a  blcsful  synne  j^at  Adam  synnede  and  his  kynde, 
for  bi  |>is  f^e  world  is  beterid ;  but  }>e  ground  of  |>is  goodnesse 
stondij)  in  grace  of  Jesus  Crist. 

But  5it  men  mai  muse  how  Crist  is  pesible  kyng,  si]?  he  seij), 
he  cam  not  to  sende  pees  in  j^e  erjje  but  swerd,  and  J)at  bitokenej) 
fitting  and  noo  pees.  Here  men  seien  soJ)eli,  j^at  jjer  ben  two 
peesis,  verri  pees  and  fals  pees,  and  ))ei  ben  ful  dyvers.  Verry 
pees  is  groundid  in  God,  whanne  God  love]?  a  man,  and  to  jjat 
pees  sue])  pees  wi]?  alle  creaturis ;  for  to  men  ])at  ]>us  loven 
God  done  alle  J^ingis  good.  And  ])is  pees  stondi]?  in  pacience, 
and  mekenes,  and  o}?er  vertues ;  and  ]?us  was  Crist  pesible 
kyng,  and  he  and  hise  hadden  pees  here.  Fals  pees  is  groundid 
in  reste  wi})  oure  enemys,  whanne  we  assente  to  hem  wi})Outen 
a5enstonding.  And  swerd  a5ens  sich  pees  cam  Crist  to  sende 
into  erjje ;  for  })us  fou^te  Poul  ajens  his  fleish,  a^ens  ))e  world 
and  J)e  fend;  and  ]7us  dide  Crist,  partinge  fleishli  frendis  fro 
\e  love  of  o})er,  for  ]?e  more  love  })at  \q\  shulden  have  to  Crist 
})at  is  her  God.  pis  fals  pees  is  cowardise,  and  enemyte  of 
God ;  and  auctor  of  }>is  pees  is  }>e  fend  of  helle.  And  Crist 
contrariede  }>is  pees,  wi]?  synnes  Jjat  bringi])  it  in,  as  ben  pryde, 
envie  and  bateils,  ydilnes,  and  o])er  synnes.  And  where  verry 
pees  techi])  pacience,  ])is  pees  techi]?  fi3ting,  and  blasfeme})  in 
God,  as  it  wolde  be  his  maistir.  And  to  ]?is  undirstonding  was 
not  Crist  pesible  kyng.  And  herfore  \q  prophete  sei}?,  J^at  in 
tyme  of  Crist,  ]?ei  shulden  welle  ]>er  swerdis  to  sharris^  and  Jjer 

^  schares,  E. 


"  A  passage,  not  worded  precisely 
as  here  stated,  but  with  the  sanie 
general  meaning,  may  be  found  in 
Gregory's  Commentary  Tfi  Pritnuin 
Region,  lib.  iv.  cap.  i.  But  there 
is  a  passage  in  the  Sarum  missal,  in 
the  office  for  Holy  Saturday,   con- 

SERMONS. 


taining  precisely  the  same  thought ; 
'  O  certe  necessarium  Adae  pecca- 
tum  et  nostrum,  quod  Christi  morte 
deletum  est !  O  felix  culpa,  quae 
talem  ac  tantum  meruit  habere 
redemptorem ! ' 


What  Ls  tlic 
peace  which 
Christ  sends 
upon  the  earth. 


Is,  ii.  4- 


323 


WrCLIF'S 


Ps.  xlvi.  9; 
Ixxvi.  3. 


The  Martyrs. 


speris  to  sykelis.  For  of  Crist  sei|)  ano]jer  prophete,  ]?at  Crist 
shulde  do  awei  bateilis  to  ]?e  ende  of  ]>e  erj^e,  and  instrumentis 
of  bateilis,  as  bowe,  and  sheld,  and  swerd,  and  o})er  engynes 
of  batailis.     pus  shulde  it  be  ;  but  |)e  fend  reversij)  |?is. 


On  Seint  Stevenys  Dai. 

[SERMON     XCL] 

Ecce,  ego  mitto  ad  vos prophetas. — Matt,  xxiii.  [34.] 

pis  gospel  is  songen  in  worship  of  Seint  Steven,  |)at  was  |>e 
firste  martir  aftir  Cristis  assencioun;  for  he  was  oon  ofjje  sevene 
dekenes  chosen  of  j^e  apostlis,  and  stood  styfli  to  his  deej>  for  bi- 
leve  a3ens  Jewis.  And  so  bileve  techi]>  us  ]?at  he  is  an  hooli 
martir.  Crist  seide  |?es  wordis  to  two  maner  of  folk,  |)at  weren  |?e 
fendis  capteyns  in  killing  of  martiris ;  and  |)es  weren  princis  of 
preestis,  and  comunte  of  Jewis.  Crist  supposi]?  in  |;is  speche,  ]?at 
he  is  bo]>e  God  and  man ;  and  so  al  tyme  J>at  was,  or  shal  be,  is 
present  to  him.  And  he  supposi)?  also  |)at  |?er  ben  two  kynredis; 
good  kynrede,  and  y  vel,  of  which  ben  man-sleris  fro  ]?e  bigynyng 
of  ]?e  world  to  \^  laste  martir.  And  to  ]ns  kynrede  shapi]?  Crist 
his  wordis : — Lo^  I  scnde  to  y)u  prophetis,  and  ivise  men,  and 
scrihis  ;  and  al  j^is  is  for  50ur  good,  to  teche  30U  Goddis  lawe : 
and  of  hem  shal  y  kille,  and  do  upon  pe  crosse,  and  0/  hem  shal  y 
tormenien  in  y)ur  synagogis.  And  here  mai  we  see  \q,  malis  of 
})is  kynrede,  for  a  synagoge,  as  ]?ei  seien,  is  an  holi  place ;  and 
hereinne  \€\  turmenten  just  men.  And  ])e  synne  was^  j^e  more, 
and  blyndenesse  of  witt  also,  for  jjei  wenden  to  do  wel  in  ]?is. 
And  so  J)ei  pursucn  Cristene  men  fro  cite  to  citee,  J)at  shal 
veniaunce  come  on  hem "  at  ]je  dai  of  jugement.  And  })us  ]?ei 
done  her  fadirs  work,  sleyinge  martiris  bi  ])er  tyme,  pat  aljust 
blood  come  on  hem,  pat  is  shed  iii  erpe,/ro  pe  blood  of  just  Abel  to 
pe  blood  of  Zacarie,  pat  ivas  Barachies  sone,  slayn  of  hem  bitwixe 
pe  temple  and  pe  auter. 


»  So  E ;  /s,  A. 


The  words  And — hem  are  italicized  in  E. 


SERMONS, 


323 


pis  is  a  blessid  ende  ordeyncd  bi  Goddis  lawc,  for  no  synne 
mai  be  done,  but  5if  justise  be  ]jerwi|j ;  and  so,  jjis  justise  maki]> 
})e  world  more  fair  ])an  }ns  synne  mai  mak  it  foul.  Muse  we 
not  of  ])is  Zacarie,  how  he  was  Barachies  sone  and  whanne  he 
was  kild,  as  J)is  gospel  telli]; ;  for  many  men  have  many  names, 
and  algatis  in  }ie  olde  lawe ;  and  a  man  is  a  sone  of  a  fadir  longe 
bifore ;  and  many  })ingis  ben  hid  to  us,  how  \ei  weren  speciali 
done  ^.  And  ]?us  we  taken  ])e  word  of  Crist,  and  trowen  it  so|> 
as  bileve,  sij?  ech  word  of  ]?e  gospel  is  trewe,  si]>  it  is  bileeve ; 
si]>  ech  compleet  resoun  telli}j  treu]?e  jjat  we  shulde  trowe,  and 
ech  part  of  |)is  resoun  bitokene]>  J^e  same  treuj?e.  Crist  sei|?  to 
])is  folk : — SoJ)li,  Y  seie  to  50U,  alle  J?es  ]?ingis  shal  come  upon 
))is  kynrede.  pes  Jewis  weren  a  part  |?erof,  and  so  jjis  kynrede 
was  J)ere,  and  herde  jjes  wordis  of  Crist,  for  a  part  of  it  herde 
hem.  Afdr,  Crist  declari]?  ]jat  ))is  malice  was  oonli  in  hem ;  for 
God  was  of  good  wille  to  do  good  to  his  kyn ;  but  sum  of  hem 
wolde  not  take  ]>is  goodness  of  God.  And  ]?us  sei])  Crist : — 
Jerusalem,  Jerusalem,  how  ofte  ivolde  V  gadere  pi  childrefi,  as  an 
henne  gaderip  her  chckencs  undir  hir  wynges,  and poii  woldest  not, 
but  toke  in  veyn  Goddis  grace. 

And  here  men  douten  comunli  how  Goddis  wille  was  reversid, 
si]?  \>Q  Psalme  sei]>  : — |?at  al  j^at  God  wolde,  he  dide  generali  in 
hevene  and  in  erj^e.  But  here  it  seme]?  |?at  Austin  wolde  seie  on 
J)is  manere  ^ : — |?at  Goddis  wille  mut  nedis  ever  more  be  fulfillid; 
and  so,  as  ofte  as  Crist  wolde  gadere  children  of  Jerusaleem,  as 
ofte  weren  ])ei  gaderid  undir  his  proteccioun ;  and  whanne  he 
wolde  not  gadere  hem,  her  synne  was  in  cause,  and  bi  ri5t 
wisnesse  of  God,  ])ei  musten  nedis  be  punishid;  and  so 
Goddis  wille  was  fulfillid  in  punishing  of  hem.  God  wole 
sum  ]?ing  uttirli,  as  j^ing  })at  he  wole  be ;  and  jjes  |)ingis  moten 
nedis  be,  si]?  God  is  al  my5td.  And  sum  |)ing  wole  God  upon 
condicioun ;  and  telli|?  men  his  wille,  how,  bi  his  lawe,  men 
shal  be  punishid  |)at  breken  j^is  general  wille  in  ony  part  ]?erof, 
])at  is  fulfillid  in  sum  part.  And  so,  si]>  God  biddi]?  do  ])is  })ing, 
and  ordeyne]?  to  punishe  for  \>q  trespas,  God  wole  on  ]?is 
maner  |)at  ]?is  dede  be  don.     And  so  ever  Goddis  wille  is  ful- 

a  Seep.  240. 

■*  See  St.  Augustine's,  Enarratio  hi  Psalmnm  cxxxiv.  §  to. 

Y  2 


Ps.  cxxxv,  6. 


324 


WrCLIF'S 


fillid,  oujjer  in  dede,  or  penaunce.  3^^  ^  ^^^  ^^  meedfulli  |>at 
God  biddij?  him  do,  Goddis  wille  is  ri3tli  fillid  in  dede,  as  God 
biddij) ;  5if  a  man  a5enstondi|)  God  and  doi]?  a^ens  his  wille,  3it 
Goddis  wille  is  fillid  asideli  ^  by  punishinge  of  |)is  man.  And 
God  ha]?  ordeyned  ever  more  siche  wille  to  be  fulfillid  )?us.  And 
so,  as  men  speken  in  Latyn  *,  ^if  God  biddi]?  ]?ee  do  ]?is  dede,  God 
wole  ])at  J)Ou  do  ]?is  dede,  al  if  ]?ou  doist  it  not ;  for  ]?ou  art  in 
dette  to  do  )?is  dede,  and  in  ]?at  is  Goddis  wille  endid.  But 
God  wole  not  ]?at  ]>ou  doist  ]?is  dede,  for  God  knowij?  not  ))is 
treu])e,  but  God  wole  |)at  |)OU  do  })is  dede  as  God  wole  Jjat  ]?ou 
shuldist  do  Jjis  ^.  And  so  Crist  doubli]?  ])is  citees  name  to  telle 
defaute  of  |?er  unkyndenesse ;  koiv  pei  sleen  Goddis  prophetis, 
a7id  stoone  Goddis  servauntis  sent  to  he??i,  as  was  Stephen  and 
many  oJ>er,  j?e  which  al  ]?is  citee  killide. 

And  after  Crist  telli])  \q  veniaunce  ]>at  shal  be  taken  for  ])is 
synne.  Lo,  '^our  hous  shal  be  lefte  to  "^ou  desert^  for  defaute  of 
dwelleris.  And  ]?is  })ing  cam  after  in  dede,  soone  after  \2X  Crist 
steij  to  hevene.  And  so  Christ  seij?  to  ]jis  kinrede ;  Certts,  I 
seie  to  '^ou,  y  shal  not  se  me  fro  henns,  til  pat  y  seien,  hlessid  be  he 
pat  is  comen  in  pe  Lordis  fiame.  Anoon  |>is  kynrede  diede  fro 
Crist,  and  |>anne  ]?ei  wisten  j^at  he  was  God,  and  how  he  cam 
to  ])er  profit,  al  5if  j?ei  weren  unkynde  to  him.  And  J)is  knowing 
was  peyneful  to  ])is  kynrede  ]?at  shulde  be  dampned;  and  j)is 
folk  suffride  |>is  pey  ne  bifore  |)at  ]jei  sawen  Crist.  For  God  is 
redi  in  peyne  5yvynge  as  he  is  redi  to  5yve  blisse ;  for  his  justise 
nedij>  bo|)e  to  J?e  toon  and  to  jje  to})er. 

^  sydely,  E. 


'^  as  men  speken  in  Latyn.  The 
reference  in  the  text  is  probably  to 
the  great  work  of  Archbishop  Bracl- 
wardine,  the  '  profound  Doctor,'  en- 
titled De  Causa  Dei  confra  Ptlagiurn, 
in  which  the  whole  subject  of  free 
will  and  predestination  was  ex- 
haustively handled,  and  the  popu- 
larity of  which  was  very  great.  It 
appeared  about  the  year  1340,  and, 
as  Sir  Henry  Savile  says  (pref.  to 
edition  of  Bradwardine's  De  Causa 
Dei,  1 618)  was  immediately  on  its 
publication  '  tanto  omnium  docto- 
rum  exceptus  applausu,  ut  per  omnes 


fere  bibliothecas  tolius  Europac  de- 
scriberetur.'  To  this  work  Chaucer 
refers  in  the  well-known  passage  in 
the  Nun's  Priest's  tale,  and  repro- 
duces some  of  its  subtle  argumen- 
tation in  the  fourth  book  of  Troylus 
and  Cryseyde. 

'•  God  does  not  will  thee  to  do 
a  particular  act  in  obedience  to  his 
command,  because  he  is  ignorant  of 
the  truth  (that  thou  wilt  not  do  it) ; 
but  God  wills  thee  to  do  the  act, 
in  so  far  as  he  desires  that  thou 
shouklst  ol^ey  his  precepts,  though 
thou  in  fact  doest  it  not. 


SERMONS. 


'i^S 


On  Seint  Jhones  Day. 


[SERMON     XCII.] 

Dixit  Jesus  Peiro. — John  xxi.   [15.] 

pis  gospel  telli]>  how  Crist  ordeynede  Joon  to  lyve  and  die, 
and  how  Crist  wolde  ]?at  Joon  cam  to  blisse  wijjouten  kilHng. 
Joon  telH]?  how  Jesus  seide  to  Petir  pat  he  shulde  sue  him, — not 
oonli  bi  paas  of  feet,~but  in  suffringe  de]?  as  dide  Crist.  And 
Peter  knew  |jis  witt  of  God,  and  wolde  fayn  wite  how  Joon 
shulde  die.  But  Joon  clepi]?  himsilf  bi  J)ree  names  and  leve]? 
his  owne  propre  name.  For  ]7es  wordis  \2X  Joon  telli]?  here 
sounen  to  excellence  of  him;  and  ]?anne  God  wole  jjat  men 
be  pryvy,  and  5eve  ])e  so]>e  to  grace  of  God.  And  ]?us  seij>  ]?is 
gospel  of  Joon,  how  Petir  turnede  him  and  saw  Joon.  And 
|)e  firste  name  of  })es  |>ree  sowne]?  in  to  Goddis  grace,  and 
is  seid  in  J)is  maner  :  Peter,  as  he  turnede  him,  saw  pat  disciple 
pat  Jesus  lovede,  how  he  suede  Christ,  as  Peter;  but  jit  he  wiste 
not  of  his  deej).  And  }>is  soune]?  to  grace  of  Crist,  j^at  he 
lovede  ]?us  Joon  bifore ;  for  more  grace  mai  not  God  jyve  ))an 
sich  love  bifore  disertis.  pe  secounde  name  )?at  Joon  clepi|> 
him,  stondi]?  in  familiarite  of  Crist :  how  Joon  restide  on  Shir 
purs  dale  ^  ^  in  pe  soper  on  Cristis  brest.  pis  homlynesse  was 
a  greet  grace,  and  mevej?  men  for  to  trowe  ]?at  |)is  Joon  hadde 
witt  of  Crist.  And  al  |>is  cam  of  grace  of  Crist,  pe  |)ridde 
name  jjat  Joon  clepi|>  himself,  })at  Peter  shulde  knowe  bi 
resoun,  is  |)is  )>at  Joon  seide  to  Crist,  Lord,  who  is  he  pat  shal 
traye  pee  ?  pis  word  was  seid  on  Shir  pursdai,  whanne  Crist 
was  at  his  soper,  for  )janne  tolde  Crist,  but  comunli,  \2X  oon  of 

^  Scher  Thursday,  E. 


^  Shir  Thursday  is  Maundy  Thurs- 
day ;  '  so  called,'  says  Nares  in  his 
Glossary,  ed.  1859, '  from  the  custom 
of  shearing  or  shaving  the  beard  on 
that  day.'  He  quotes  from  an  old 
Homily, — '  For  that  in  old  faders' 


days  the  people  would  on  that  day 
sbere  theyr  hedes,  and  clyp  theyr 
berdes,  and  pool  theyr  heedes,  and 
so  make  them  honest  ayenst  Easter 
day.' 


Saint  Jcihn 
describes  him- 
self in  his 
gospel  in  three 
different  ways. 


326 


WFCLIF'S 


The  manner  of 
Saint  John's 
death. 


hem  shulde  traye  him ;  and  Petir  wolde  wite  which  ]?at  he  were. 
For,  as  men  seien,  Petre  wolde  have  fou3te  ^V\]»  him.  And 
Petre  saw  ]jat  Joon  was  ny^  Crist,  and  homly^  wi])  him,  and 
spake  to  Joon  J>at  he  shulde  axe  Crist  which  was  he  ]>at  shul 
traye  Crist,  as  Crist  hadde  seid.  And  al  J>is  sounejj  to  Cristis 
worship,  and  to  wisdoom  of  Crist.  And  J?us  Joon  nempnede 
|?is  ])ridde  name,  and  leeve]?  to  boste  of  himsilf. 

Whaniie  Peter  saw^  pis  disciple^  ])at  was  Joon  Evangelist,  he 
axide  of  Jesus  what  shal  worpe  of  pis  Joon.  But  Jesus  an- 
sweride  to  Petir  in  wisdom  and  pacience,  and  seide  :  Y  wole 
pat  he  dwelle  pus  til  Y  come^  ;  what  is  pat  to  pee  ?  sue  pou  me. 
And  it  is  ynow3  J)ee  to  cunne,  and  to  do  ^  at  |?is  tyme,  and  axe 
no  more.  Here  mai  we  se,  how  Crist  wolde  \2X  neijjer  Petre 
ne  Joon  wiste  J?anne  Judas  name,  whom  Crist  wiste  J>anne  to 
traye  him.  And  so  Crist  shewide  togidere  bo}?  pacience  and 
charite.  But  Crist  shewide  after  lore  more  to  note ;  how  men 
shulden  not  bisien  hem  to  knowe  Jjingis  unpertinent  to  ]?e  heljje 
of  ]?er  soule.  And  |>us  seide  Crist :  What  is  pat  to  pee.  And 
so  pis  word  we?tte  among  pe  apostlis,  pat  pis  Joon  shulde  nevere  die. 
And  so  wordis  |)at  ben  wel  seid  mai  li3tli  be  taken  amys ;  si]? 
apostlis  token  amys  ]?is  word  of  Crist  so  pleinli  seid.  And  |>us 
Joon  tellij?  ])is  defaute,  and  seide,  Jjat  Jesus  seide  not  pat  Joon 
shulde  nevere  die  ;  hut  Jesus  seide  in  J)is  maner  :  But  I  wole  pat 
Joon  divelle  pus  till  pat  Y  come,  what  is  pat  to  thee.  And  Cristis 
wordis  my^ten  be  verified  on  jjis  maner,  ^if  Joon  were  deed ; 
]?at  Crist  wolde  ]>dX  Joon  lyvede  longe,  wi|)0uten  martirdom 
in  bodi,  til  Crist  cam  in  his  owne  persone,  and  warnede  Joon 
to  come  to  him  and  ete  in  hevene  wij?  his  bre})eren  in  Cristis 
feste  jjat  he  hadde  ordeyned.  And  Jjus  tellij?  {)e  stone  of  Joon, 
})at  was  longe  after ;  as  it  bifel,  Crist  cam  to  Joon,  and  tolde 
him  how  he  shulde  come  to  his  brej^eren  upon  Sundai  next 
after,  and  so  Joon  diede  in  his  grave  ^\     Lord !  si})  p'cs  wordis 


'  homely,  E. 

*  So  in  the  Vulgate, '  Sic  eum  volo 
manere  donee  veniam.  (^uid  ad  te  ?  ' 

''  This  '  storie '  is  given  at  large 
in  the  Legenda  Aarea  ol  Jacobus  de 
Voraginc.  '  Cum  igitur  esscl  Jo- 
hannes XCIX  annorum,  a  passionc 


-  do  \>at,  E. 

Domini  secundum  Ysidorum  anno 
LXVIII,  apparuit  ei  Dominus  cum 
discipuhs  suis  diccns,  Veni,  dilecte 
mi,  ad  me,  quod  tempus  est  ut  in 
viensa  viea  cum  tuts  fralrlbus  epideris. 
Surgens  autem  Johannes  coepit  ire. 


SERMONS. 


^^1 


of  Crist  mai  be  wel  ))us  undirstonden,  what  shulde  meve  ony 
man  to  take  fals  wite  bi  hem  ?  After  j)ese  meke  wordis  of  Joon, 
and  comendinge  of  Goddis  grace,  telHj)  Joon  of  himsilf: 
hoiu  he  is  pat  disciple  pat  berip  witnesse  of  pes  pingis  andwroot 
pes  pingis  in  j^is  gospel ;  and  we  witen  pat  his  ivitnesse  is  sop. 
And  sich  a  witnesse,  unsuspect,  shulde  be  trowid  of  trewe  men 
and  not  be  holden  for  fals,  si|)  it  is  oure  bileve.  Prove  |>ou  }>at 
jns  gospel  is  fals,  and  after  dampne  it  if  j^ou  canst. 


On  Children  Masse  day, 


[SERMON      XCII  I.] 

Angelus  do7?iini  apparuit. — Matt.  ii.  [13.] 

\)e  Lordis  atmgel  apperide  in  sleep  to  Joseph,  and  seide :  Rise, 

and  take  pe  child  and  his  modir,  and  flee  into  Rgipt,  and  be  pou 

pere  til  Y  seie  to  pee  ;  for  it  is  to  come  pat  Eroiide  seke  pe  child /or 

to  Use  him  and  his  felowis  wi|)  him.     And  Joseph  roos  up,  and 

ioke  in  pe  ny-i^t pe  child  and  his  modir,  andfledde  ifito  Egipt.    And 

Joseph  was  pere  to  pe  deep  of  Heroude.     Aiid  pis  was  done  of 

Joseph,  for  tofulfille  pat  pat  was  seid  by  pe  prophete,  pat  seide  : 

Out  of  Egipt  Y  clepe  viy'sone,  sei])  God  of  Crist.     And  pa7tne 

Heroude  saw^  pat  he  ivas  disseyved  of  pe  kyngis,  and  was  ful 

ivrop,  and  sente  into  Bedelem,  and  slow^  at  pe  children  pat  weren 

in  Bedelem,  and  in  allepe  coostis  biside,pat  weren  of  two  yer  and 

ivipitme,  after  pe  tyme  pat  he  sow^te  out  of  P^es  kyngis,  |?at  Crist 

shulde  be  of  age.     For  as  men  seien  comunli,  |?e  same  5eer  )?at 

Crist  was  born,  Eroude  wente  to  Rome  and  brente  J^es  kyngis 


Cui  Dominus,  Dominica  die  ad  me 
venies.'  The  legend  goes  on  to 
describe  how  St.  John  caused  his 
grave  to  be  dug  near  the  altar  in 
his  church  at  Ephesus,  and  laid  him- 
self down  in  it ;  from  which  point 
the  story  evaporates,  as  it  were,  in 
a  cloud  of  miracles,  and  makes  no 
mention  of  his  actual  death.     This, 


however,  our  author  might  have 
found  in  St,  Augustine,  who,  in 
Tract  CXXIV  In  Johann.  Evang., 
says  that  it  was  related  in  an  apo- 
cryphal writing  that  the  apostle, 
after  his  grave  had  been  dug,  '  ibi 
se  tanquam  in  lectulo  collocasse 
statimque  eum  esse  de/unclum.' 


The  slaughter 
of  the  Inno- 
cents. 


328 


WYC  LI  F'S 


ship  a,  and  dwelte  ]?ere  aboute  two  5eer  bifore  he  cam  a^en.  And 
jjerfore  he  slow  alle  jje  children  ])at  weren  two  5eer,  for  he 
dredde  him  of  Christ  ]jat  he  shulde  take  his  kingdom ;  si])  })is 
alien  ^  was  kyng  bi  Jie  graunt  of  Romayns,  and  he  wiste  not 
how  Crist  wolde  do  j^at  was  bi  kynde  kyng.  And  panne  was 
fulfillid  pat  was  seid  bi  Jeremy e  :  A  vols  was  herd  in  hi"^,  which 
vois  was  a  ive.pinge  and  a  greet  weiling, — Rachel  ivas  weping 
for  hir  children  and  she  luolde  not  be  confortid,  for  pei  weren 
not,  quic  |>us. 

pis  prophecie  is  undirstonden  on  many  maneres  of  men. 
Sum  men  undirstonden  it,  ]?at  Rachel  wepte  in  spirit  jjat  ]>ei 
weren  not  hir  children  |)at  weren  kild  in  Bedleem,  but  hir 
sistris  children ;  for  j^ei  weren  kild  martiris.  Oj^er  men  undir- 
stonden by  Rachel  holi  Chirche;  and  ]5es  martiris  weren  hir 
children  ])at  she  wepte  fore,  not  for  J^e  martirdom  |>at  was  in 
hem,  but  for  j^e  synne  jjat  was  done  a3ens  hem.  And  j^e 
remenant  of  ))e  word  is  undirstonden  ^  denyingli,  J?at  j^e  Chirche 
wolde  not  be  confortid  of  |)is,  j)at  her  children  weren  dede.  For 
she  |)0U3te  it  no  disconfort  by  many  enchesouns;  oon,  j^at  it 
mut  nede  be,  as  God  himsilf  ha]?  ordeyned, — and  he  ordeynej? 
evere  for  |>e  beste,  5if  we  coudyn  perseyve  it.  How  shulde  we 
grutche  ajens  God  j^at  we  trowen  doij?  so  wel  ?    Also,  we  trowen 

^  So  E  ;  A  has  undirstonding . 

'^  hrente  \>es  fcyriffis  ship.  This  sin- 
gular legend  is  not  found,  so  far  as 
I  can  discover,  in  any  writer  of 
earlier  date  than  Petrus  Comestor, 
(the  Mangiadore  of  Dante,  Paradho, 
xii.  134),  author  of  the  Historin 
Scholasiica,  from  whom  De  Lyra 
quotes  it.  Peter  was  a  priest  of 
Troyes  in  the  twelfth  century  ;  the 
Historia  is  said  to  have  been  pro- 
duced in  the  year  1181.  In  the 
dedication,  addressed  to  the  arch- 
bishop of  Sens,  Peter  declares  that 
he  had  written  the  work  at  the 
urgent  entreaty  of  many  friends,  in 
order  to  'elucidate  the  too  brief  and 
obscure  narrative  of  holy  scripture.' 
Labbe,  in  his  Scrip/ores  Ecclesiaslici, 
thus  writes  of  him;  —  'Ilistoiiam 
Ecclesiasticam  consai  cinavit  eamquc 
glossis  tum  falsissimis  tum  insulsis- 
simis  rcfcrcivil.  quae  tamcn  ita  tum 


ubique  obtinuit,  ut  ipsi  scripturae 
sacrae  nudae  ac  purae  pene  pre- 
ferretur.' 

The  story  of  the  veracious  Petrus 
is,  that  while  Herod  was  on  his  way 
to  Rome,  whither  he  had  been  sum- 
moned by  Augustus  with  reference 
to  the  quarrels  between  him  and  his 
sons,  he  stayed  for  a  time  at  Tarsus 
in  Cilicia,  and  burnt  all  the  ships  of 
the  people  of  Tarsus,  in  revenge  for 
their  having  provided  the  wise  men 
with  a  ship  to  return  home  in, 
\\  herel)y  the  prophecy  in  the  forty- 
eiglith  Psalm  was  fulfilled,  '  Thou 
shalt  break  the  ships  of  Tarshish 
with  an  cast  wind,'  Tarshish  being 
of  course  identical  with  Tarsus  ! 

'^  Ilerod  was  an  alien  and  no 
Jew,  being  the  son  of  Antipatcr 
the  Idumaean. 


SERMONS. 


329 


})at  j)es  seintis  weren  take  in  ])er  best  tyme,  so  j^at  many  ben 
betere  ]?an  j?ei  shulden  have  be  unmartrid.  Whi  shulde  |>e  Chirche 
sorowe  for  her  grete  goode  ?  Many  sich  resouns  ben  maad, 
j>at  men  shulden  be  pacient  and  confourme  hem  to  Goddis 
wille,  and  enjoie  of  ]?e  more  goode.  And  |)us  men  seien  j)at 
l)e  Chirche  is  worshipid  bi  martirs.  Crist  is  heed  of  martiris, 
and  oonli  bi  himsilf;  but  his  membris  ben  martris  upon  |>re 
maneres:  sum  in  wille  and  dede, — and  jjus  was  Stephen  martrid; 
and  sum  in  wille,  and  not  in  dede, — and  ]?us  was  Joon  martrid; 
and  sum  men  in  dede  and  not  in  wille,  and  |)us  weren  ]jes 
children  martrid. 

But  men  douten  comunli  how  alle  J^es  weren  martris,  si]> 
circumcisioun  was  Jjanne  as  nedeful  as  now  is  baptym.  But  licly 
many  of  hem  weren  kild  bifore  ]?e  ei^tjje  dai,  and,  bifore  J>at,  jjei 
shulden  not  be  circumcidid  bi  |?e  lawe.  Here  many  men  ]?enken 
})at  ])er  ben  many  circumcisiouns,  as  J)er  ben  many  baptemys,  as 
it  is  knowun  comunli.  And  God  is  not  so  oblishid  to  sensible 
sacramentis  ]jat  ne  he  mai,  wiJ>outen  hem,  3yve  a  man  his  grace. 
And  as  God  5af  martiris  grace,  wijjouten  baptym  of  water,  bi 
baptym  of  |?e  Hooli  Goost  and  bi  water  of  Cristis  side,  so  mai 
men  suppose  of  circumcisioun ;  and  so  alle  ]?es  Innocentis 
weren  circumcided  in  soule.  pus  mai  men  suppose  bine|)e 
bile  eve. 

And  many  men  supposen  })is  more  ])an  of  ]?es  seintis  |)at 
now  ben  canonisid  bi  |)e  Court  of  Rome,  for  lordship,  or 
money,  or  favour  of  partis ;  for  |)us  may  |?e  Court  be  blyndid 
in  many  sich  canonisingis.  Also,  fals  witnessis  proven  not 
bifore  God ;  whi  shulden  we  bileve  jjat  |?es  witnessis  seien  so]?? 
also,  many  sich  signes  |)at  ben  holden  myraclis  mai  be  done  bi 
J)e  fend,  and  many  moo  ]>an  ]?ei ;  what  evidence  is  of  jjes,  J)at 
|)is  soule  is  in  hevene .?  Som  soulis  ben  in  hevene  bi  witnesse 
of  holi  writt,  and  ]?is  witnes  is  more  wor]?  ]>an  a  J^ousand 
Courtis ;  and  bileve  of  Cristen  men  is  J^at  J)es  ben  seintis.  But 
men  supposen  binej)e  bileve  |)at  o]7er  men  ben  seintis,  after 
evidence  ]?at  ])ei  have,  ou|)er  more  or  lesse :  as  sum  men  sup- 
posen, and  sum  leeven  levefulli ;  and  sum  men  irowen  treuli,  jjat 
alle  sich  seintis  profilen  not  to  men  but  :5if  |>ei  maken  hem  love 
Crist.    So,  3if  men  wolden  betcrc  love  Crist  wijjoutcn  sich  feestis, 


Question  raised 
whether  all  the 
Holy  Innocents 
were  martyrs. 


He  assails  the 
canonization  of 
saints  as  prac- 
tised by  the 
Court  of  Rome. 


3^^ 


WFCLIF'S 


The  miiUitiule 
of  festivals  of 
doubtful  profit 
to  the  Church. 


It  is  dishonour- 
ing to  Saint 
Thomas  of 
Canterbury  to 
say  that  he 
died  in  defence 
of  the  Cliurch's 
possessions. 


it  were  beter  to  hem  to  wante  sich  seintis.  But  wi]?  |?is  it  is  so]), 
J)at  many  ben  seintis  in  hevene,  as  Laurence  and  Kateryne  ^, 
al3if  Rome  canonise  hem  nevere.  But  si]?  ])es  seintis  ben  not 
expressid  in  ])e  lawe  of  holi  writt,  men  ben  not  holden  to  trowe 
it  expressli  }>at  ])es  ben  seintis  in  hevene  :  for  after  J>at  treuj^e  is 
in  holi  writt  shulden  men  trowe  J)is  treuj^e.  And  so,  as  it  is  ofte 
seid,  holi  ^vl•itt  conteyne]>  al  treu]>e :  sum  treuj>e  expresli, — and 
|)at  shulden  men  ]?us  trowe, — and  sum  treu]>e  pryvyli, — and  jjat 
shulden  men  trowe  in  comune.  And  God  woot  of  ]?es  festis, 
whejjer  ])e  Chirche  ben  betere  for  hem ;  for  if  men  loven  more 
Crist  and  holden  betere  Goddis  lawe  bi  \\s>  multitude  of  festis, 
and  bi  J>e  seiyng  of  her  houris,  Jeanne  it  profiti])  to  sich  men  to 
kepe  sich  ])ingis  wel.  And  5if  j^es  festis,  wij?  jjes  ymages  and  ]?es 
houris,  weren  left  of  men,  and  Jeanne  ])ei  loveden  betere  Crist, 
and  diden  betere  service  Jjat  he  bad  hem ;  Jeanne  it  profitide  to 
sich  men  to  leve  siche  serymonies.  And  it  seme]?  to  many  men, 
si])  Crist,  wij)  alle  hise  apostlis,  lefte  alle  siche  ])ingis  and  lyvede 
betere  in  charite,  and  kepte  betere  ])e  bidding  of  God,  so  men 
my^ten  now  do.  But  men  shulden  not  here  diffyne,  but  3if  God 
tolde  it  hem ;  for  bo])e  sich  doyng  and  sich  lyvynge  my^te  do,  in 
caas,  harm  or  good.  But  algatis  men  shulden  seie,  ])at  ])ei  shulden 
not  leve  })e  office  ]>at  Crist  bad  hem  expresly  for  sich  newe 
ordenaunce. 

And  it  is  knowun  ]?at  many  harmes  and  many  errours 
fallen  bi  })es  festis;  first,  in  ])e  purchasyng  of  canonisyng 
of  seintis  at  Rome;  after,  in  coveitouse  occupiyng  togedre 
moneie  bi  siche  seintis;  and  algaUs  in  mystrowyng  ])at  men 
have  of  sich  seintis.  As  sum  men  trowen  ])at  Seint  Thomas, 
Erchebishop  of  Cantirbirie,  diede  for  dowyng  of  ])e  Chirche,  and 
to  defende  goodis  ])erof.  And  it  were  more  licli  to  men,  and 
more  acording  to  Goddis  lawe,  })at  men  shulden  be  seintis  in 
hevene  for  to  bringe  holi  Chirche  to  ])e  ordenance  ])at  Crist 


«•  At  tlie  early  period  (middle  of 
the  third,  and  early  in  the  fourth 
centurj')  at  which  these  saints  lived, 
no  formal  rules  for  canonization  ex- 
isted. Yet  St.  Laurence  is  a  strancfc 
instance  to  choose ;  for  though  he 
was  not  formally  canonized,  his  feast 


was  solemnly  kept  in  the  Roman 
church  at  least  ever  since  the  fifth 
century ;  and  this  was  the  more 
natural,  because  he  was  a  native  of 
Rome.  See  his  life  in  Alban  Butler 
(Aug.  ID). 


SERMONS. 


'^^^ 


ordeynede;  and  })at  was  pore  state  of  preestis.  And  herfore 
trowen  many  men,  jjat  cause  |)at  made  Seint  Thomas  martir 
was,  ))at  he  spake  a3ens  wolves  J>at  weren  aboute  to  mm-|?ere 
lambren;  and  suffrede  not,  for  defaute  of  preching,  Goddis 
vyne3erde  passe  to  a  wort3erd.  And  |)us  bishopis  and  clerkis, 
wi|>  kingis,  holden  stifli  a3ens  Thomas;  and  ])us  we  redyn^  of 
Seint  Thomas,  and  trowen  it  betere,  but  lesse  |?an  fei]?.  And 
|)us  shulde  we  not  stryve,  as  foolis,  how  hye  ]?is  Thomas  is  in 
hevene,  and  what  seintis  in  hevene  he  passij? ;  as  done  ])es  newe 
foundun  ordris  of  her  patrouns  ^,  for  whom  |jei  stryven  how 
hie  seintis  ]>ei  ben  in  hevene.  And  jit  |>ei  can  neijjer  teche  bi 
resoun  ne  bi  bileve  jjat  ]>ei  ben  seintis  in  hevene,  ne  |)at  ]?ei  passe 
p>e  leste  in  hevene.  But  men  mai  trowe,  whoso  wole,  jjes  fablis 
for  which  foolis  stryven.  God  jyve  us  grace  to  love  him,  and 
kepe  his  lawe,  and  love  it;  for  j^at  is  betere  to  Cristene  men, 
]>an  kepe  j^es  festis  of  |jes  seintis.  For  ech  preier  to  j^ese 
seintis  moot  be  knytt  wi]j  helpe  of  God.  For,  if  we  loven  Crist 
in  his  ordre  betere  for  love  of  siche  seintis,  ]?anne  ]?es  festis 
profiten  to  us ;  but  comunli  j^ei  done  us  harm.  But  al  oure 
craft  were  for  to  knowe  what  we  shulden  take  as  bileve,  and 
what  |)ing  we  shulden  suppose,  and  what  j^ing  forsaken  as  fals. 

^  reden,  E. 


^  as  done  \>es  newe  foundun  ordris  of 
her  patrouns.  This  looks  like  a  re- 
ference to  the  famous  Liber  Con- 
formitatum  of  Bartholomew  of  Pisa  ; 
but  if  it  be,  this  sermon  was  not 
written  by  Wyclif,  for  that  work, 
according  to  Gieseler  (Eccl.  Hist, 
vol.  iv.  p.  155)  was  not  written  till 
1,^85.  In  it  is  said,  (I  quote  from 
Gieseler)  that  the  brother  Pacificus 
had  seen  in  a  vision  many  seats  in 
heaven,  '  inter  quas  vidit  unam  em- 


inentiorem  aliis  et  prae  omnibus 
gloriosius  fulgentem,  et  ornatam 
omni  lapide  pretioso ; '  of  which 
seat  it  was  told  him, — '  haec  sedes 
fuit  Luciferi,  et  loco  ejus  sedebit 
humilis  Franciscus.'  It  is,  however, 
probable  that  the  exaltation  of  their 
founder  in  Paradise  was  a  favourite 
theme  with  Franciscan  preachers  in 
all  countries,  long  before  the  ap- 
pearance of  the  Liber  Conformita- 
tuni. 


33^ 


WFCLIF'S 


J?E  Gospel  on  >e  sixte  day  after  Cristmasse  dai. 


[SERMON     XCIV.] 


The  wrker 
prefers  ex- 
pounding Holy 
Writ  to  amus- 
ing the  people 
with  stories 
al>out  the 
Saints. 


The  prophecy 
of  Simeon. 


Er at  Joseph  et  Maria. — Luc.  ii.  [33.] 

To  sum  men  it  plesi]?  for  to  telle  ]?e  talis  ]?at  ]?ei  fynden  in 
seintis  lyves,  or  wijjouten  holi  writt;  and  sich  ])ing  plesij)  ofte 
more  |?e  peple.  But  we  holden  ]?is  manere  good, — to  leeve  sich 
wordis  and  triste  in  God,  and  telle  sureli  his  lawe,  and  speciali 
his  gospelis ;  for  we  trowen  ]?at  \€\  camen  of  Crist,  and  so  God 
sei])  hem  alle.  And  jjes  wordis,  si]?  J>ei  ben  Goddis,  shulden  be 
taken  as  bileve;  and  more  wolen  \€\  quykene  men  ]jan  o])er 
wordis  j)at  men  knowen  not.  And  J)us  jjes  festis  of  ]?es  seintis 
han  |)is  good  biside  o]?er,  \2X  man  mai  wel  telle  in  hem  ]>e 
understonding  of  ]je  gospel. 

pis  gospel  tellij)  a  treuj^e  to  us,  how  Joseph  and  Marie,  Cristis 
eldris,  weren  woundringe  of  pes  pingis  pat  weren  seid  ]?anne  of 
Crist ;  for  alle  J^es  wordis  weren  newe  to  hem,  and  seid  of  God, 
as  we  bileven.  And  as  Austin  seij)  on  Jie  Psalm  ^ :  Trowe  it 
not,  for  Y  seie  so ;  but,  5if  Crist  seie  so,  wo  is  him  |?at  trowi{> 
it  not.  And  as  we  shulden  have  bileve  Jjat  alle  Cristis  wordis 
moten  nede  be  trewe,  so  we  shulden  have  bileve  ]?at  ]?is  sentence 
was  seid  of  Crist ;  which  sentence  is  told  to  us  bi  figuris  and  bi 
mannis  writing.  And  j^is  is  ]7e  leste  bileve  jjat  we  shulden  have 
in  al  oure  feij).  And  3if  we  ben  disseyved  in  J>is,  oure  owne 
synne  is  in  cause.  We  shulden  not  trowe  in  j)is  ynke,  ne  in  ]?e 
skynnes  ]jat  is  clepid  book\  but  in  Jje  sentence  ]?at  \€\  seien, 
which  sentence  is  })e  book  of  liif.  For,  al  if  ])er  ben  many 
treu|)is  and  dyverse  resouns  in  ]je  gospel,  nej^eles  ech  of  ]?es 
treu|)is  is  jje  substance  of  God  himsilf. 

Symeon  was  an  oold  man,  and  blessid  Marie  and  Joseph  ;  for 
he  bilevede  j^at  Jesus  hir  sone  was  togidere  God  and  man,  and 
so  he  trowide  j^at  bi  him  Marie  and  Joseph  coulden  ^^  be  saved. 

'   a  boke,  E.  ^  scbulden,  E, 

*  1  have  not  been  able  to  verify  this  reference. 


SERMONS. 


3^^ 


pis  Symeon  seide  to  Marie,  J>at  he  trowide  was  Goddis  modir  ^ : 
Lo,  }ns  child  is  putt  here  into  falling  doun  and  rysyng  up  of 
inany  folk  pat  be7i  in  Israel,  and  into  a  sig?ie  to  ivhich  it  shal 
he  aynseid,  of  wickidc  men  ;  ajtd  pi  soule,  ivhich  is  his,  shall 
passe  siverd  of  compassioun.  For  Marie  suffride  in  herte  wi}) 
Crist  and  hadde  m}xhe  sore  we  in  Jjis  world.  For  to  sich  folk 
wolde  Crist  3eiie  blisse,  and  ])us  |?er  blisse  savouride  more ;  for  it 
is  seid  comunli  \2X  man  may  not  passe  fro  ))is  joie  strei3t  unto 
|?e  joie  of  heven,  for  Jeanne  lievenli  joie  savouride  him  not. 
And  Jius  ech  man  of  worldli  lust,  5if  he  shal  after  come  to 
hevene,  mote  nedis  have  a  litil  space  to  purge  him  of  his 
worldli  lyf ;  and  ]>anne  shal  blisse  savoure  him,  whanne  he  is 
purgid  |>us  fro  )>is  world.  And  so  Crist,  wi])  his  modir  and  alle 
hise  aposdis,  hadden  here  sorowe ;  and  ]?us  jjei  weren  disposid 
here  to  take  betere  ])e  blisse  of  hevene.  And  it  is  no  drede  to 
clerkes  jjat  ne  ])e  spirit  of  oure  Ladi,  \q  which  is  lyf  of  hir,  and 
in  which  Crist  w^as  wlappid,  was  a  spirit  of  Crist ;  as  alle  ];ingis 
moten  nedis  be  hise.  Lord !  si])  sophistris  graunten  ])at  ]>is  ^ 
fadir  of  J>e  ^  hound  is  myn,  and  ^it  he  is  not  my  fadir  <'^,  whi 
shulde  we  not  graunte  also  ]^at  oure  Ladies  soule  is  Cristis;  and 
so  myche  more,  as  Cristis  wille  and  hir  wille  was  ever  at  oon  1 
pe  eende  whi  oure  Ladi  suffride  J)us,  was  herfore  ordeyned  of 
God,  for  she  shulde  be  more  hooli,  and  more  disserve  to 
Cnstene  men,  and  beter  printe  Cristis  dedes,  and  telle  hem  hise 
evaungelistis. 

And  ]>us  many  men  tellen  ])is  cause  to  dyvers  ententis ;  \2X 
oure  Ladi  shulde  have  sorewe,  }mt  pou'^tis  be  sheivid  of  many 
her  lis.  Sum  men  construen  ])is  ])us  :  ])at  oure  Ladi,  bi  ])is  sorewe, 
lovede  more  tendirli  mankynde,  and  made  hem  shewe  her 
pryvy  synnes.  And  so,  bi  J)is  merit  of  oure  Ladi,  ])0U3tis  of 
apostlis  and  o])er  weren  shewid  of  many  hertis  to  God,  bi 
confession ;  or  ellis,  ])at  ])us  oure  Ladi  ])0U5te  betere  on  dedes 
}>at  Crist  dide,  and  shewide  hem  to  Luke  and  ojjer,  to  witnesse 
hem  of  many  hertis. 


^  So  in  E ;  A  italicizes  the  words  Goddis  modir. 


\>e,E. 


i>/s,  E. 


a  On  the  fallacies  arising  from  Logic,  §§  8-12,  and  the  collection 
ambiguity  of  the  middle  term,  see  the  of  examples  in  the  Appendix,  Part 
chapter  on   Fallacies    in  Whately's       11. 


334 


The  witness 
of  Anna. 


WFCLIF'S 

Aftdper  ivas  an  oold  ivomman,  Anna ^  pat  was  a  prophete  in  }>is 
tyme :  she  was  dowdier  of  Famiel,  of  pe  kynrede  of  Aser.  pis 
Anna  wente  wel  in  her  daies,  and  she  lyvede  sevene  i^eer  wip  hir 
hosehonde  J)at  was  weddid  wi]?  \\\x  fro  her  inaidenhod.  And  pis 
Anna  was  widewe  unto  four  e  score  yer  and  four  e,  pat  wente  not 
out  of  pe  temple ,  hut  servede  perinne,  hope  ?ti'^t  and  dai,  hifastinge 
and  devoute  preieris.  A?id pis  Anna  cam  pe  same  tyme^  and  made 
hir  confession  to  God,  and  spake  of  Crist,  as  ^  of  God  and  man, 
to  alle  oper,  ])at  camen  to  hir  and  weren  in  bileve,  and  ahiden  pe 
hiyng  ayn  of  mankynde.  Here  men  douten  comunli  how  old  )?is 
Anna  was,  and  whe])er  ]jes  foure  score  5eer  and  foure  ben 
countid  in  hir  two  eeldis  bifore,  as  in  tyme  of  hir  maidenhood, 
and  in  tyme  of  hir  wedlok.  But  leve  we  ])is  witt  to  God,  and 
wite  we  wel  j^at  J>is  Anna  was  an  old  womman ;  and  so  Crist 
wolde  have  witnesse  of  ages  and  statis  of  folk.  Crist  wolde 
have  witnes  of  old  folk,  as  weren  Anna  and  Symeoun ;  and  he 
hadde  witnesse  of  jong  folk,  as  weren  Innocentis  martrid  for 
him ;  and  he  hadde  witnesse  of  myddil  folk,  as  weren  his  fadir, 
and  modir,  and  herdis.  But  comunli  Crist  hadde  witnesse  of 
just  folk  of  good  name. 

Aiid  whanne  pei  hadden  do  alle  pingis  in  pe  temple,  pat  f el  to 
he  done  hi  Goddis  lawe,  pei  tur^ieden  ayn  to  Galile,  to  pe  citee 
Nazareth.  For,  sij?  Crist  was  circumcisid,  and  pore  oifringe 
was  maad  for  him,  ])er  was  no  more  ]?ere  to  do  bi  Crist,  of  so 
tendir  age ;  but  whanne  he  was  of  twelfe  ^eer,  he  cam  a5en  wi]) 
his  eldris  and  enfourmede  \q  doctours  of  ]?e  temple,  as  \q 
gospel  of  Luk  sei]?.  And  in  J)e  meene  while,  pe  child  wexide 
and  ivas  confortid,  ful  of  witt,  and  pe  grace  of  God  was  wip 
him. 


'  .So  E ;  A  reads  arid. 


-^0^0^ 


SJlRMONS. 


335 


)PE  Gospel  on  Newe  ^eris  Day. 


[SERMON     XCV.] 


Postqiiam  consummati  stmt. — Luc.  ii.  [21.] 

pis  gospel  telli]>  of  Cristis  circumcisioun,  |)at  was  done  on 
})C  ei5ti])e^  dale  fro  j^at  Crist  was  bore.  And  ])is  religioun  bigan 
at  Abraham  |)e  patriark;  and  j)is  religioun  was  done  in  hem 
longe  after  ]?er  ei3tj?e  dales  ^  a.  But  ])is  was  kept  speciali  among 
|?e  Jewis;  but  now  we  kepen  it  not,  but  ]>ing  ])at  it  figuri]?. 
pe  first  book  of  Goddis  lawe  telli}>  of  Adam  and  Eve,  how  ]?ei 
lyveden  nakid  in  tyme  of  ]>er  innocence.  But  fro  \€\  hadden 
synned,  \€i  wisten  ]?at  |?ei  weren  nakid,  and  \€\  founden  in 
lymes  of  gendrure  rebellioun  to  resoun;  and  ]?ei  shameden  herof, 
and  hiliden  |>es  lymes,  for  man  shame])  kyndeli  of  workes  of 
synne.  And  Jjus  God  bad  Abraham  to  J^enke  on  })is  synne, 
\2X  men  shulden  kitte  awey  J)e  skynne  of  jjer  5erde ;  and  ])is 
kitting  awei  is  clepid  circumcisioun.  Many  causes  J^er  ben 
whi  ]7is  prophytid  to  Jewis;  for,  bi  ])is  jsei  ]70U3ten  betere  on 
])e  synne  of  Adam ;  bi  |?is  \€\  fledden  more  |>e  foule  synne  of 
lecherie.  And  to  ])is  synne  weren  ]je  Jewis  ful  redi ;  and  her- 
fore  swynys  fleish  was  forfendid  Jewis  ^.  And  bi  |)is  obedience 
J>at  Jewis  maden  to  God,  weren  jjei  knowen  from  o]>er  men, 
whanne  ]?ei  weren  slayn  in  bataile.  Si}>  Crist  my3te  not  synne, 
and  algatis  in  lecherie,  Crist  was  circumcidid,  to  fulfille  |)e  lawe, 
and  to  telle  men  aftir  how  he  clensi]?  ])er  hertis  fro  synnes  jjat 
))ei  han  done,  in  dede,  in  word,  and  J)0U5t. 


The  Circum- 
cision. 


^  ey}t\>e,  E. 

a  For  (Gen.  xvii.  10)  Abraham 
was  ninety  yeai's  old,  and  Ishmael 
thirteen,  when  the  rite  was  prac- 
tised on  them,  and  on  all  the  men 
of  the  houshold. 

b  Nicholas  de  Lyra  (Biblia  Sacra, 
in  Levit.  cap.  xi.)  explains  that  the 
flesh  of  the  camel,  the  hare,  the 
Hyrax   Syriacus,    or   choerogryllus. 


^  \'e  eyit  dayes,  E. 

(translated  '  coney,')  and  the  swine, 
was  forbidden  to  the  Jews,  because 
by  the  first  is  mystically  signified 
pride,  by  the  second  timidity,  by  the 
third  avarice,  and  by  the  fourth  fil- 
thiness, — vices  which  are  respec- 
tively opposed  to  the  four  cardinal 
virtues,  prudence,  courage,  justice, 
and  chastity. 


?>?fi 


WYC  LIF'S 


The  name 
Jesus. 


Phil.  ii.  10. 


And  ])is  is  |^e  first  ernest  ^  }^at  Crist  3af  for  mannis  kynde, 
and  seide  ]jat  he  wolde  save  it  bi  blood  of  };is  Goddis  lomb. 
Men  seien  })at  Crist  juries  shed  his  blood  for  man :  first,  in  cir- 
cumcision of  ])is  tendir  membre ;  ])e  secounde  tyme,  longe 
after,  whanne  Crist  swette  his  blood  whanne  he  praiede  for 
man,  and  dredde  to  suffre  dej> ;  })e  JTidde  tyme,  and  moost, 
whanne  J^e  blood  of  Cristis  bodi  was  drawyn  out  in  many 
maneris  bi  violence  of  turmentouris.  pe  blood  in  his  fleish 
was  drawyn  out  bi  scourging;  j^e  blood  in  his  veynes  was 
drawyn  out  bi  nailis ;  and  ]?e  blood  of  his  herte,  where  Cristis 
liif  was  tresourid,  was  drawyn  out  bi  persing  of  spere  of  a  kny5t. 
Lord  !  si)>  Crist  seij?  ]>at  |>e  blood  of  just  Abel  shal  be  requyrid 
of  Cayn,  myche  more  J?is  blood  of  Crist.  And  si])  suffring  bi 
charite  is  meritorie  and  helpyng,  myche  more  |>is  suffringe 
of  ])e  persone  of  Crist.  And  ])us  goostli  circumcisioun  was 
evermore  nedeful ;  and  it  hadde  vertue  and  ende  in  J)e  blood 
of  Crist. 

pis  gospel  telli)>  shortli  of  ))is  circumcisioun.  Luk  sei|>, 
Whanne  ei-^te  daies  weren  endid^pat pe  child  shiilde  be  circumcidid, 
his  name  was  clepid  Jesus ^  pat  was  clepid  of  pe  aungel  bifore  he 
shulde  be  conceyved  in  wombe.  It  is  knowun  to  trewe  men  J>at 
Crist  was  juries  clepid  ])us ;  oones,  whanne  he  was  circumcidid, 
as  we  clepen  children  whanne  \€\  ben  baptizid  ^ ;  jje  toj^er  tyme, 
whanne  Gabriel  spak  wij)  oure  Ladi,  and  telde  hir  how  she 
shulden  conseyve  Crist,  and  he  shulde  be  clepid  Jesus,  pe 
j?ridde  tyme  was  Crist  clepid  Jesus  in  j^e  Trinite  wi|>inne ;  and 
|jis  was  hi5est  cleping,  and  moost  of  vertu.  For  by^  ]?e  orde- 
nance  of  |)is  ojjer  han  ))er  power ;  and  bi  ])is  seij)  Poul, 
\2X  in  ]>e  name  of  Jesus  ech  knee  is  bowid,  of  hevene,  of  erj^e, 
and  helle ;  and  ech  tunge  confessi)?  |>at  oure  Lord  Jesus  Crist 
is  in  )>e  glorie  of  God  his  Fadir.  And  so  })is  word  Jesus,  seid 
of  trewe  men,  is  of  gret  vertu  a^ens  \q.  fendis.  And,  as  sum 
men  speken,  j^is  name  is  often  teld,  sum  tyme  privyli,  and  sum 
tyme  apertli,  and  it  was  oftc  figurid  bifore  j^at  Crist  was  bore. 
Jesus  is  as  myche  to  scic  as  Savyour.  And  so  Joseph  in  Egipt 
was  figure  of  oure  Jesus.     Josue,  j^at  Icdde  Goddis  folk,  and 


ernes,  E. 


hnplymed. 


^  So  E ;  bifore,  A. 

WYCLTF. 


S^ERiMONS. 


337 


particle  ]>q  lond  of  biheste,  figuride  oure  Jesus  bi  many  pro- 
pirtees ;  and  so  dide  Jesus  Sidrakis  sone ;  and  Jesus  Nanes  ^ 
sone  ». 

And,  as  men  seien,  in  j)is  word  *  Unnej'e  shal  j)e  just  man 
be  saved/  is  menyd  })is  word  Jesus,  whoso  coude  undirstonde 
it.  For  in  ])is  word  Vix  ben  but  J^ree  lettris,  V,  and  I,  and  X. 
And  V  bitokene]?  fyve;  I  bitokene]^  Jesus;  and  X  bitokene]? 
Crist.  And  so  |)is  resoun  seij?  J>at  jje  just  man  shal  be  saved 
bi  J)e  V  woundis  of  Jesus  Crist  oure  Lord. 


t^E  Gospel  on  Twelf>e  Evyn. 

[SERMON     XCVI.] 

Defuncto  Herode. — Matt.  ii.  [19.] 

pis  gospel  telli]?  how  Crist  cam  from  Egipt.  For  in  tyme 
\2X  Crist  was  ]>ere,  J)at  is  not  made  to  us  to  knowe,  was  l^e  first 
Heroude  deed,  ]>at  slou^  \t  children  for  Cristis  sake.  For  in 
meke  abiding  sendijj  God  remedy ;  and  |>us  seij?  ]je  gospel  ]?at, 
Whaiine  Heroude  was  deed,  lo,  pe  aungel  of  oure  Lord  apperide 
to  Joseph  in  sleep,  and  had  him  ryse,  and  take  pe  child  and  his 
?}iodir,  and  go  into  pe  lond  of  Israel,  for  pei  hen  dede  pat  soi^ten 
pt  childis  liif  It  is  seid  bifore,  J)at  God  is  good  maistir,  |>at 
sendi])  siche  messangers  to  conforte  his  disciplis,  and  telli]>  but 
litil  at  oones,  |>at  ]?ei  shulden  not  for^ete ;  but  evere  as  |>ei  han 
nede,  \€\  shulden  ben  newe  confortid.  God  woot  al  j^ing  bifore 
J)at  it  be  done ;  and  so  he  ordeynede  his  angel  to  come  to 
Joseph  in  Egipt  anoon,  whanne  Eroude  was  deed,  to  telle  him 
]3es  ti})ingis.  And  so  Joseph  dide  no5t  but  ]^at  J)at  God  tolde 
him.  And  5if  Eve  liadde  do  so,  she  hadde  venquishid  J>e 
fend,  and  not  hadde  daliance  wi]>  him  til  J)at  she  hadde  ben 
disseyved. 

And  wite  we  wel,  \2X  not  oonli  Heroude  sou3te  ))e  liif  of 
Jesus,  but  many  of  his  servauntis  for  love  of  him.     And  j>us 

'  mantles,  E. 


^  That  is,  Joshua  the  son  of  Nun. 


Mystical  mean- 
inji  of  the 
word  VIX. 


The  Return 
from  Egypt. 


SERMONS. 


338 


WrCLIF'S 


Christ  is  still, 
and  ever  will 
be,  persecuted 
in  his  members 
here  on  earth. 


lordis  seien,  we  wolen  |?at  it  be  so.  Two  maneres  of  sekyng 
j)er  ben  of  men:  sum  men  seken  men  to  do  hem  good  and 
worship ;  and  }?us  ]>re  kingis  sou3ten  oure  Lord  Jesus ;  and 
sum  men  seken  a  man  to  do  him  harm  and  dispit ;  and  \\xs 
Heroude  and  his  servantis  sou3ten  Jesus  Crist ;  and  ))ei  wolden 
have  kilid  Crist.  And  ]7us  ]>ei  sou5ten  Cristis  Hif;  for  his 
spirit  |?ei  my^ten  not  dere ;  and  his  bodi  ]>q\  tolden  litil  bi,  but 
J)ei  wolden  not  |)at  his  spirit  hadde  quiked  his  bodi. 

And  Joseph  roos  and  took  pe  child  and  his  modir  also,  and  cam 
in  to  pe  lond  of  Israel ;  but  warli,  as  ]>&  aungel  tau3te  him. 
And,  whanne  Joseph  herde pat  Archelaus,  Heroudis  sone,  rengnede 
in  Judeefor  his  fadir,  he  dreddefor  him  to  go  pidir.  And  Joseph 
was  amofieschid  in  sleep  bi  angel  how  he  shulde  go ;  and  wente 
into  Galile,  And  Joseph  cam  and  dwelte  in  a  citee  of  pat  contre^ 
pat  was  clepid  Nazareth  ;  for  to  fulfille  pe  prophecie  pat  Jesus 
shulde  be  clepid  of  Nazareth.  And  so  he  was ;  for  Pilat  wroot 
upon  his  cros  |)is  writing,  as  |?e  gospel  tellij);  Jesus  of  Naza- 
reth, King  of  Jewes.  And  so,  as  Luk  telli];,  oure  Ladi  was 
grett  in  ]je  citee  of  Nazareth,  and  ]?er  she  conceyvede  Crist; 
and  ]?us  bi  many  resons  was  Crist  clepid  of  Nazareth. 

Beside  lettre  of  ))is  gospel,  mai  men  meeve^  doutis  of  scole; 
but  me  ])inki]j  now,  it  is  bettre  to  touche  lore  of  vertues.  We 
shal  bileve  \2X  al  ]>e  gospel,  be  it  nevir  so  literal,  techi]?  what 
J)ing  shal  bifalle,  and  how  ])at  men  shal  lyve.  And  so,  as  Crist 
in  his  30ungJ)e  was  pursued  by  many  men  to  dispise  him  and 
slee  him  in  his  owne  persone ;  so,  unto  J)e  dai  of  dome  is  he 
pursued  in  his  membres,  and  algatis  in  Goddis  cause,  bi  resoun 
of  Goddis  lawe.  We  shulden  not  presume,  but  hope,  j^at  we 
ben  membris  of  Crist ;  but  wel  we  witen,  jif  men  haten  us  and 
pursuen  us  for  Cristis  cause,  ]?anne  J>ei  pursuen  Crist  in  his 
membris,  and  haten  j)e  cause  of  Crist.  For  betere  cause  my3te 
not  Crist  have  j?an  defending  of  his  lawe ;  for  })is  cause  made 
Crist  be  deed  many  weies  bifore  ojjer ;  and  Crist,  for  ]?e  beste 
cause,  suffride  here  martirdome.  Studie  wel  Goddis  lawe,  and 
|)e  treuj)e  j^at  sue})  ofit,  and  defende  it  booldli, — bo]>e  to 
precstis   and   to    \^   world,—  and   \om    shalt   have    enemyes   to 

'  move,  E. 


SER3fONS, 


339 


pursue  J)ee  to  ))e  de};.  And  as  Crist  was  pursued  bo|>e  of 
preestis  and  kny3ttis,  so  |>ou  shalt  be  pursued  of  jjes  twoo 
bi  diverse  resouns.  Sum  tyme  kny^ttis  ben  chevetaynes,  as 
it  fel  of  ]?e  eemperours,  and  sum  tyme  preestis  ben  maistris, 
as  it  was  in  Cristis  tyme.  And  so  it  mai  falle  now,  bo|)e  of 
popis  and  bishopis.  For  yi  men  J^enken  Goddis  lawe  sharp  \ 
and  to  lette  avauntage  of  J)is  world,  men  of  ]?is  world,  bi  |>e 
fend,  wolen  haten  hem  |jat  puplisshen  it.  And  so  slou|>e  and 
cowardise  ben  cause  of  )?is  fals  pees ;  and  so  wanting  of  ]?is 
pees  is  signe  to  many  jjat  God  love]?  hem.  Ech  word  of  )?is 
gospel  mai  be  told  to  ]?is  entent ;  but  it  suffisi])  to  have  ]?e 
roote,  and  go  lijtli  to  o]?er  wittis.  And  muse  we  not  how  |)is 
kingdom  cam  from  Archilaus  to  Heroude ;  for  if  it  hadde  be 
profitable,  God  wolde  have  tolde  it  in  his  lawe.  And  so  many 
treujjis  profiten  more  while  ]?ei  ben  unknowen  to  men  ]?an  ])ei 
shulden  profite  knowyn ;  as  Goddis  lawe  techij)  us. 


^PY.  Gospel  on  twelf^e  dai. 

[SERMON      XCVII.] 

Cum  naius  esset  Jesus. — Matt.  ii.  [i.] 

pis  gospel  telli]),  how  |jre  kyngis  camen  afer  out  of  j?e  eest 
to  do  worship  to  Jesus  Crist,  as  )>ei  weren  tau5t  bi  Goddis 
lawe.  And  |)us  sei]?  Mathew  in  jjis  gospel,  |>at  whanne  Jesus 
was  born  in  Bedeleem  oj pe  lond  of  Judee,  for  diversite  of  ano]>er 
Bedeleem,  in  pe  daies  of  Heroude  pe  Kyng.  (And  |?is  was  Jje 
first  Heroude,  more  |>an  ]?e  two  after,  and  he  was  kyng  of 
Judee  bi  \q,  eemperour  of  Rome;  and  he  hadde  it  in  pees, 
\2X  tyme  \2X  Crist  was  bore.  And  ))us  sei]>  J)e  testament  of  Ja- 
cob, whanne  he  tolde  of  Judas  his  sone :  '  per  shal  not  be  taken 
aweie  \q.  ceptre  ^  fro  Judas  kynde,  ne  a  duke  ]?at  shal  come 
of  him,  til  \2X  Crist  come,  jjat  is  to  be  sent^;  and  he  shal  be 
abiding  of  hej^ene  men,'  jjat  he  shal  turne.     And  |)us  it  bifel 


*  to  scharp,  E. 


^  septre,  E. 
Z    2 


'  So  £;  seint,  A. 


The  Epiphany. 


Gen.  xlix.  lo. 


340 


WrCLIF'S 


Num.  xxiv.  17. 


The  worship  of 
the  Magi. 


of  Heroude,  for  Jjc  tyme  ]>at  Crist  was  bore ;  for  ]janne  regalie 
of  ]?e  Jewis  was  taken  aweie,  and  ^ovun  to  Heroude.)  And  |?es 
jjre  kingis  weren  wise  men,  and  lyveden  in  worship  after  J)er 
astat,  and  tau5ten  her  peple  Goddis  lawe  and  resoim,  as  Jjei 
hadden  be  jjree  men  of  hevene.  And  fro  J^e  tyme  of  Balam, 
J)at  was  profete  of  Moab,  j^er  weren  kingis  in  |?at  contre  to 
aspie  his  prophecie.  For  he  seide  ])at  a  sterre  shulde  springe 
of  J)e  kynde  of  Jacob,  and  Gentil  folk  shulde  loute  J)at  child 
))at  shulde  be  bore  in  tyme  of  ]?is  sterre.  And  so,  whanne  Jjis 
sterre  apperide  on  Cristemasse  ni3t,  or  bifore,  })es  ]?ree  kingis 
ordeyneden  hem  to  come  and  worshipe  ])is  child.  And  so  |)ei 
camen  upon  dromedis  wi]>inne  ])e  jjrittenjje  dale ;  for  her  weie 
was  ordeyned  redi,  wijjouten  letting,  how  j^ei  shulden  come. 
And,  for  |)ei  wisten  |;at  ])e  Child  was  greet,  ]?ei  camen  to  Jeru- 
salem, ]?at  was  ]?e  heed  citee  of  pe  contre,  and  hopiden  ]>at 
Crist  was  bore  |)ere.  And  ]?ere  pet  ^  axiden  ophili,  Where  is  he 
pat  is  bore  Kyng  o/Jewes,  as  Balaim  tolde  in  his  prophecie,  y^r 
we  sawen  pe  sterre  of  him  iii  pe  eest,  ])at  ha]?  led  us,  and  we  ben 
comen  wip  yftes  to  loute  him,  as  we  shulden.  And  whanne 
Heroude  herde  pes  wordis,  he  was  disturblid,  bi  manj^  causis, 
and  alpe  citee  of  Jerusalem  was  disturblid  wip  him.  He  ]?0U3te 
])at  so  grete  men  wolden  not  come  so  fer  ]?idir,  but  5if  J)ei  hadden 
wist  bi  certeyn  tokenes  ]?at  a  kyng  of  Jewes  were  bore ;  and 
j)is  kyng  shulde  reve  him  ])e  kyngdome  ]?at  he  hadde.  IMen 
seien  ]jat  jjis  sterre  was  sich  J^at  it  was  bine]?e  ]?e  moone  in  \q. 
overmeste^  part  of  Jje  eir,  and  movede  as  God  wolde  ]?at  it 
movede.  And  so  ])es  jjree  kingis  weren  meved  bi  li3t  and 
leding  of  J)is  sterre;  and  so  ]jei  my^ten  in  litil  tyme  come  to 
Jerusaleem. 

Arid  Heroude  gedride  alle  princis  of  preestis  pat  weren  in 
Jerusale?n,  and  alle  pe  scribis  of  pe  peple,  to  wite  where  Crist 
shulde  be  bore.  And  pei  seiden  to  him,  ]?at  he  shulde  be  bore. 
In  Beedleem  of  Judee  ;  for  so  was  it  writun  bi  pe  prophete,  pat 
seide  pus,  of  j)is  toun  : — And pou,  Bedeleem,  in  pe  lond  of  Juda, 
art  not  lest  among  pe  princis  of  Juda  ;  for  of  pee  shal  come  out 
a  duk  pat  shal  reule  my  folk  of  Israel,     panne  Heroude  made 


'  So  E  :  not  italicized  in  A. 


overmokte,  E. 


SERMONS. 


341 


privylt  clepe  pese  pree  ki?igts,  and  lemede  of  hem  pe  tyme  of  pis 
sterre  pat  apperide  to  hem,  and  sente  hem  into  Bedelem,  and  seide 
to  he?n,  (but  falseli) : — Go  y,  and  axe  bisili  of  pis  child,  \2X  is 
bore ;  and  whanne  y  hav  foimdun  him,  telle  y  me  ayn,  pat  Y 
come  and  loute  hini.  And  ivhanne  pei  her  den  pe  king  J)us  speke, 
pei  wenten  out  of ferusaleem  ;  and  lo,  pe  sterre  pat  pei  sawen  in  Pe 
eest  meevede  bifore  hem  til  pat  place  pat  it  stood,  evene  above  where 
pe  child  fesus  was.  And  wha?ine  pes  kingis  sawen  pis  sterre, 
pei  hadden  7nyche  joie  wipal.  A?id pei  efttriden  in  to  pe  hous,  and 
foundwi  pe  child,  wip  Marie  his  modir;  and  pei  f el  doun  bifore  pe 
child,  and  lotitiden  him,  devouteli.  And  pei  openeden  per  tresouris, 
and  offriden  to  him  J>ree  ^iftis,  gold  and  mirre  atid  encense ; — 
as  J)ei  weren  tau3te  to  trowe  of  Crist  ]>at  he  was  boJ>e  king  and 
preest,  and  shulde  die  for  mankynde.  And  pei  token  answer e 
in  per  sleep,  pat  pei  shulden  not  turne  ayn  to  Heroude  ;  and  so 
hi  anoper  weiepei  turneden  ayn  to  per  lo7id. 

Bi  J)is  gospel  mai  we  lerne,  liow  Crist  coveitide  honest 
poverte ;  for  he  was  not  bore  in  \q  kingis  citee,  but  in  pore 
uplondish  toun, — not  in  ]>e  beste  place  of  Jje  toun,  but  in  a  pore 
comune  stable.  And  ])es  kyngis  weren  enfourmed  bi  tymes 
what  alle  ])es  j^ingis  menten.  And  so  we  singen  in  J>e  chirche, 
]?at  jjes  ]?ree  jiftis  of  )?e  kingis  weren  jovun  of  ech  of  hem,  and 
bi  certeyn  causis  ordeyned  of  God.  Bi  ]?e  gold  \€\  mitten  bie 
])ingis  ]?at  was  nedeful  for  Crist,  and  bi  J)e  mirre  \€\  my3ten 
streng])e  ]?e  membris  of  Crist,  and  bi  jje  encence  Jjei  my3ten 
putte  awey  ]?e  stynke  of  |>e  stable.  And  Crist  ordeynede  bi  his 
lawe,  ])at  he  shulde  not  ])us  begge,  but  lyve  in  an  honest  poverte 
lik  to  ])e  state  of  innocence.  And  )?at  \q.  ]?re  kingis  camen  so 
fer  to  bringe  jjes  goodis  unto  Crist,  bitokene]>  Cristis  lordship 
Jjat  he  hadde  wi]?  his  povert.  But  me  J)inki]>  Jjat  |)e  witt  is 
betere  j^at  ))e  Chirche  singij?  of  J?is ;  gold  is  Cristis  regalie, 
in  encence  his  presthode,  and  in  myrre  his  sepulcre^.  And  |>us 
alle  men  shulden  worshipe  hem.  Seculer  lordis  shulden  wor- 
shipe  Crist,  and  ]?at  j?is  gold  shulde  teche  hem ;  preestis  also 

'^  The  writer  no  doubt  refers  to       quence  used  on  the  festival  of  the 
the   following   passage   in   the  Se-      Epiphany  (Sarum  Missal) : — 

Huic  Mail,'!  muncra  deferunt  praeclara, 
Aurum,  simul  thus  cum  myrrlia  ; 
Thure  deum  praedicant,  auro  rcgem  magnum, 
Hominem  mortalem  myrrha. 


Lessons  taught 
by  this  gosi>€l. 


342 


WFCLI  F'S 


shulden  worshipe  Crist,  bi  ])e  lore  of  ]?is  encence ;  and  alle 
comunes  shulden  worshipe  Crist,  for  we  ben  alle  dedli,  and 
in  tyme  of  oure  de]?  and  aftirward  we  haue  noon  helpe  but 
him.  And  J)is  shulden  we  do  in  lijt ;  for  we  shulden  worche 
discretli.  And,  as  Gregory  techi]?''^,  we  shulden  wenden  fro  \q 
fend  al  bi  ano]?er  weie  ]>an  we  camen  into  }>is  world.  For  bi 
synne  we  camen  hidir,  and  contynneden  here  in  synne ;  but  we 
shal  wende  fro  ]?e  fend  unto  oure  countre,  J>at  is  hevene,  bi  J)e 
weie  of  vertuous  ^  liif,  and  ]?anne  we  suen  ]?es  }>ree  kingis. 


pE  Gospel  on  Conversioun  dai  of  Seint  Poul. 


[SERMON     XCVIII.] 


Leavinp  all 
things  for 
Clirist's  sake. 


Ecce  reliquimus'^  omnia.— "hlKTi:.  xix.  [27.] 

pis  gospel  tellij?  of  j^e  meede  ]?at  Crist  bihi3te  to  his  hie 
kny5tis.  Petre  was  of  greet  bileve,  and  hardi  in  axing,  and 
axij)  j?us  Crist : — Lo,  zve  hav  forsaken  alle  pingis,  a?td  we  hav 
sued  pee  ;  what  mede  shal  be  to  us  for  pis  suynge  ?  Here  men 
douten  comunli,  how  Petre  seide  so}? ;  si]>  men  forsaken  not  but 
J)ing  ))at  \€\  have  hadde,  and  Petre  was  a  fishere,  and  hadde  but 
litil  |?ing.  Also  |>er  ben  many  J?ingis  ])at  Petre  ]>ou3te  nevere 
on;  but  how  shulde  he  forsake  J?ing  \2X  nevere  cam  in  his 
jjoujt  ?  Also,  Petre  forsoke  nevere  |?e  Holi  Trinite,  ne  ]>e 
manheede  of  Crist,  }>at  ben  many  |)ingis.  How  approve]?  Crist 
)>es  false  wordis  of  Petre .''  Here  it  seme]?  to  many  men  ])at 
Petre  undirstood  })us, — ]?at  ])ei  forsoken  alle  }?ingis^, — for  alle 
])es  worldli  goodis ;  si]>  \€\  helden  Jjer  bisynesse  and  ]>er 
wille  fro  Jjcs  goodis.     And  ])is  witt  mente  Crist,  in  his  speche 


^  So  in  E ;  A  has  vertues. 
words  ]>at — \)ingis  are  om.  in  E. 


^  So  in  E ;  A  has  relinquimtis. 


The 


^  St.  Gregory,  Honiil.  X.  '  A  re- 
gione  nostra  superbiendo,  inobedi- 
endo,  visibilia  sequendo,  cibum 
vetitum  gustando,  discesshnus  :  sed 
ad  earn  necesse  est,  ut  flendo,  obe- 
diendo,  visibiHa  contemnendo,  atque 


appetitum  carnis  refrenando,  redea- 
mus.  Per  aliam  ergo  viam  ad  re- 
gionem  nostram  regredimur ;  qiio- 
niam  qui  a  paradisi  gaudiis  per  di- 
lectamenta  discessimus,  ad  haec  per 
lamenta  revocamur.* 


SERMONS. 


343 


aftir  to  Petre.  And  j)us  biddijj  Crist  bi  Luk  and  Joon  to 
forsake  and  hate  seven  goodis.  And  ])es  wordis  mai  serve  wel 
to  J>is  undirstonding ;  and  |>is  witt  was  so|>  of  Petre  and  o|)er 
apostlis ;  si]>  a  manere  of  forsakyng  is  to  leeve  willc  to  siche 
goodis,  and  J^ei  hadden  not  suyd  Crist  |)us,  but  ^if  |>ei  hadden 
left  sich  will.  And  it  is  li3t  to  assoile  objectis  ajens  ]?is  ^  To 
jje  firste  we  seien,  jjat  Peter,  bifore  he  suyd  Crist,  hadde  in  his 
affeccioun  al  manere  of  sich  J>ing ;  and  j^is  desire  he  lefte,  and 
so  alle  siche  ))ingis.  To  J)e  secounde  word  we  seien,  jjat  ]?er 
ben  many  J)0U3tis  and  many  desiris  to  )>ingis,  as  special  or 
general.  Petre  hadde  general  desire  to  al  manere  of  siche 
jjingis,  and  general  forsakyng  axi|?  sum  mede.  And  clerkis 
seien,  Jjat  special  mai  not  be  wijjouten  general,  and  ])is  forsaking 
maki])  hem  to  have  J^es  jjingis  j?e  which  ]?ei  forsoken, — 5he, 
betere  Jjan  ])ei  hadden  bifore ;  as,  ^if  a  man  forsake  for  Crist 
his  fadir  and  modir,  he  haj?  hem  Jeanne  betere  }>an  whanne  he 
lovede  hem  fleishli. 

The  ]?ridde  obiect  ])at  here  is  maad  goij)  not  a^ens  oure 
sentence.  For  ech  man  mai  wel  wite  J?at  Petre  Jjoujte  not 
to  leve  Crist,  si]?  Petre  sei]?,  next  aftir,  ])at  J?ei  suen  Crist ;  and 
])at  is  verri  tokene  ]jat  jjei  forsaken  not  J)us  Crist,  si]?  ]?ei  forsaken 
al  manere  of  erjieli  Jjingis  for  Crist ;  and  |jis  axij)  grete  mede,  si]> 
it  is  myche,  and  wilful ;  and  mede  bihi3t  to  traveilours  maki]? 
hem  traveile  betere.  Ojjer  chartris  he  nedi]?  not  but  J)e  word  of 
Crist ;  for  wordis  of  J)e  firste  treuj^e  passen  alle  o]?er  chartris. 

Jesus  seide  to  hem,  to  whom  he  spak  ]jes  wordis  :  Sopeli  I  seie 
to  ^ou,  pat  y  pat  pus  hav  suyd  me,  in  pe  laste  making  of  men  \ 
whanne  mamiis  sone  shal  sitte  in  sete  of  his  majeste,  y  shai  siite  in 
twelve  setes  and  juge  twelve  kynredis  of  Israel.  Here  shal  we 
wite  \2X  Crist  spak  not  oonli  to  ])es  twelve,  but  generali  to 
o]?er  seintis  j>at  passingli  suen  Crist ;  for  ^if  Crist  bihi5te  jjis  to 
Scarioth,  and  lefte  to  3eve  ]?is  mede  to  Poul,  what  trujje  were  in 
Cristis  wordis,  or  what  mede  to  o]?er  men  ?  It  seme]?  })at  Crist 
undirstondi])  his  sitting  at  ])e  dai  of  dome;  for  })is  seete  of 
juging  is  propre  to  him,  bo]?e  God  and  man ;  and  ]>erfore  it  is 

^  So  E ;  A  excludes  mnhing  of  men  from  the  italics. 
•"*■  It  is  easy  to  solve  the  objections  raised  against  this  text. 


Difficulties 
solved. 


Final  reward 
for  such 
leaving. 


344 


WFCLIF'S 


Ps.  i.  5 


wel  clepid,  a  seete  of  his  majeste.  pis  noumbre  of  twelve  is 
noumbre  of  alle  passinge  seintis,  )?at  ny5  suen  Crist  in  staat  of 
apostlis,  and  algatis  forsoken^  \e  world  for  the  love  of  Crist. 
pe  noumbre  of  ])es  seintis  shal  be  partid  in  twelve,  and  juge 
alle  lesse  seintis,  w^hich  ben  also  partid  in  twelve.  And  alle 
J)es  ben  Jacobis  sones,  and  seen  all  clereli  God.  And  ]?us  seien 
men  comunli  j^at  J>re  manere  of  men  shal  come  to  Cristis 
jugement.  Sum,  passinge  seintis  )?at  sueden  ny^  Crist,  as 
patriarkis,  and  Baptist,  and  o]>er  Cristis  disciplis.  And  Jjes, 
for  |)ei  weren  li3t  and  ensample  to  o])er,  shal  juge  o]?er  J)at 
sueden  hem  to  j^er  bo])e^  worship.  And  ]>is  jugement  shal 
not  be  but  ])is  witnessinge  of  treujje.  pe  secounde  part  Jjat 
shal  come  to  Cristis  laste  jugement  shal  be  seintis  J>at  shal 
sue  ]?es  grete  seintis.  And  it  is  no  contrariouste  ^  jjat  J^es  same 
seintis  ben  of  ]jes  bo]?e  partis,  bi  dyverse  resouns.  pe  more 
part  of  men,  in  ]je  laste  jugement,  shal  be  men  J^at  shal  be 
dampned,  and  }>is  is  a  greet  part.  Of  ]jes  men  sei]?  |?e  Psalm, 
jjat  J>ei  risen  not  up  in  jugement ;  Jjei  shal  be  jugid  of  God,  and 
of  alle  hise  seintis,  for  to  go  to  helle  for  her  wickid  liif.  And 
]?is  mede,  bihi^t  of  Crist,  passij)  alle  j^es  worldli  goodis.  Blessid 
be  ]?is  duke  of  bataile,  j^at  j>us  rewardi]?  his  kny5tis ;  for  J>is  is 
more  confortable,  and  betere  bi  a  ]?ousand  part,  ]?an  wages 
50vun  in  erjjeli  batailis  of  kny^tis  or  of  clerkis.  Lord !  si])  ])is 
suyng  for^  Crist  is  forsaking  of  worldli  goodis,  and  profiting  in 
poverte  after  ]>2X  Crist  lyvede,  how  myche  shulden  we  preestis 
drede  })at  we  fallen  in  ])is ! 

And  for  ])is  myddil  part  ])at  shal  come  to  )>e  jugement,  bihotij? 
Crist,  ])at  ech  pat forsakip  for  him  ony  of  |)es  ei^te  ])ingis^,  shal 
have  an  hundredfold  here  in  pis  Ijf  and,  after,  pesihle  possessioun 
of  pe  liif  of  blisse.  Scorne  we  J^es  foolis  ])at  seien,  bi  jjes  Cristis 
wordis,  ]?at  ech  seint  shal  have  here  a  hundrid  wyves  at  jje  laste, 
and  so  of  o})er  sevene  j^ingis  ])at  ]?e  gospel  rehersij).  Here 
mark  we  alle  j)es  ei5te,  which  ben  hous  and  hreperen,  sistren,  and 
fadir,  and  modir,  wif  or  children,  or  feldis,  wi]>  oj^er  rentis. 
And  marke  we  |je  fruyt  })at  man  haj)  of  worldli  havyng  of  |>es 
eijtc,  and,  on  |)e  of^er  side,  havyng  )>at  just  men  have  here ;  and 


'  forsaken,  E. 
*  So  E;  om.  A. 


bro\>eres,  E. 


^  contrarioste,  E. 


'  of,  E. 


SERMONS, 


345 


we  shal  wel  undirstonde  })at  |)is  secounde  havynge  passij)  an 
hundrid  fold  j^e  first  in  fruyt  and  profit.  And  here  we  taken 
two  jiingis  as  Cristyn  mennys  bileve : — oon,  ]>at  sich  men  han 
al  manere  of  j^ingis;  anoj^er,  |?at  sich  goosth  havynge  passij) 
worldli  havyng.  And  J>anne  mai  we  telle  scorne  by  sich  asse 
argumentis : — ^if  a  man  shal  have  here  an  hundred  fold  so  good 
jjing  as  is  ))is  wif,  |)anne  he  shal  have  an  hundrid  wyves !  Kepe 
we  wordis  of  \e  gospel,  and  witt  of  it  |?erwi]),  and  alle  ])e  fendis 
or  false  men  mai  not  disprove  a  word  ]?erof. 


pE  Gospel  on  Candilmasse  dai. 

[SERMON     XCIX.] 

Postquain  impleti  sunt  dies. — Luc.  ii.  [22.] 

It  is  seid  comunli,  J^at  oure  Ladi  ha]>  fyve  festis :  Concep- 
cioun,  Nativite,  Annunciacioun,  Purificacioun ;  \q  fifte  is  As- 
sumpcioun,  whanne  oure  Ladi  was  deed,  pe  ferjje  of  ]jes 
festis  is  seid  in  ]?is  gospel,  and  is  clepid  comunU  ]je  feste  of 
Candilmasse;  for  Jewis  hadden  a  lawe, — and  we  kepen  5it 
sumwhat  ]?erof  in  purifiynge  of  wymmen, — ]?at  a  womman,  after 
J)at  she  was  deliverid  of  a  knave  child,  shulde,  in  sixe  wokes 
after,  come  to  \q  temple  and  be  purified  ])ere,  after  ]?at  ]?e 
law  lymytide.  And  al  5if  oure  Ladi  nedede  not  to  be  ]?us 
purified,  ^it,  'bi  counseil  of  God,  she  fulfillide  |)us  ]?e  lawe. 
For  her  sone  seij?  after,  I  cam  not  to  undo  \q  lawe,  but  to 
fulfille  it ;  and  so  he  made  his  modir  do.  And  so  tellij? 
Luke,  J)at,  fro  pe  dales  iveren  fulfillid  of  purfying  of  Marie, 
after  pe  lawe  of  Molses,  pel  hrour^ten  festis  In  to  ferusalem  to 
sette  him  blfore  God.  For  al3if  God  be  everywhere,  5it  we 
seien  he  is  in  chirchis  on  a  special  manere,  as  he  is  in  juste 
soulis.,  A7id  so  pel  offrlden  Crist  to  God;  as  pe  law  axlde  pat 
every  male  pat  openep  wommans  bodl  to  his  Issue  shal  he  halewid 
to  pe  Lord ;  and  offride  for  him  a  certeyn  j^ing, — as  a  pelre  of 
turturls  or  two  brlddls  of  doivves.  For  riche  folk  shulden  offre 
for  purifying  of  wymmen  a  jong  lomb  of  o  jeer,  as  Goddis 


The  Purifica- 
tion. 


34^ 


WVC  LIF'S 


Simeon  pro- 
phesies. 


Lesson  of  the 
gospel,— that 
we  should 
hope  for  hea- 
venly bliss. 


lawe  telli}?;  and  it  sufficide  to  pore  folk  to  offre  a  peire  of 
turturis,  or  two  dowve  briddis,  for  ]?e  child  J>at  was  born.  And 
so  we  mai  not  denye  J>at  ne  Crist  and  his  eldris  weren  pore 
folk,  for  J)ei  chosen  ]>q  secounde. 

And  per  was  a  man  in  Jerusalem  pat  was  clepid  Symeon ;  and 
pis  was  a  just  man,  and  hadde  drede  of  Goddis  lawe.  And  pis 
77ian  abood  con/or  ting  of  Israel ;  and  pe  Holi  Goost  was  in  pis 
Symeon.  And  pis  man  hadde  answer e  of  pe  Holi  Goost  pat  he 
shulde  not  se  dep,  but  ^if  he  saw  first  Crist.  And  he  cam  into  pe 
temple  bi  leding  of  pe  Holi  Goost.  And  whanne  pei  brow^ten  pe 
child  Jesus,  his  eldris,  into  pe  temple,  pat  pei  shulden  do  after 
pe  custom  of  pe^  lawe  for  him.,  Symeon  toke  him  in  his  armes, 
and  blessid  God,  and  seide :  Now,  Lord,  pou  levest  pi  servaunt 
after  pi  word  in  pees,  for  myn  iyn  han  seen  Crist,  \2X  is  helpe 
to  |>e  world.  And  he  is  Jji  owne  Sone,  \q  same  God  ]?at  Jjou 
art.  And  his  helpe  pou  hast  ordeyned  bifore  pe  face  of  al  manere 
peple,  to  be  li^t  to  shewing  of  folk,  aiid  glorie  to  pi  folk  of  Israel. 

To  J)is  feeste  of  oure  Ladi  answeri]?  \q  four]?e  vertue,  )>at  is, 
hope  of  hevenli  blisse.  And  it  was  fuUi  in  hir;  for,  as  bileve 
lastide  in  hir  whanne  it  failide  in  apostlis,  so  she  hopide  ever 
more  \2X  she  shulde  come  to  blisse  of  hevene.  For  si]?  she 
trowide  \2X  hir  Sone  shulde  rise  fro  dee]?  to  lyve,  and  how  and 
whanne  he  shulde  rise,  as  God  himsilf  hadde  tau3t  hir,  how 
myjte  J)is  Ladi  myshope  }?at  ne  she  shulde  come  to  hevene  ? 
In  ]?is  we  shulden  sue  J)is  Ladi,  and  ]?enke  ever  on  hevenli 
blisse,  and  traveile  ]?erfore,  nijt  and  dai,  in  hope  for  to  gete 
])is  blisse ;  and  what  woo  ]?at  we  have  here,  take  it  in  ful 
pacience,  for  ]?e  joie  \2X  we  hopen  to  gete  in  J?e  blisse  of 
hevene.  Lord  !  sij?  a  tiliyng  man  hopi]?  ofte  to  have  his  fruyt, 
how  moche  more  shulden  we  have  hope  to  come  to  blisse  of 
hevene.  And  ]?is  hope  is  of  ]?is  kynde,  \2X  it  mote  be  con- 
tynuel,  and  ever  more  meritorie,  to  large  a  mannis  blisse  in 
heven.  It  maki]?  a  man  mery  and  glad,  and  suffre  al  ])at  falli]? 
to  him;  for  it  is  groundid  in  rijt  bileue  }?at  God  doi]?  al  for  \q 
beste.  No  man  faili]?  ])is  hope^  but  if  he  synne  on  o}?er  syde; 
and  algatis  but  if  he  forjete  to  J?enke  on  hevenli  blisse.     Men 


^  So  E:  om.  A 


in  \>h  hope,  E. 


SERMONS. 


347 


})at  ben  stoppid  wi])  worldli  J'ou^tis,  or  wij?  lustis  of  her  fleishe, 
failen  to  plese  }>is  Ladi  here,  and  folwe  her  in  ]?er  jjoujt; 
and  )?us  ))ei  maken  not  |)e^  Lord  myche,  ne  hir  spirit  is  glad  in 
God.  But  j)us  dide  oure  Ladi  Marie,  as  ^q  gospel  telli]>  of  hir. 
And  ])us  fewe  men  in  j^is  liif  wanten  ernes  of  dispeire ;  for  J)ei 
)>at  ben  depid  in  synne,  and  ])enken  not  but  on  |)es  worldli 
goodis,  wanten  hope  of  hevenli  blisse,  and  ])us  j^ei  growen  in 
dispeire.  And  on  J>is  shulden  we  prestis  jjenken ;  and  algatis 
prestis  of  J^e  world,  ]>at  suen  not  Crist  in  poverte,  but  j^enken 
how  })ei  mai  be  riche  here.  And  ]jis  synne  is  more  in  coventis 
j>at  ben  groundid  in  her  goodis,  and  ever  ben  depid  in  Jjer 
synne  for  defaute  of  rijt  hope. 


pE  Gospel  on  >e  chairinge  of  Seint  Petre. 


[SERMON     C] 


Venit  Jesus  in  partes  Cesar te"^. — Matt.  xvi.  [13.] 

pis  gospel  tellij)  how  Petre  apostle  passide  in  bileve  o])er 
apostlis,  for  he  was  more  sad  and  hardi  to  trowe  of  Crist  J>at 
he  shulde.  Matheu  tellij)  ]?at  Jesus  cam  into  Je  contre  ])at  siche 
a  cite  was  inne  sett^  ))at  was  clepid  Cesar ie  of  Filip^.  And  of 
two  men  it  hadde  ]>e  name,  pis  citee  hadde  ]?ree  names ;  first, 
it  was  clepid  Lachis ;  and  si})  it  was  clepid  Dan,  after  ]?e  kinrede 
of  Dan;  and  after  of  Philip,  Heroudis  bro]?ir,  ]>at  hadde  ]?e 
fourJ)e  part  of  |)is  rewme,  it  was  clepid  Cesarie  of  Philip,  in 
worship  of  \q  emperour  and  him^^.     And  ])is  citee  was  divers 


The  faith  of 
Peter. 


J>w,  E. 


2  Cesaree,  E. 


"■  If  the  writer  had  consulted  St. 
Jerome,  he  would  have  found  (see 
Smith's  Bible  Diet.)  that  Dan  and 
Cesarea-Philippi  were  two  different 
places,  standing  about  four  miles 
apart,  at  two  different  sources  of  the 
Jordan.  But  perhaps  his  authority 
was  F.  Brocardus  of  Strasburg,  a 
Dominican    friar   who    visited    the 


^  seil  ynne,  E 


Philip,  E. 


Holy  I-and  in  1283,  and  whose  de- 
scription of  his  journey  is  given  in 
Canisius's  Thesatirus,  vol.  iv.  Bro- 
cardus similarly  confounds  the  po- 
sition of  Dan  or  Laish  (he  calls  it 
Lesem),  with  that  of  Paneas  or 
Cesarea-Philippi,  to  which  he  gives 
tlie  additional  appellation  of  Ba- 
lenas. 


348 


WrCLI  F'S 


The  people's 
opinion  of 
Christ. 


Peter's  con- 
fession. 


fro  Cesarie  of  Palestine,  in  which  dwelte  Centurio^.  But  alle 
])es  weren  worldli  names;  and  ]?es  men,  to  gete  ]?er  name 
lastinge  here,  but  not  in  hevene,  leften  sich  dedis  here  in  erjje. 
Over  ])e  state  of  innocence.  And  Jjus  done  ]?es  newe  ordris,  in 
cloistris  and  in  o]?er  housis,  and  ])enken  to  myche  on  hir  liif 
here,  and  to  litil  on  hevenli  liif.  We  shulden  j^enken  on  goode 
workes,  to  make  men  to  forsake  Jjis  world,  and  Jjenken  on 
Crist  and  on  his  liif;  for  sich  j^ou^tis  wolen  lasten  wij?  us. 

And  ]?us  axide  Crist  here,  for  greet  witt  )>at  was  in  him,  among 
his  di'sciplis,  who  he  ivas,  bi  his  manhede.  For  it  is  seid  ofte 
tymes,  ])at  on  foure  maneris  is  man  broujt  for]?,  pe  fourjje 
manere,  and  propre  to  Crist,  is,  J>at  he  cam  of  a  virgine  oonli. 
And  so  to  make  mede  in  apostlis,  and  to  teche  Jje  Chirche 
after^  Crist  brou^te  in  j?is  questioun,  and  axide  what  men  seide  of 
him.  As  men  hadden  dyverse  opynyouns  of  Baptist,  what  he 
was, — sum  men  seiden  ]?at  he  was  Heli,  and  sum  men  J)at  he 
was  Christ,  and  sum  men  jjat  he  was  anoj^er  prophete,  as 
techi])  Joones  gospel, — so  weren  many  opynyons  of  Crist.  And 
herfore  seiden  Cristis  apostlis  bi  oon  witt,  how  dyverse  men 
hadden  here  dyverse  opynyons.  For  sum  men  seiden  J)at  he  was 
Baptist ;  as  Heroude,  and  men  of  his  opynyon,  seiden  j^at  Joon 
was  risen  to  liif,  and  he  hadde  vertue  to  do  miraclis,  as  \q  dedis 
of  Crist  shewiden.  Oper  men  seiden  of  Crist  ]?at  he  was  old 
Heli,  ]?e  prophete ;  for  Heli  was  taken  up  in  a  chare  of  fire,  and 
aftir  he  apperide  no  more,  p^  pridde  men  seiden,  bi  Cristis 
workis,  Jjat  he  was  Jeremye  \q,  prophete,  or  anoper  grete  prophete. 
Somme  seiden  oon  and  sum  ano]?er.  But  Crist  axide  his 
disciplis  \  whom  pei  seiden  him  to  he.  But  Peter  answeride 
gloriously,  as  a  trewe  man,  for  alle  ])e  apostlis,  and  seide  on  ])is 
maner,  ])ou  art  Crist,  Sone  of  God  lyvynge.  Bi  ])at  ]?at  Petre 
clepid  him  Crist,  he  knowelichide  ])at  he  was  ]je  greet  prophete, 
J)e  which  was  bihi3t  bi  Moises  to  ]je  folk  in  )>e  oold  lawe.  And 
so  Petre  knowelichide  J)e  manheed  of  Crist.  In  j?at  jjat  Petre 
seide  after,  |)at  Crist  was  J^e  Sone  of  God  lyvyng,  he  knowe- 
lichide  Cristis   Godhede    fro   j^es    fals   Goddis.      Imagis    and 

^  apostlis,  E. 


*  The  writer  seems  to  have  mis- 
taken the  '  Cenlurio '  of  the  Vulgate 


(Acts  X,  i)  for  one  of  the  names  of 
Cornelius. 


SERMONS. 

mawmetis  ben  falseli  clepid  Goddis,  but  jjer  is  but  oo  lyvynge 
God,  as  ]>er  is  but  oon  ]?is  Goddis  Sone  oonli. 

And  Crist  answer itige  seide  unto  Pelre,  Blessid  art  pou, 
Sy mount  Barjo?ia,  for  fleish  and  blood  tolde  pee  not  pis,  but  my 
Fadir  pat  is  in  hevene.  Here  we  trowen,  bi  Cristis  wordis,  ]jat 
Petre  moot  needis  be  blessid ;  and  so  he  hadde  bileve  wij? 
charite  ordeyned  to  blisse.  And  so,  as  Petre  moste  nedis 
synne,  but  he  my5te  not  synne  deedli,  so  |?e  boot  ^  of  Petre,  ]?at 
is  holi  Chirche,  mote  nedis  suffre  tribulacioun,  but  it  mai  not 
perishe.  Petre  is  now  clepid  Symount,  bi  his  propre  name, 
and  now  clepid  Barjona,  or  sone  of  Johanna,  and  now  clepid 
Petre,  as  Crist  clepid  him  here. 

And  jjus  Crist  seip  to  him  here,  pat  he  is  Petre,  and  upon  pis 
stoone  shal  he  grounden  his  Chirche.  pis  corner  stoone  is  Crist, 
of  whom  Petre  ha|?  ]?is  name ;  and  on  ]?is  same  stoone  is  hooli 
Chirche  grounded.  And  ])us  Petre  and  ech  man  signifie]>  |>is 
stoon.  And  aftirward  Crist  telli]?  ])e  strengjje  of  j^e  Chirche,  and 
biheti[)  first  to  it,  pat  pe  '^atis  of  helle  shal  not  have  my^t  ay7is  it. 
Cristis  Chirche  mai  here  be  troublid  bi  ))e  fendis  lymes,  and 
|>es  lymes  mai  be  clepid  5atis  of  helle.  For  bi  ])es  many  fendis 
comen  in  and  out,  and  ]>ei  ben  ^atis  to  many  men  to  entre  in  to 
|)e  weie  of  helle.  pese  jatis  mai  kille  ])e  membris  of  Crist,  but 
jjei  mai  not  harme  hem,  for  Crist  kepi]?  her  soule,  and  victorie 
of  it  is  betere  ])an  bodili  de]?.  And  J>es  3atis  in  |?is  turmenting 
doen  harm  to  hem  silf,  and  profit  to  Cristis  Chirche  which  \€\ 
weenen  to  distrye. 

pe  secounde  pry vy lege  of  Petre  stondi]?  in  ])is ;  pat  Crist  shal 
yve  him  pe  keies  of  pe  rew?Jie  of  hevene.  pes  two  keies  ben  so])li 
seid  witt  and  power,  to  teche  men  ])e  weie  to  hevene,  and  to 
opene  hem  |?e  3atis.  And  |)es  keies  hadde  Petre  wij)  many  oJ>er 
seintis,  for  alle  men  ]?at  comen  to  hevene  have  })es  keies  of 
God.  And  so  we  shal  not  undirstonde  |?at  ]jes  ben  keies  of 
metal,  ])at  oonli  Petre  berij),  to  opene  hevene  5atis  to  men ;  but 
)>ei  ben  lore  and  power,  ]?at  men  have  goostli  of  God.  And  so 
})is  laste  word  seid  is  nede  to  be  undirstonden  wel,  ]?at,  What 
hyn  ping  pat  Petre  bindip  upon  erpe  shal  be  bounden  iti  hevene, 


349 


Christ's  pro- 
mises to  Peter. 


buot,  E. 


35^ 


wrcziF's 

and  what  kyn  ping  he  unhindip  upon  erpe  shal  be  unhounden  in 
hevene.  And  ]?es  wordis  weren  not  oonli  seid  unto  Petre,  but 
comunli  to  ]?e  apostlis,  as  ]?e  gospel  tellij?  after,  and,  in  persones 
of  \q,  apostlis  weren  \€\  seid  to  prestis,  and,  as  many  men 
]?enken,  to  alle  Cristen  men.  For,  if  man  have  mercy  on  his 
soule,  and  unbinde  it,  or  binde  it,  God  bi  his  jugement  in 
hevene  jugi]?  ]>e  soule  sich.  For  ech  man  \2X  shal  be  dampned 
is  dampned  for  his  owne  gilt,  and  ech  man  \2X  shal  be  saved  is 
saved  bi  his  owne  merit.  And  ]?us  men  seien  comunli,  \2X 
wordis  of  Crist  ben  undirstonden,  whanne  jjes  keies  erren  not 
fro  )>e  keies  above.  And  so  it  were  nede  here  to  wite  what  is 
holi  Chirche,  and  what  ben  jje  keies  of  hevene,  or  whanne 
prestis  bynden  or  unbynden.  In  ]>is  Jjrefold  disseit  ben  many 
men  blindid ;  for  as  bi  J)e  firste  leesyng  was  mankynde  lost,  so 
bi  ])is  secounde  lesyng  is  ]?e  Chirche  disseyved.  pe  first  lesyng 
was  of  ])e  fend,  whanne  he  reverside  God,  and  seide  to  Adam 
and  Eve  |)at  \€\  shulden  not  die.  pe  secunde  lesyng  is  of  \q 
fend,  and  of^  Anticrist  his  viker;  jje  which  lesing  is  poudrid 
wij)  ypocrisie.  He  sei)>  \2X  he  is  next  Crist  bi  manere  of  lyvyng, 
and  so  whatever  he  seij?  mote  nede  be  so]?;  and  bi  ]?is  foule 
heresie  is  |)e  Chirche  disseyved. 


pE  Gospel  on  Seint  Mathies  dai. 


[SERMON     CI.] 


God's  wisdom 
given  to  the 
meek. 


Cofifiieor  tihi,  Pater,  Domine. — Matt.  xi.  [25.] 

pis  gospel  telli])  how  Crist  answeride  to  feyned  wordis  of 
j?e  peple,  and  telde  many  hie  treu|)is  to  lore  of  his  Chirche. 
And  ))es  treu))is  ben  pertinent  to  chesyng  of  Mathi  "^^  for  ]jis 
feste  telli})  how  Mathi  was  chosen  in  j^e  stede  of  Scarioth,  aftir 
jjat  he  hadde  hanged  himsilf.  And  so  telli})  Matheu,  how  Jesus 
in  })at  tyme  answeride  to  })e  peple,  and  seide  on  })is  manere :  — 
/  confesse  to  pee,  Fadir,  Lord  of  hevc7ie  and  of  erpe,  pat  hiddist 


^  So  E ;  om.  A. 


2  Mathy,  E. 


SERMONS. 


Z5^ 


pes  ireupis  fro  worldli  wise  men  and  ware,  and  shewidest  hem  to 
meke  men,  and  dispisid  of  ]>e  world.  And  j^e  laste  ^  cause  herof 
is  told  jjus  of  Crist :  Ihe,  Fadir,  pou  didist  pus,  for  pus  it  was 
liking  to  pee.  We  shal  undirstonde  here,  )>at  not  ech  confes- 
sioun  is  rounyng  in  an  eere  of  a  mannis  owne  synne,  but 
graunting  of  treu|)e  wi]>  graunting  of  God.  And  ])us  speki|> 
Crist,  ]>at  is  of  more  auctorite  |>an  alle  ])es  popis  ]?at  ordeyneden 
confessioun  of  rounyng.  And  here  mai  we  see  how  God  is 
Cristis  Fadir  wi]jouten  ende,  wi|>inne,  bifore  J>at  he  be  Lord; 
but  he  is  ever  Lord  of  ])is  brode  world;  and  J?is  world  is 
understonden  bi  hevene  and  bi  erj^e.  pis  treu))e  ]?at  Crist  con- 
fessi|>,  falling  to  ]?e  apostlis,  stondi]?  in  ]?is  word ;  |>at  J)ei  cowden 
many  trew|)is  ]?at  weren  hid  to  olde  ^  wise  men  and  war  of 
jje  world,  as  weren  Scribis  and  Fariseis,  and  o\tx  worldli  men. 
And  cause  of  |)is  dede  of  God  is  open  to  trewe  men ;  for  God 
wole  shewe  to  men  how  al  wisdom  is  of  him,  and  he  wole  5eve 
it  freeli  to  meke  men  j)at  he  love]?.  So  \2X  noujt  liki])  to  God 
but  for  certein  enchesoun. 

And  J)us,  for  Mathi  was  meke,  God  chees  him  apostle.  For 
it  is  not  leveful,  for  vertue  of  bileve,  to  denye  \zX  God  wrou5te 
in  castinge  of  |)es  lottis,  and  in  alle  dedis  of  jjes  apostlis,  J>e 
whiche  chosen  Mathi.  And,  as  it  is  seid  bifore'^,  j?is  chesing 
were  5it  betere,  for  mannis  affeccioun  is  falsly  varyed,  and 
speciali  whanne  worldli  wynnyng  is  knyttid  to  \q  chesing. 
And  5it  men  trowen  J>is  heresie  as  if  it  were  bileve,  \2X  %\i  ony 
be  chosen  bi  mannis  lawe  J?anne  he  is  treuli  chosen.  And  5it 
bo]?e  \t  cheseris,  and  he  \2X  is  chosen,  in  J)is  displesen  to  God. 
And  practik  of  ]?is  heresie  doi]?  myche  harm  in  chesing,  as  we 
mai  see  at  eye  in  chesing  of  )7es  popis.  Lyve  \q  cheseris  a 
meke  liif,  and  leeve  \€\  to  chese  a  worldli  state,  and  kepe  \€\ 
j)e  fourme  of  )?is  chesing,  and  \€\  shal  chese  wel.  For,  no 
drede,  sich  disturblyng  cam  never  of  chesing  of  ))es  popes, 
5if  jjei  weren  pore  and  meke,  and  lyveden  as  J^e  apostlis. 

And,  for  disciplis  of  Crist  shulden  trowe  to  his  speche,  he 
tellij)  what  falli])  to  him  bi  vertue  of  his  Godhede.     Crist  seij>^ 

^  So  in  E ;  le&te,  A.  ^  So  E ;   A  has  holdun.  "  So  in  E ; 

A  gives  the  words  '  Crist  sei]> '  as  part  of  the  quotation. 

«*  See  p.  304. 


Mathias  chosen 
an  apostle  for 
his  meekness. 


All  things  de- 
livered to 
Christ. 


35^ 


WFCLIF'S 


pat  alle  pingis  ben  ^ovun  him  of  his  Fadir,  and  no  man  knave 
fulli  Goddis  Sone  but  his  owne  Fadir,  and  no  man  knewe  pis 
Fadir  but  his  Sone,  and  ojjere  men  to  whom  he  wolde  shewe. 
pe  firste  of  J>es  ]?ree  wordis  techi|>  \2X  Crist  is  God,  for  ellis  |>e 
Fadir  my5te  not  5eve  him  alle  ])ingis.  For  5if  we  undirstonden 
bi  alle  |?ingis,  alle  creaturis,  ^it  ]>e  Sone  is  bifore  J)at  he  have 
alle  creaturis ;  and  in  ]?at  beyng  bifore  he  mote  nede  be  God. 
And  3if  we  undirstonden  al  ]?ing  wij^inne  in  God,  )>at  Crist  ha]> 
al  ]jis  ]?ing  50vun  of  his  Fadir,  ^it  Crist  moot  nedis  be  God, 
jif  ]?is  gifte  be  trewe ;  for  ]janne  Crist  ha]?  Jje  Holi  Goost,  and 
propirtees  of  \xq  persones,  and  ]>q  Fadir  of  hevene  in  a  manere, 
]?e  which  mai  oonli  acorde  to  God.  And  so,  for  ])e  first  word 
is  so]?,  Crist  mot  nedis  be  God.  And  of  ])is  wole  it  sue  ]?at 
Crist  is  almy^ty,  all  witti,  and  al  wilful,  as  })e  Trinite  is ;  for 
Crist  is  ])e  same  God  ]?e  which  is  ]je  Trinite.  Of  J)is  wole  sue 
}je  to}?er  word  after,  }>at  no  resonable  }?ing  knowi]?  ]?e  Sone  at 
\>e  fulle  but  ]?e  Fadir  of  hevene ;  for  ]jei  ben  algatis  evene. 
And  after  ]?is  speche  of  ])e  Trinite,  ]?e  whiche  is  even  in  himsilf, 
shulde  Crist  speke  of  ])is  cunnyng,  ]>e  which  is  ])e  most  ])at 
mai  be.  pe  ])ridde  word  sue]?  of  ]?es :  ]?at  no  man  knowi]?  ]?e 
Fadir  but  ]?e  Sone,  and  ]?es  men  to  which  ]?is  sone  wole  shewe 
]?is  knowing,  pe  peple  my^te  se  at  i^e  how  J?at  Crist  was 
verri  man.  And  so  Crist  come]?  doun  to  mannis  speche  of 
knowing,  pe  Sone,  bi  his  Godhede,  knowij?  evenli  ]?e  Fadir ; 
and,  bi  ]?at  ]?at  he  is  man,  he  knowi]?  as  myche  as  man  may 
knowe ;  and  so  his  knowing  moot  be  comuned  to  men  after  ])at 
]?ei  ben  able,  pe  Holi  Goost  is  ]?e  same  kynde  ]?at  is  ]?e  Fadir 
and  ]?e  Sone,  and  ]?erfore  Crist,  supposing  ]?is,  leeve}?  to  speke 
of  ]?is  Goost. 

And  of  })is  may  men  gadere  how  men  shulde  trowe  here 
Cristis  wordis,  si]?  he  is  God  J?at  mai  not  lye,  ne  faile  to  man 
in  his  lore.  And,  for  Crist  is  bo]?e  God  and  man,  and  ha]? 
bre]?eren  of  his  lesse  kynde,  J?erfore  he  turne]?  him  to  his 
bre]?eren  and  conforti]?  hem  in  }?er  travaile.  Co??ie  y  alle  to  me, 
seip  Crist,  pat  travailen  and  ben  chargid,  and  V  shall  refete  ^ 
y)u.     Take  y  my  yk  upon  yu,  and  lenie  y  of  me  }?is  lessoun. 


^  refreesche,  E. 


WYCLIF. 


SERMONS. 


?>S^ 


pat  Y  am  viylde  and  vieke  of  herte,  and  sue  ^e  50ure  Fadir  in 
))es  two,  and  jjanne,  shal  y  finde  reste  to  '^oure  soulis,  in  30ure 
traveil.  For  my  ^ok  z's  swe/e,  and  my  charge  is  li-^t.  And  J)es 
wordis  of  Crist,  to  conforte  religiouse  men,  ben  betere  })an  alle 
|)es  newe  reulis  jjat  ben  cloutid  to  Cristis  wordis ;  for,  in  what 
staat  jjat  ))0u  be  in  Cristis  religioun,  lerne  wel  jje  lessoun  of 
myldenes  and  mekenes  of  Crist,  how  he  kepte  him  in  al  his 
lyf,  in  what  troublyng  jjat  he  was  inne.  And  jif  ]jou  be  on 
Goddis  half,  J)OU  shalt  lyve  mekeli  aftir  Crist. 


pE  Gospel  oure  Lady  Day  in  Lente. 

[SERMON    CIL] 

Missus  est  Angelus  Gabriel  a  Deo. — Luyk.  i.  [26.] 

pis  gospel  telli])  to  j?e  Chirche  how  Jje  aungel  grette  oure  Ladi, 
and  how  she,  bi  hir  mekenesse,  ablide  hir  to  conseyve  Crist. 
And  ]>is  J?ridde  feste  of  oure  Ladi  is  a  wondir  hi3e  feste,  for  in 
J)is  was  Crist  maad  man,  and  Crist  passi]?  alle  o]?er  seintis.  And 
so  men  seien  comunli,  \2X  oure  Ladi  hadde  fyve  joies.  pe  firste 
was  at  ]>is  tyme  whanne  she  conceyvede  Crist  bi  mekenes.  \q. 
secounde  was  whanne  she  bare  Crist  wi])Outen  peyne  at  Criste- 
masse;  j?e  jjridde  was  whanne  it  was  shewid  to  hir  ))at  Crist 
was  risen  fro  dee])  to  lyve;  ]>e  fer]?e  was  whanne  she  saw  hir 
sone  stie  in  to  hevene ;  and  ]>e  fif])e  joie  was  whanne  she  was 
deed  and  take  to  blisse.  And  to  |)es  fyve  joies  ben  answerynge 
fyve  vertues  jjat  we  mai  have ;  and  5if  we  wolen  worshipe  ]?is 
Ladi,  holde  we  |>es  vertues  wel.  pes  fyve  vertues  ben  in  J)is 
ordre :  mekenesse  and  chastite,  bileve  and  hope,  and  charite ; 
and  5if  we  kepen  hem  we  plesen  God.  And  si|)  Crist  and  his 
modir  moten  nedis  be  of  00  wille,  Jjus  shal  we  plese  to  Marie, 
J>e  which  is  Goddis  modir. 

Luk  telli]?  how,  Gabriel  was  sent  fro  God  to  grete  Marie.  And, 
for  sum  men  ben  clepid  Gabriel,  Jjerfore  ])e  gospel  specifiej?  ])at, 
pe  aungel  Gabriel  was  sent  fro  God  to  Nazareth^  jjat  was,  a  citee 
of  Galilee,  in  which  citee  oure  Ladi  dwelte.    And  pis  maiden  was 

SERMONS.  A  a 


The  Annun- 
ciation. 


The  greeting 
of  the  angel. 


354 


WrCLIF'S 


iveddid  to  Joseph^  pe  which  was  of  Davipis  hous,  and  name  of  pe 
virgyn  was  Marie.  And  wel  she  is  clepid  a  virgyn  so  ofte  in 
]?is  Gospel,  for  she  was  virgyne  whanne  she  was  weddid,  and 
a  virgyn  after  to  her  de)).  And  a  iitil  before  Jjis  wedding,  J)is 
aungel  grette  })is  maiden  ]?us ;  and  so  was  Crist  conseyved  of 
hir  in  verri  matrimonie  of  Joseph.  It  seme]?  J)at  Ambrose,  upon 
Luk,  sei]> »,  Jjat  \€\  weren  weddid  bifore,  and  soone,  bitwixe  ]>at 
tyme  and  ny^t,  |je  aungel  cam  and  grette  Marie  J)us.  And  algatis, 
on  ech  wey,  oure  Ladi  was  weddid  in  ]je  same  hour,  or  nye  ]?at 
hour  ])at  she  was  greet  ^  Suppose  we  ]?at  j)is  greting  cam  after, 
and  neijjer  wordis  ne  resoun  semej>  to  a3en  seie  ]?is.  pis  aungel 
cam  in  to  pis  maiden,  and  seide  to  hir  on  |?is  manere,  Hail,  ful 
of  grace,  God  is  wip  pee ;  hlessid  be  pou  afnong  wymmen.  pis 
angel  clepide  not  now  IMarie  bi  hir  propir  name,  \2X  she  was 
clepid,  for  common  uss "  wij)  lordis  and  ladies  axi]?,  J^at  comun 
servauntis  of  hem  clepen  hem  not  bi  propre  name,  but  bi  name 
of  excellence;  as  men  jjat  speken  of  oure  Kyng  leeven  to  clepen 
him  Kyng  Richard,  but  seien  j?at  ]jis  is  ]?e  wille  of  ]>e  Kyng,  or 
|)us  j)e  Kyng  biddi]?  to  do  ^.  And  clouting  of  )?is  word  Marie  to 
Jjis  gretinge  of  |)e  angel  is  not  wor]?  ful  myche  pardone,  but  jif 
it  be  c  two  ]?ousand  3eer ;  as  men  seien  ])e  pope  ha]?  grauntid  ^ 
for  ]?e  seiyng  of  an  orisoun  bitwixe  ]?e  sacryng  and  Agnus  Dei. 
But  many  ]?enken  }?at  J?e  Pater  noster  is  \^  bettere.  And  so  it 
seme]?  to  many  men  ])at  God  and  jje  pope  varien,  si]?  God  doiJ> 
al  ]?ing  upon  resoun,  and  not  but  for  certeyn  causis. 


'  gret,  E. 

**  S.  Ambros,  Comment,  in  Litcam, 
Lib.  II,  cap.  I. 

b  This  indication  of  date,  which 
confines  the  composition  of  these 
sermons  within  the  years  1378 -1399, 
has  been  considered  in  the  Intro- 
duction. 

'^  'but  jif  it  be'  appears  to  be 
used  here  in  the  sense  of  '  much 
less.'  But  perhaps  the  sentence 
should  be  punctuated  thus, — '  myche 
pardone ;  but  5if  it  be,  two  ))ousand 
jeer,  as  men  seien,  \>e  pope  hab 
grauntid,'  c\c. 

^  1  have  searched  the  Bullarium 
(that  of  Cocquelines,  Rome,  1739), 


^  use,  E. 

which  however  is  very  meagre  for 
the  pontificate  of  Urban  VI,  and 
toiled  through  the  numerous  pro- 
clamations of  indulgence  of  that 
pope,  which  are  thickly  strewn  over 
the  pages  of  Raynaldus,  the  con- 
tinuator  of  Baronius,  but  without 
finding  anything  to  support  the 
statement  in  the  text.  The  usual 
indulgence  granted  to  those  who 
took  up  arms  against  the  anti-pope 
was  a  plenary  indulgence,  on  the 
same  conditions  and  with  the  same 
privileges  as  were  customary  in 
the  case  of  crusaders  to  the  Iloly 
Land. 


SERMONS. 


^SS 


Oure  Ladi,  zvhanne  she  herde  pi's  greting,  was  troiiblid  in  pis 
word,  and  pou'i,ie,  as  a  wise  maiden,  what  manere  shidde  be  pis 
greting.  pis  troublinge  in  |)is  gretingc  puttij?  no  synne  or  blame 
in  IMarie,  si]?  Crist  sei]>  }>at  his  soule  is  troublid,  bifore  his  de]?. 
And  pis  angel  seidc  to  hir,  Drede  pe  not,  Marie,  for  pou  hast 
foiindun  grace  bifore  pe  Lord  of  alle  Lordis.  And  here  |?is 
aungel,  for  confort,  clepide  Marie  bi  hir  propre  name,  to  telle 
Jjat  he  knewe  hir  wel,  and  eke  J>e  Lord  ])at  sente  him.  For 
whoever  ha])  founden  grace  of  a  lord  is  loved  of  him.  Lo,  pou 
shalt  conseyve  in  wombe,  and  pou  shalt  bere  a  sone,  a?idpou  shalt 
clepe  his  name  fesus.  And  he  pis  ^  shal  be  greet,  and  he  shal  be 
clepid  pe  sone  of  pe  hiyste  Lord ;  and  pe  Lord  God  shal  yve  him 
Davipis  seete,  ]?e  which  Davi]?  is  his  fadir  ;  and  he  shal  rengne  iti 
facobis^  hous  wipoute7i  ejide'^  and  of  his  rewme  shal  be  noon  ende. 
Bi  ])is  mai  men  undirstonden  ])at  Crist  was  king,  as  Davi}?  was, 
but  more  spirituali,  as  his  kyngdom  was  more  spiritual.  For 
ech  worldli  lordship  mote  nedis  have  an  ende ;  and  ])us  rengn- 
yng  wi]70uten  eende  in  \q  hous  of  Jacob,  and  })at  of  his  rewme 
shal  be  noon  eende,  tellen  how  Crist  rengne])  spirituali,  and  not 
contrarie  to  worldli  lordis. 

And  Marie  seide  to  pis  angel,  On  what  mafiere  shal  pis  be,  for 
I  knowe  no  man  fleishli?  Arid  pis  angel  answering  seide  to  hir, 
pe  Hooli  Goost  shal  come  above  in  pee,  and  pe  vertue  of  alper 
hiyste  Lord  shal  make  umbre  unto  pee.  pe  vertue  of  God 
maki])  umbre,  whanne  in  a  lowe  place  it  letti])  heete  ^  of  synne, 
as  it  fel  in  oure  Ladi ;  for  she  was  lower  in  kinde  J)an  aungels, 
and  she  conseyvede  wi])OUten  synne.  And perf ore  pat  holi ping 
pat  shal  be  born  of  pee  shal  be  clepid  Goddis  Sone,  singulerli  bifore 
o])er.  And  lo,  Eliyibeth  pi  cosyn,  and  she  hap  conseyved  a  sone  in 
hir  elde  ;  and  pis  monep  is  pe  sixte  to  him  pat  is  clepid  bareyne  b. 


^  Jacobs,  E. 


^  So  in  E ;  om.  A. 


J)e  hete,  E. 


*  '  He  this '  is  the  reading  in  this 
place  of  a  single  MS.  (Bodl.  277) 
of  the  later  Wycliffite  version. 

^'  to  him  that  is  clepid  bareyne.  Both 
A  and  E  concur  in  this  reading, 
and  the  expression  a  few  lines  be- 
low, '  Zacharie  in  reprefe  was  clepid 
bareyne,'  leaves  no  doubt  that  it 
is   correct.     But   it   is  not  easy   to 

A 


understand  why  the  writer  adopted 
this  most  erroneous  version  of  the 
original,  or  where  he  found  any 
countenance  for  it.  The  very  nu- 
merous MSS.  of  the  two  Wycliffite 
versions  all  read  '  hir,'  and  the  ren- 
dering of  the  Vulgate  is  '  illi  quae 
vocatur  sterilis,'  Did  the  writer 
inadvertently  read  '  qui '  for  '  quae  V  ' 

a  2 


Christ's  spi- 
ritual Kingship. 


35^ 


WFCZIF'S 


The  Con- 
ception. 


The  example  of 
Mary  teaches 
meekness. 


For  Zakary,  Baptist  fadir,  hadde  geten  Joon  sixe  moneJ)is  bifore ; 
and  so  bi  a  litil  tyme  Joon  was  man  bifore  Crist.  But  evene 
bi  sixe  moneJ?is  was  Joon  born  before  Crist;  for  Crist  was 
man,  but  not  Joon,  fro  ]>e  ^  tyme  |)at  he  was  conceyved.  And 
Zacharie  in  repreef  was  clepid  bareyne,  wi]?outen  fruyte.  For 
no  word  pat  God  seip  shal  he  iinpossible  to  him  ;  and  so,  sij)  God 
wole  have  it  ]>us,  it  mote  algatis  be  so. 

And  Marie,  as  ful  ripe  in  mekenesse,  answer ide  ]?us  to  pe 
aiingel :  Lo,  here  pe  handmaide7t  of  God ;  Be  it  done  to  me  after 
pi  word.  And,  as  men  seien  comunli,  in  ))is  tyme  Marie  con- 
seyvede  Crist.  For,  as  Eve,  for  j)e  tyme  ))at  she  was  moost 
proud,  loste  mankynde,  so  Marie,  for  |?e  tyme  Jjat  she  was 
most  meke,  won  mankynde.  And  here,  5if  \o\x.  wilt  plese  Marie, 
or  God  hir  sone,  be  algatis  meke ;  for  mekenes  wole  plese  to 
Marie,  siJ)  she  woot  it  plesi]>  to  God.  And  herfore  she  sei])  in 
hir  song :  God  bihelde  |?e  mekenesse  of  his  maiden,  and  certis, 
herfore,  lo,  alle  kynredis  shal  seie  J?at  I  am  blessid.  And  so, 
3if  jjou  wilt  plese  oure  Ladi,  traveile  \o\x  to  growe  in  mekenes. 
Also,  si])  ech  hie  ])ing  mote  have  a  good  and  stable  ground,  and 
3if  J)0u  wilt  come  to  hevene  jjou  moost  make  a  tour  ])idir,  and  so, 
if  ))0U  wilt  come  to  hevene,  stable  ])ee  in  Cristis  mekenesse.  And 
so  as  ])e  sentre  is  lowest  of  alle  j^ingis,  so  Crist  is  ]?e  mekeste 
\2X  mai  be.  Also,  ])e  lower  jjat  a  vessel  is,  jje  more  of  licour 
wole  it  take ;  and  so  ])e  mekere  )>at  a  man  is,  \t  more  of  grace 
wole  he  take.  And  so,  5if  j?ou  wilt  have  grace  of  God,  meke 
])ee  wele  in  J)i  soule ;  for  mekenes  meve]?  to  pacience,  and  to  al 
o])er  manere  of  vertues. 

'  So  E  ;  for  tyme,  A. 


SERMONS, 


^yl 


f>E  Gospel  on  Philippis  Dai  and  Jacob. 

[SERMON     CIIL] 

Non  turheiur^  cor  vestrum. — John  xiv.  [i.] 

pis  gospel  telli]>,  how  Crist  confortide  his  discipHs  upon 
Shire  pursdaie,  as  he  dide  comunli  in  wordis  \2X  he  seide  hem 
j)anne.  Joon  telli|>  in  fyve  capitlis  wordis  ]?at  Crist  spake  after 
his  soper ;  and,  among  o])er  J>ingis,  he  tolde  hem  how  he  shulde 
be  bitrayd,  and  how  he  shulde  be  after  turmentid  and  deed,  and 
how  |>ei  shulden  have  drede  bo])e  wi|>inne  and  wi)?outen.  And 
herfore  he  medlide  wi|)  al  wise  wordis  of  confort.  Crist  biddi]? 
first  in  |)is  Gospel,  ]jat  her  herte  he  not  trouhlid  wi))inne,  fie  drede 
for  perils  wi]?outen,  for  confort  jjat  \€\  shal  have  of  him.  3^^ 
|7ei  ben  sad  in  |>is  bileve,  \2X  alle  Jjes  ]?ingis  moten  nedis  falle, 
and  for  |;er  betere  afterward,  bojje  here  and  in  hevene,  \€\ 
shulden  not  be  troublid  wi]?inne  to  leese  ony  vertue ;  for  |:'anne 
\€\  shulden  falle  fro  vertues,  for  good  }>at  God  made  to  hem. 
And,  bi  J)is  same  resoun,  }>ei  shulden  not  drede  of  bodili  peril ; 
for  al  ]?is  shulde  turne  hem  to  good  bi  ]?is  same  bileve.  And, 
fo^  to  make  hem  siker  of  })is,  Crist  sei]?  J)is  word,  ^e  trowen  in 
God,  and  trowe  y  in  me.  As  who  seij>,  5e  moten  nedis  trowe  in 
God,  or  ellis  50U  faili]?  charite ;  and  ^e  mai  not  trowe  in  God, 
but  5if  5e  trowen  in  me,  for  Y  am  })e  same  God,  })at  is  God  ]?e 
Fadir.  And  so  wordis  j^at  Y  telle  30U  moten  nedis  be  so)?.  3if 
God  telle  us  a  })ing,  who  of  us  wolde  drede  jjerof,  si]?  we  ben 
certyn  of  bileve  jjat  God  mai  not  disseyve  us  ?  And  oonhede 
in  Godhede,  wi|?  Trinite  in  persones,  is  ofte  seid  in  ))is  gospel, 
and  in  oj^er  bojje.  And  )?us  bileve  shulde  be  ground  to  conforte 
men  in  jjis  weie. 

And  men  shulden  not  muse  on  J)is,  |)at  ne  |)er  ben  diverse 
meritis.  For,  as  jjer  ben  in  ech  man  diverse  degrees  of  bileve, 
so  })er  ben  in  Cristis  apostlis  diverse  degrees  of  meritis.     And 

^  So  in  E  ;  A  has  turhentur. 


Christ's  dis- 
courses at  the 
Last  Supper. 


'  Many  man- 
sions,' degrees 
of  merit  and 
reward. 


358 


Wrc  LIF'S 


Final  bliss,  and 
the  way  to  it. 


Christ's  me- 
diation. 


for  to  quiete  hem  in  ])is  Crist  seij?  to  his  apostlis,  ]>at  in  pe  hous 
of  his  Fadir  hen  many  dwellingis ;  as  who  sei]>,  Have  ^e  sum 
degree  of  fei]>  and  hope  and  charite,  and  laste  ^e,  creessyng 
]?erinne  to  ^our  lyves  eende,  and  ^our  place  is  ordeyned  in 
hevene  after  J)at  ^e  ben  wor]>e.  What  man  shulde  herfor  lette 
to  serve  God  wel,  but  ra]?er  he  shulde  enforse  him  to  encresse 
in  Goddis  service.  And  ]?es  disciplis  shulden  truste  in  |)is  meene 
persone  Crist;  for,  as  he  seijj  so|)li,  "^if  07ty ping  in  hevenli  blis 
were  lesse,  or  defauty,  he  wolde  have  teld  hem.  And  in  proof  of 
J)is  J>ing,  he  siiep  up  in  his  tyme,  to  make  hem  a  place  redi pere,  as 
he  dide  aftirward.  And  si]?  he  is  bo]7e  God  and  man,  he  woot 
wel  how  it  is  })ere ;  and  gabbing  in  sich  a  Lord  were  more 
synne  ]>anne  ever  was. 

And,  for  Crist  mai  not  bigynne  a  jjing  but  ^if  he  make  an 
eende  ]?erof,  Jjerfore  he  sei]?,  |)at  52/*  he  wende  pus  to  hevene  he 
shal  come  ayn  and  take  pes  apostlis  to  him.  And  ]?is  shal  be 
verified  at  Cristis  comyng  at  Jje  dai  of  dome,  pat  where  Crist  is 
evermore,  bojje  in  stede  and  in  blisse,  pei  ben  pere  wip  him  after 
]jis  dai  wi|)Outen  eende.  And  y  witen  whidir  Y go,  a?id  also  3^ 
knowe  pe  weie.  And  ])us  Crist  certefiede  hem  ]?at  ]?ei  witen  ])e 
ende,  and  \q  weie  how  ]>q\  shulden  come  to  blisse,  over  Jjat  ))e 
fadirs  wisten  in  J>e  olde  testament;  and  ])us  )>ei  may  truste  in 
Crist  as  meene  persone  of  God  and  man.  But  Thomas  seid 
here  to  Crist,  Sire,  we  witen  nere  whidir  pou  goist,  and  how  mai 
we  knowe  pe  weie  .^  And  Jesus  seide  to  him:  I  am  weie,  trupe, 
and  lyf.  As  3if  he  wolde  meene  to  Crystene  men :  Knowe  je 
me,  and  love  36  me,  and  je  knowe  alle  Jjes  jjingis.  For  Crist 
wole  teche  his  disciplis  bi  litil  and  litil  alle  |)es.  And  so  ]?e  liif 
|?at  Crist  ledde  here  is  J)e  weie  to  come  to  hevene;  for  but  if 
we  suen  him  in  ]>is  liif,  we  shal  never  come  to  blis.  And  })e 
trewe  reule  ])at  he  5af  is  treuj^e,  to  teche  men  ))at  wolden  ellis  erre. 
And  he  is  liif  many  weies  to  susteyne  men  yn  jjis  traveile. 

And  so  Crist  seij>  soJ)li  \  pat  no  man  comep  to  pe  Fadir  but  bi 
him;  for  his  manhede  is  nedeful  meene  to  make  asee})  for 
mannis  synne,  and  his  Godhede  mote  nedis  meeve  to  come 
})is  weie,  so  fer  fro  er|>e.     And  muse  we  not  of  \q  knowing  \2X 


*  So  E ;  A  includes  the  word  in  the  quotation. 


SERMONS. 


359 


we  moten  have  of  J>is  Fadir.  For  Crist  sei}>  so)>li,  pai  y/ pei 
hadde  kfiowen  him,  certis  pei  hadden  knowe  his  Fadir.  For  whoso 
knowij)  Cristis  Godhede,  he  woot  how  God  seij)  al  }>ing ;  for  ]?is 
word  of  God  is  his  Sone  and  Crist,  ]>at  we  shulden  knowe  |)us ; 
and  jjanne  he  knowi]?  him  \2X.  sei]?,  |>e  which  is  God  \q  Fadir. 
And  after  y  shal  knowe pe  Fadir  beter  J>an  5e  jit  done  ;  andy 
have  saie7i  him,  bi  bileve  j^at  bringij)  in  ])is  knowing. 

And,  for  ]?ese  wordis  weren  woundirful,  j^erfore  Philip  seide 
to  Crist :  Sire,  shewe  us  pe  Fadir,  and  it  is ynow^  to  us.  And 
Jesus  seide  to  Philip  panne,  So  longe  tyme  I  am  wip  '^ou,  and  y't  y 
knowen  not  me,  Philip.  Whoso  seep  me,  he  seep  my  Fadir ;  how 
seist  pou,  shewe  us  pe  Fadir  .^  Ne  trow  est  not  pou  pat  I  a?n  in  pe 
Fadir,  ajidpe  Fadir  is  in  me  .^  pes  wordis  pat  I  speke,  I  speke  hem 
not  of  mysilf :  hut,  certis,  pe  Fadir  pat  dwellip  in  me  is  pat  ilk 
pat  doip  pe  werkes.  Ne  trowe  y  not  pat  Y  am  inpe  Fadir,  and 
pe  Fadir  is  in  me?  ellis,  trowe  y  my  Godhede,  for  pe  workes  pat 
V  do.  Sopeli,  sopli,  I  seie  to  yu,  pat  man  pat  trowip  in  me  shal 
do  pe  werkes  pat  Y  do  ;  a7id  pe  moste  of  hem  ^  shal  he  do,  for  I  go 
to  my  Fadir,  and  my  chirche,  ])at  is  my  bodi,  dwellij>  jit  stille  in 
er))e.  And  I  shal  not  be  idil  in  hevene,  for  whatever  y  axen 
pe  Fadir  in  my  fiame,  pat  shal  Y  do. 

Alle  ))es  wordis  jiat  Crist  sei]?  here  axen  sutil  undirstond- 
ing,  jhe,  more  ])an  we  mai  have  while  we  lyven  in  jjis  liif.  It 
is  nedeful  here  to  knowe,  how  \q  Godhede  of  Crist  is  o]?ir  in 
kynde  j?an  his  manhede,  al  if  ]?ei  bo]?e  ben  oo  persone.  And 
j?is  Godhede  is  so  sutil  ]?at  it  is  comune  to  ]?re  persones. 
And  so,  whoso  knowij)  ]?is  Godhede  in  oon  mote  nedis  knowe 
it  in  ech  of  hem;  for  ]?es  ]?ree  persones  ben  not  diverse,  as 
J>ree  men,  or  J>ree  oJ)er  substances,  but  ech  of  hem  mai  no- 
wher  be,  ne  oujt  do,  wij?outen  ech  ojjer.  And  |)is  mannis  witt 
mote  be  clene  ]>at  shulde  knowe  wel  J)is  matere. 

**  '  Majora  horum  faciet ; '  Vulg. 


The  doctrine 
of  the  Trinity. 


360 


WFCLIF'S 


Christ's  last 
appearance  to 
the  apostles. 


His  practice 
authorizes  our 
breaking  our 
fast  before 
communion. 


I^E  Gospel  on  Ascencioun  Day*. 

[SERMON     CIV.] 

Recumhentihus  undecem  discipulis. — Mark  xvi.  [14.] 

pis  gospel  telli]?  in  what  form  Crist  toke  his  leve  at  his 
apostlis.  Mark  sei]>,  ]>at  enleven  apostlis  restiden  after  J>at  \€\ 
hadden  eten,  and  Jesus  apperide  unto  hem,  and  reproveden 
untreu])e  of  hem,  and  hardnes  of  \tx  herte,  for  ]?ei  trowiden  not 
to  hem  J)at  sawen  jjat  he  was  risen  from  de]>.  And  Crist  seide 
to  hem,  Go  je  into  al  \q  world,  and  preche  je  \q  gospel  unto 
alle  maner  of  men.  He  \2X  shal  trowe  and  be  baptisid  shal 
be  saaf;  and  certis  he  ]?at  shal  not  trowe  shal  be  dampned. 
And  |)es  signes  shulen  folowen  hem  J?at  shulen  bileve  in  my 
name  :  pei  shulen  caste  out  fendis,  ]?ei  shulen  speke  wi]?  newe 
tungis,  ]>ei  shulen  take  awei  addris,  and  ^if  jjei  drynken  ony 
dedeli  |?ing,  it  shal  not  noie  hem;  \€\  shulen  putte  ])er  hondis 
on  syke  men,  and  jjes  seke  men  shulen  fare  wel.  And  sojjeli 
)je  Lord  Jesus,  fro  he  hadde  spoke  ]?us  wi})  hem,  he  was  taken 
in  to  hevene  and  sitti])  on  Goddis  ri;!  side.  And  ]?ei  wenten 
her  weie,  and  prechiden  everywhere,  and  ])e  Lord  wrou3te  wi}> 
hem,  and  confermede  her  wordis  wip  pes  sigfies  suing. 

Here  men  shulden  note  ])es  wordis,  for  ech  of  hem  beri}? 
greet  witt ;  first,  how  Crist  toke  leve  at  his  disciplis  fro  j?e  tyme 
|>at  ]?ei  hadden  eeten.  He  5af  J>e  sacrament  to  hem  after  |>er 
mete  comunli,  and  Crist  spak  wi|>  hem  comunli  after  j^at  jjei 
hadden  sumwhat  eten.  And  no  drede  to  Cristene  men  ]?at  ne 
Crist  dide  ))us  for  certeyn  cause.  O  cause  was  herfore,  |)at 
men  shulden  eten  in  good  mesure,  J)at  Jjer  wittis  weren  more 
sharp,  and  |>ei  more  able  to  serve  God.  And  Crist  wiste  )>at 
men  shulden  ordeyne  reversingeli  to  Cristis  dede,  and  herfore 
he  ordeynede  |>us,  to  telle  J)at  ])e  contrarie  is  leveful.  And  |)is 
shulden  j^es  men  note  ]>2X  proven  j?at  )?e  ost  is  not  breed  ;  for 

*  This  sermon  is  not  found  in  MS.  E  (Douce  321). 


SERMONS. 

j>anne,  \q\  seien,  man  brake  his  fast,  etinge  ))e  oost  whanne  it  is 
sacrid,  and  ])anne  he  shiilde  not  take  aftirward  Goddis  blood 
|>at  is  sacrid  in  })e  chalis.  Lord !  whi  witen  not  ]?es  foolis  j>at 
]jer  accidentis  maken  men  drunken  whanne  jjei  taken  hem 
above  resoun,  as  Poul  witnessi})  ?  And  witt  prove)?  where  J)is  man 
be  excusid  of  gloterie,  for  he  is  drunken  of  an  accident.  And 
si]?  taking  of  jjis  |?ing  in  mesure  was  no  synne  in  Cristis  tyme, 
what  vertue  ha]>  mannis  statute  to  make  |)is  be  synne  more  ]?an 
))anne  ?  pes  founed  wordis  fordone  Cristis  fredom,  and  bileve 
J>at  men  shulden  have.  3if  J>is  be  no  synne  to  God,  it  is  no 
synne  for  to  charge  to  eeten  in  mesure  bifore  ]>q  masse,  and 
after  to  synge  and  use. 

Aftirward  we  shulden  wite,  how  Christ  reprovede  unbileve  and 
hardnes  of  apostlis  hertis,  ]?at  weren  bifore,  and  Jeanne  weren 
taken  awei,  for  \e\  hadden  not  sorewe  ynow^  for  |)ese  errours 
]?at  ])ei  weren  inne.  And  j^ei  shulden  note  ]?e  wordis  of  Crist 
])at  he  spak  ]jat  tyme  to  hem.  And  ]?is  is  ano]?er  note,  how 
Crist  bad  hem  ])anne  go  and  preche  Jje  gospel  freli  to  alle 
manere  men.  And  wo  be  to  hem  |?at  letten  ]?is,  for  jurisdic- 
cioun  or  o})er  cause ;  as  wo  is  to  hem  ])at  leven  ])is,  and  prechen 
dremys,  fablis,  and  gabbingis.  And  it  is  not  ynow  to  have 
nakid  bileeve,  but  men  moten  have  charite,  ]?at  shal  fourme 
o|?ere  vertues.  And  |?is  baptisi])  men  wi|>  baptym  of  ])e  Holi 
Goost. 

But  3it  men  douten  of  ])es  wordis  ]?at  Crist  speki]?  aftir.  It 
seme|>  |>at  alle  men  )?at  bileven  moten  nede  have  j^es  fyve 
signes ;  and  si])  noon  of  us  ha]?  hem,  noon  of  us  ha])  bileve. 
Here  men  seien  comunli,  J)at  seintis  at  ]>e  first  tyme  hadden 
alle  ))es  fyve  signes  betere  J)an  we  have  now.  But  trewe  men 
have  in  a  manere  alle  J)es  signes  now.  For  whanne  ))ei  de- 
lyveren  hem  of  synnes,  ])ei  casten  out  fendis  in  j)e  name  of 
Crist.  And  ])ei  speken  wi])  newe  tunges,  for  alle  J)ingis  ))at 
men  done  in  grace  be  newe  bi  titil  of  grace.  And  Crist  seij), 
in  Apocalips  ^,  \qi  taken  awei  addris  ])at  ])ei  have  of  ^er  fleish ; 
for  J)er  will  is  awei  to  displese  God  bi  Jjer  lust.  And  dedli 
drynke,  ^if  \>e'\  taken  it,  or  ojjer  ])ing  ])at  come])  to  hem,  anoieJ> 


361 


I  Cor.  xi,  21. 


a  Is  the  reference  to  Apoc.  xii,  9  ? 


362  .  WrCLIF'S 

hem  not,  but  bringi]?  hem  to  blisse  |jat  God  ha]?  ordeyned 
to  hem.  And  ^if  J?ei  blessen  men,  or  what  |)ing  ]?at  jjei  done, 
Cristene  men  shulen  be  beterid,  whe]?er  ]>ei  be  saved  or 
dampned.  And  so  it  seme]?  ]>at  |;es  men  oonH  trowen  J)us, 
]?at  God  haj)  ordeyned  to  blisse ;  for  o]jer  men  ben  in  greet 
synne  and  in  greet  unbileve,  al3if  it  be  florishid  for  a  tyme. 

But  men  noten  last  here,  how  Crist  sittijj  on  |>e  ri^t  side  of 
his  Fadir,  si])  his  Fadir  is  oonli  Godhede,  and  ha])  no  figure 
as  man  ha]).  And  here  men  knowen  as  bileve  })at  Christ  sitti]? 
not  on  ]>e  bodili  side  of  his  Fadir  in  hevene,  for  his  Fadir  ha]) 
noo  sich  side ;  but  ]>e  Fadir  ha])  sum  men  ordeyned  to  damp- 
nacioun,  as  ben  fendis  in  helle  and  men  ])at  shulen  be  dampned 
])ere ;  and  ]>es  ben  ])e  left  side  of  ])e  Fadir,  on  which  Crist  shal 
not  sitte.  Sum  men  ben  on  ]>e  ri3t  side;  as  alle  men  ])at  shulen 
be  saved,  and  ordeyned  to  come  to  blisse  after  Goddis  firste 
ordenaunce.  And  ])us  Crist  bi  his  manhede  sitti})  on  his 
Fadirs  ri3t  side,  for  no  ])ing  mai  be  nerre  Godhede  ne  more 
blessid  ])an  is  Cristis  manhede.  And  so  he  sitti})  on  his  Fadirs 
ri3t  side  on  o])er  manere  })an  ony  o])er  mai  sitte. 


pE  Gospel  on  Mydsomer  Evyn. 


[SERMON     CV.] 


The  writer  de- 
nounces those 
who  had  turned 
the  freedom  of 
the  New  Law 
into  a  bondage. 


jFui'/  in  diehus  Herodis. — Luc.  i.  [5.] 

pis  gospel  telli])  a  playen^  storie  how  ])at  Joon  Baptist  cam 
for]).  Luk  telli]),  how  per  was  171  daies  of  Ho'oude  kyng  of  Jude 
0  prest  clepid  Zacarie,  of  pe  gendrure  of  pe  preest  Ahia.  And 
loot  ^  fel  to  })es  preestis  to  mynistre  in  ])e  ei5ti])e  woke.  And 
Zacaryus  wfwas  of  Aarons  doubters,  and  hir  name  was  Eliza- 
beth. And  hope  pes  two  were7i  just  bif ore  God,  goi?igforp  in  alle 
Goddis  77iandefnentis  and  in  alle  Justifying  of  pe  Lord  wipouten 
plei7it.  Fadirs  of  ])e  olde  lawe  weren  myche  chargid  over  men 
now ;  for  ])ei  kepten  })es  same  ten  mandementis,  ])at  we  kepen 


'  pleyn,  E. 


^  So  E;  /o  //.  A. 


SERMONS. 


3^3 


in  j)e  newe  lawe,  and  over,  ^if  |)ei  wolden  be  juste,  jjci  mosten 
kepe  cerymonyes,  and  many  lawis  judicialis,  ]?at  us  nodi})  not 
now  to  kepe.  And,  for  j^es  two  kepten  al  j?is  wi)?outen  grete 
blame  of  God  or  man,  Jjerfore  Luk  preisi|>  Baptistis  eldris  .in 
keping  of  |>e  olde  lawe.  But  woo  is  to  hem  in  tyme  of  grace, 
])at  })us  have  chargid  J>e  newe  lawe,  ])at  we  have  now  more  to 
kepe  })an  j?ei  hadden  in  ]>e  olde  lawe.  For^  ]>es  men  have 
distroyed  freedom,  and  pervertid  Cristis  Chirche,  and  so,  as 
myche  as  in  hem  is,  jjei  have  maad  Crist  unfree,  and  j)is  un- 
fredom  is  worse  ]?an  al  jje  richessis  of  ]>is  world. 

Atid  pei  hadden  noo  child  '^it,  for  pe  womman  was  bareyne, 
and  pet  weren  hope  olde,  passid  wel  in  tyme  of  her  eelde.  And 
it  fel  pat  Zacarie  dide  his  preestis  office  in  pe  temple,  as  it  fel 
to  his  tyme,  and  custom  pat  panne  was.  He  wente  herbi  aloone 
to  off  re  ensence  in  pe  inner  part  of  pe  temple  ;  and  al  pe  peple 
was  wipouten  preiy?ige  in  pe  tyme  of  pis  ensence.  And  oiire  Lordis 
aungel  apperide  to  him  stondiftg  on  pe  ri^t  side  of  pe  auter.  And 
pis  preest  Zacarie  was  disturblid,  and  dredde  herfore.  But  pe 
aufigel  seide  to  him,  Drede  pee  7iot,  Zacarie,  for  pi  preier  is 
herd ;  and  Elizabeth  pi  wyf  shal  bere  to  pee  a  child,  and  his 
name  shal  be  clepid  foon,  and  joie  and  gladnes  shal  be  to  pee, 
and  many  shal  enjoie  in  his  birpe.  He  shal  be  greete  bifore  God, 
and  wyti  and  sidir  "-^  he  shal  7iot  drynke ;  and  he  shal  be  fild 
vjip pe  Holi  Goost  ■^it  fro  his  modir  ivombe.  And  he  shal  turne 
many  of  pes  children  of  Israel  to  pe  Lord  God  of  hem.  And  pis 
foon  shal  go  bifore  Crist,  in  spirit  and  vertue  of  Helye  ;  for  Joon 
was  Hely  in  figure,  as  Christ  sei]>  J)at  mai  not  lye.  And  pis 
Joon  shal  converte  pe  hertis  of  pe  formere  fadris  in  to  pe  love 
of  Jjer  sones,  jjat  tellen  hem  J>at  Crist  is  comen  ;  and  men  out 
of  bileve  foon  shal  turite  to  prudence  of  juste  men.  For  it  was 
a  greet  prudence  to  trowe  |)e  signes  of  Crist,  |)at  he  was  j)e 
prophete  bihi3t  to  |?e  fadirs  of  ]>e  olde  lawe.  Arid  so  Baptist 
made  redi  to  pe  Lord  a  perfect  folk  in  ri^t  bileve. 

^  So  E;  And  for.  A,  which  leaves  the  construction  incomplete. 

^  sydre,  E. 

a  Both  WycUffite  versions  render  sisara,  cicera,  and  cisara)  with  the 

the  siceram  of  the  Vulgate  in  this  French    cidre,    whence    comes   our 

place  by  sydir.     Ducange  identifies  'cider.' 
sicera   (other   forms    of  which   are 


The  Angel 
Gabriel  and 
Zacharias. 


3^4 


WFCLIF'S 


Christ  con* 
demns  both 
church-endow- 
ment and  the 
celibacy  of  the 
clergy. 


The  nativity 
of  John  the 
Baptist. 

Eccles.  iii.  I. 


Zacharias 
recovers  his 
speech. 


Here  mai  men  douten,  and  trete  of  |?e  staat  and  liif  of 
prestis  ;  how  jiei  ben  dowid  and  wyflees  a3ens  Goddis  autorite  ; 
for  Crist  forfendid  dowyng  bo]je  in  him  and  in  hise  apostlis, 
and  approvede  wedding  in  apostlis  and  many  o]>er.  And  ])is 
is  ]?e  caste  of  |)e  fend,  to  kyndle  fir  in  ^  heerdis ;  for  or  ])ei 
moten  bo|)e  brenne,  or  j?e  kepere  mote  leeve  his  craft  and 
traveile  to  kepe  |>is  fir  ^.     And  preestis  shal  not  do  bojje  wel. 


pE   Gospel   on    Mydsomer   Dai. 

[SERMON    CVL] 

Elizabeth  impleium  est  iempus  pariendi. — Luc.  i.  [57.] 

pis  gospel  telli]?  of  \^  forme  ]>at  Joon  Baptist  was  born  inne, 
and  seijj ;  To  Elizabeth  was  tyme  fidfillid  to  bere  child.  For  |)e 
Wise  man  sei]?  }>at  alle  ]?ingis  have  j^er  tyme.  And  sij?  al  {)ing 
mote  nedis  come  in  tyme  ])at  God  ha|)  ordeyned  it,  muche 
more  |>e  tyme  of  Joon,  ]>at  God  ordeyned^  so  speciali.  And 
])us  Elizabeth  bare  pis  child.  And  her  nei'^boris  aiid  her  cosyns 
herden  pat  she  was  delyverid,  and  helden  pat  God  hadde  maad 
his  mercy  greet  wip  pis  olde  wit/,  and  joie/ulli  pankide  God  wip 
hir.  And  it  fel  in  pe  eiy:ip  dale,  pei  camen  to  circumcide  pe 
child;  and  pei  clepiden  him  Zacarie  after  his  fadirs  name.  And 
his  modir  answeride  and  seide,  Nay,  but  he  shal  be  clepid  Joon. 
And  pei  seiden  to  Elizabeth,  pat  710  man  was  in  hir  kyn  pat  was 
clepid  bi  pis  name ;  whi  shulde  he  be  clepid  so  ?  But  pei 
bekenedeft  to  his  fadir,  what  he  wolde  pat  he  were  clepid,  and  he 
axide  a  metal  pointed,  and  wroot,  and  seide,  Joon  is  his  name. 

And  so  miracle  was  wi]?  Joon  Baptist,  bo]?e  bifore  his  bir))e 
and  aftir ;  for,  as  men  taken  of  j^e  gospel,  Zacarie  trowide  not 

'  and,  E.  ^    So  E ;  ordeyne\>,  A. 


"  The  meaning  appears  to  be : — 
it  is  a  wile  of  Satan  to  promote  the 
celibacy  of  the  clergy,  because 
thereby  he  kindles  the  fire  of  un- 
lawful passion  ('  melius  nubere 
quam    uri ')    in    Christian    pastors. 


poyntel,  E. 


who  then  either  continue  to  burn 
with  it  (and  so  fall  into  sin),  or 
have  to  leave  their  proper  pastoral 
work  in  order  to  take  such  mea- 
sures as  may  keep  tliis  fire  under 
control. 


SERMONS, 


^^5 


to  j)is  aungel,  and  j?erfore  bi  |)e  wille  of  God  he  was  doumbe 
til  Jns  tyme,  and  here  he  recoveride  his  speche,  and  tolde  what 
|)e  child  shulde  hatted  For  boj^e  his  eldris  helden  in  ]?er  mynde 
how  Gabriel  wolde  }>at  he  hi3te  Joon.  And  her/ore  woundrtde 
folk  a  I  ahouie.  And  anoon  his  moup  was  opened^  and  his  tunge 
ivas  unbotmdim,  and  he  spak  and  blesside  God  for  pe  ping  pat 
b  if  el  pus.  And  drede  was  on  alle  her  nei'ifioris.  And  pes  wordis 
iveren  publishid  upo?t  alle  hiy  coostis  of  Judee.  And  alle  pat 
herden  of  pis  ping  piittiden  in  peir  herte  and  seiden,  Who,  trowist 
J?ou,  shal  pis  child  be  P  for  pe  hond  of  oitre  Lord  was  wip  him, 
Sacarie  was  a  famous  man,  wij)  Elizabeth  his  wyf,  and  many 
myraclis  weren  bifallen  aboute  ])e  birj>e  of  ]jis  Joon ;  and  ])us 
\t  contre  preiside  him  muche,  for  many  causis  jjat  weren  in 
him.  It  was  a  miracle  ])at  ]?e  aungel  telde  him  in  so  hoH  a 
place ;  it  was  miracle  ]jat  Sacary  was  dombe,  for  he  wolde  not 
trowe  j)is  aungel ;  it  was  miracle  jjat  so  oold  folk  brou3ten 
for]?  j?is  child  in  her  olde  dales ;  it  was  miracle  }>at  his  eeldris 
on  j>is  manere  namyde  j^e  child ;  and  al  \q  lyf  j^at  Joon  lyvede 
was  ful  of  miraclis  bifore  and  after. 

And  pus  his  fadir  prof eciede,  bi  filling  of  pe  Holi  Goost ; 
Blessid  be  pe  Lord  God  of  Israel,  for  he  hap  visited  and  viaad 
pe  biyng  ayn  of  his  peple.  And  so  Joones  fadir  and  his  modir 
and  he  himsilf  weren  maad  prophetis.  And  here  mai  trewe 
preestis  touche  how  ])is  world  is  blyndid  bi  foli,  when  it  sue]? 
men  as  patrouns  |>at  weren  foolis  and  ful  of  synne,  and  leven 
Crist  and  Baptist  |)at  weren  bigyneris  of  oure  ordir.  And  herof 
pleynede  Crist  in  \q  gospel,  \2X  j>ei  singen  neijjer  wij?  him  ne 
wipen^  wij?  Baptist,  but  wij)  oj^er  foolis  whos  liif  is  biside 
bileve. 


bote,  E. 


wepen,  E. 


Against  the 
patrons  of 
new  orders^ 


-^oMc%^ 


366 


wrCLIF'S 


The  calling  of 
St.  Peter, 


Christ's  charge 
to  him. 


I^E  Gospel  on  Petris  and  Poulis  Evyn. 

[SERMON     CVIL] 

Dixit  Jesus  Sjmioni'^  Petro. — John  xxi.  [15.] 

pis  gospel  telli]?  how  Petre  and  o\\x  preestis  shulden  love 
God,  and  travailen  in  his  chirche.  And,  for  Jjis  love  stondij) 
in  J)e  grace  of  God,  jjerfore  Crist  clepip  Petre,  Syviount,  Joones 
soone.  For  whoso  prechi]?  to  ]>q  peple  and  techi]?  hem  Goddis 
lawe,  he  is  ]>at  ilke  in  whom  is  Goddis  grace ;  and  juste  eldris 
may  disserve  grace  to  ])er  children,  as  it  is  teld  bifore  of  eldris 
of  Joon  Baptist.  Crist  in  his  laste  speche  wi]>  Petre  apostle 
axide  him  |>ries  where"  he  lovede  him;  and  his  bileve  is  aweie, 
])at  trowe]?  not^  ]?at  Crist  seide  jjus  for  to  prynte  his  love  in 
Petre,  and  his  successouris. 

And  ]?us  Christ  axide  first,  Syjnoutit,  Joones  sojte,  lovest  pou  me 
more  pan  pese  ?  And  Petre  seide  to  Crist:  '^he,  Lord,  pou  wost  pat 
V love  pee.  Petre'*  was  here  curteys  and  temprid  fro  presump- 
cioun,  for  he  seide  not  J?at  he  lovede  Crist  betere  ]?an  any  o]?er 
apostle,  but  he  seide,  Crist  wiste  wele  ]?at  he  lovede  him.  And 
here  Petre  confesside  ]?at  Crist  knewe  al  ]>ing.  Put  Christ  seide 
to  Petre,  in  shewing  of  ]?is  love,  pat  he  shulde  fede  his  lambren, 
bi  ]?e  lawe  of  Crist ;  as  who  sei]?,  if  |>ou  love  me,  ]?ou  most  do 
))is  dede.  p^  secounde  tyme  axide  Christ  where  SyfJiount  Joofies 
sone  lovede  him.  A7id  Petre  seide  to  Crist,  '^he.  Lord,  pou  ivost 
pat  I  love  pee.  Aiid  Christ  seide  to  Petre,  to  conferme  ]?is  word, 
pat  he  shulde  fede  his  lambren,  in  lore  of  jjer  soule.  For  as 
mannis  soule  is  betre  ]>an  is  J)e  bodi  of  him,  so  feeding  of  his 
soule  is  betere  |)an  is  feding  of  his  bodi.  And  si])  lambren  of 
Crist  ben  00  bodi  \s\\  Crist,  more  love  my^te  no  man  shewe 
|)an  J)us  for  to  fede  his  lambren.  But  ^it  Christ  axide pe  pridde 
tyme,  where  Symount  Petre  lovede  him.  And  Petre  hadde  sorewe 
pat  Christ  axide  pis  pus  ofte,  and  seide  ayn  to  Crist,  Lord,  pou 


'  So  E ;  Sytnony,  A. 
\>at  trowe\>  tiot  are  om.  in  A. 


whe)per,  E.  ^  So  E  ;  the  words 

*  So  E;  Petre  is  italicized  in  A. 


SERMONS. 


Z^l 


Peter  was 
charged  to 
feed,  not  to 
kill,  Christ's 
sheep. 


woost  alle  phigis,  pou  wosl  pat  I  love  pee.  And  Crist  bad  him 
shave  }ns  i?t  dede,  and  fede  his  sheep,  )>at  is  more  |)an  j>es  o]>er, 
as  sheep  passen  lambren. 

No  man  j^at  is  in  bileve  dredij)  of  J)is  gospel,  J>at  ne  Crisi 
chargide  j^es  wordis  ech  bi  resoun ;  and  so  he  tau3te  apostHs  to 
feede  his  sheep  in  pasturis  of  holi  writt,  and  not  in  roten 
pasturis,  as  ben  fablis  and  lesingis  and  lawes  of  men.  pe 
pasture  everemore  giene  wi|?  treu]?is  \2X  nevere  more  failen,  is 
})e  lawe  of  hoH  writt,  )>at  lastijj  in  J>e  to|>er  world.  But,  for  a 
good  heerde  shulde  kepe  his  sheepe  fro  wolves,  and  defende 
hem  fro  scabbis  and  fro  rendinge,  Jjerfore  Crist  bad  Petre  J)ries 
)jat  he  shulde  kepe  his  sheepe.  Crist  tau5te  not  to  his  heerde 
to  reise  up  a  croyserie  and  kille  his  sheep,  wij)  his  lambren, 
and  spoilen  hem  of  \€\x  goodis;  but  ]?is  is  lore  of  Anticrist, 
J?at  jje  fend  haj?  now  broujt  in;  and  bi  ]?is  it  is  knowen  jjat 
J)es  ben  not  Petris  vikeris. 

And  Crist  techi]?  Petre,  and  in  him  alle  his  vikeris,  how  it 
fallij?  to  him  to  do  a3en  his  firste  will.  Sopli,  sopli,  I  seie  to 
pee^  whanne  pou  were  ynge  pou  girdist  pee,  and  wentist  whidir 
pat  pou  woldist;  but  now,  ivhanne  pou  wexist  oolde,  aiioper  shal 
girde  pee,  and  shal  lede  pee  pe  weie  which  pou  wolt  not,  of  ])i  silf. 
And  )jis  word  seide  Crist  for  to  telle  to  ]je  Chirche  bi  what  dej> 
Petre  shulde  clarifie  God.  For  Crist  sei]?  bifore,  in  ]>e  gospel 
of  Joon,  ))at  |>e  moste  propirte  ]?at  followi})  a  good  herde  is,  jjat 
he  putte  his  lyf  for  his  sheep,  for  |)us  dide  Crist,  and  wolde 
})at  Petre  ]7us  suede  him.  And  |>e  moste  contrarie  condicioun, 
|>at  sue])  Anticrist,  is  to  putte  his  sheepis  lyves  for  his  cursid 
lordship. 


On  Octave  of  Mydsomer. 

[SERMON     CVII  I.] 

Dixit  Zacarias. — Luk  i.  [i8.] 

pis  gospel  tellif)  }^e  middil  of  a  storie  of  Seint  Joon  Baptist.  |  l^l^^^f^^^ 
pe  vigile  of  Baptist  telli]?  how  Gabriel  bihijte  him,  and  \\?> 


368 


WVCLIF'S 


storie  tellij?  how  Zacarie  mistrowide.  And  so  Luk  tellij),  how 
Zacharie  seide  to  pe  aungel,  Wherof  shal  V  wite  pis,  \2X  Y  shal 
gete  a  child ;  for  I  am  an  oold  77ian,  and  my  wif  is  passid  in 
eelde  ?  Here  J)is  Zacharie  trowide  not  to  ]je  aungel ;  but  Marie 
trowide  to  jjis  aungel  jjat  he  seide  her  so]?,  but  she  wolde  be 
certefied  more  of  Jjc  manere.  And  }?us  sum  men  reden  as  two 
wordis  J)is  axing,  On  what  manere  shal  J)is  be,  for  I  knowe  not 
man.  But  j?is  Zacarie  mistrowide,  and  maad  ])erto  his  evy- 
dence ;  and  so  bo]>e  })es  weren  troublid,  but  Zacarie  more,  for 
j>e  troubling  of  hym  refte  him  bileve.  But  Gabriel  telde  him, 
wherfore  he  shulde  trowe.  For  I  am  Gabriel,  pat  stonde  bifore 
God,  and  I  am  sent  of  him  to  telle  pee  pes  good  tipingis  ;  and 
si]?  it  is  }?us,  I  mote  nedis  seie  so]?,  for  I  mai  not  see  but  treu}?e 
in  ]?e  book  of  liif,  and  an  aungel  ]?at  is  confermed  mai  not  lye 
to  a  man.  And  lo,pou  shall  be  domb,  and  pou  shall  not  mowe^ 
speke  unto  pe  dai pat  pes  pingis  be  done  ;  and  ]7is  penance  shalt 
J?ou  have,  for  pou  trowedist  not  to  my  wordis,  which  shal  be  fild 
in  pes  ty??ie.  And  here  mai  we  se,  bi  logik  of  }?is  aungel,  how 
al  ]>ing  mote  nede  be ;  for  no])ing  mai  ever  be  but  ]?at  ])at  ^ 
God  ha])  ordeyned  to  be  in  his  tyme ;  for  ellis  hadde  Gabriel 
seid  fals,  ]?at  he  my^te  not  speke  til  Jjanne. 

Atid  pe  peple  abood  Zacarie,  and  wondride  pat  he  tariede  in 
pe  temple.  And  whanne  he  cam  out,  he  myi^te  not  speke  to  pe 
peple  ;  and pei  wisten  pat  he  hadde  seen  sum  visioun  in  pe  teviple. 
And  he  was  bekenyiige  to  hem,  and  divelte  dombe  for  ]?e  tyme. 
And  whanne  pe  dales  of  his  office  weren  fulfillid,  he  wente  hoom 
to  his  hous,  and  ])anne  was  Joon  geten.  Aiid  after  pes  dales 
conseyved  Elizabeth  his  wiif ;  and  she  hid  hir  for  shame  fyve 
monepis  aftir.  And  she  seide  to  hirsilf ;  For  pus  hap  oure  Lord 
do  to  me,  in  pe  dales  pat  he  caste  to  take  awey  my  reprofe  among 
men.  And  ])us  cam  Elizbeth  hoom,  whanne  she  feelide  })at  Joon 
was  quike ;  and  so  he  my^te  witnesse  |?e  comyng  of  Crist 
in  J)e  wombe  of  Marie,  whanne  she  cam  to  Elizabeth.  For 
Joon  made  ])anne  joie   in  manere  of  dansing  in  presence  of 

'  So  E ;  om.  A. 


■■»  '  mowe '  is  the  lost  infinitive  of 
the  verb  '  may  ;'  it  is  the  English 
form  corresponding  to  the  German 


'  mogen.'     It  occurs  in  this  place  in 
both  Wycliffite  versions. 


WYCLIF. 


SERMONS. 


3^9 


Crist,  as  j>e  gospel  seij).  And  so  trowe  not  to  hem  )?at  seien, 
))at  it  is  six  moneJ>is  bifore  j^at  ]>q  soule  ^  be  couplid  wi|)  j^e  bodi, 
and  bifore  it  ha]?  plantid  soule^  and  sij)  soule  of  beeste'^;  but  as 
we  bileven  |;e  wordis  of  ))e  gospel,  ]?at  Baptist  was  glad  in 
comyng  of  Crist,  so  we  supposen  J)at  he  was  on  lyve  a  litil 
bifore  ]jat  Jesus  was  conseyved,  but  we  musen  not  how  muche, 
si]j  it  is  Goddis  privyte. 

Of  )>is  gospel  mai  we  take,  how  it  is  grete  synne  to  mys- 
trowe  to  holi  writt,  si])  God  punishide  Zacarie  for  he  trowide 
not  to  his  aungel ;  and  more  ben  wordis  of  God  })an  wordis 
of  ])is  aungel.  And  J)us  defaute  in  bileve  is  bifore  alle  o])er 
synnes,  and  si])  God  seiJ)  al  treu])e,  no  treu|)e  shulde  be  denyed; 
but  summe  may  men  doute,  and  sum  trowen  wi])  drede,  for 
God  sei])  J)is  treu])e,  or  ellis  God  sei])  it  not.  O  how  myche 
ben  ])ei  to  blame  ])at  seien  })at  Goddis  lawe  is  fals,  for  mys- 
undirstonding  of  a  fool  or  an  heeretik  !  Certis,  bi  \>q  same 
skile  J)ei  my5ten  seie  })at  God  is  fals,  si])  God  signifie])  to  hem 
fals  undirstonding,  in  peyne  of  ])er  former  synne,  bi  which  \q\ 
ben  blindid,  and  })us  God  were  \e  falseste  ])ing  ])at  evere  was 
in  ])is  world.  For  })ei  seien  ])at  falshede  is  no  defaute  in  a  J)ing, 
whi  seien  ])ei  not  })at  God  is  fals  for  perfeccioun  of  God, 
si])  God  meve})  fals  men,  for  })er  former  falshede,  to  undirstonde 

*  plauntis  of  soule,  E. 


*  That  is,  the  rational  or  human 
soul. 

^  The  writer  appears  to  repudiate, 
with  Aquinas,  the  doctrine  which 
held  that  before  the  rational  soul, — 
anima  intellectiva, — in  virtue  of  which 
man  is  man,  was  joined  to  the  em- 
bryo, it  had  been  animated  suc- 
cessively by  a  vegetative  and  a  sen- 
sitive soul,  so  as  to  be  conformed 
to  plants  during  the  first,  to  animals 
during  the  second  period  of  gesta- 
tion. In  the  treatise  De  Spirituali 
Creatione  among  the  Quaest.  Dispu- 
tatae,  Aquinas  writes  (art.  4) '  Quidam 
vero  dixerunt  quod  a  principio  inest 
anima  vegetabilis,  et  ilia  eadem  cum 
fuerit  magis  perfecta  fit  anima  sen- 
sitiva,  et  tandem  fit  anima  intellec- 
tiva.' But  the  Christian  philosopher, 
holding  out  for  the  oneness  and  in- 

SERMONS.  B  b 


corruptibility  of  the  human  soul, 
will  not  admit  this ;  he  looks  upon 
the  embryonic  changes  as  indicating 
successive  stages  of  the  one  soul, 
but  no  more.  '  Sic  cum  in  embrione 
primo  sit  anima  vegetativa  tantum, 
cum  perventum  fuerit  ad  majorem 
perfectionem  tollitur  forma  imper- 
fecta, et  succedit  forma  perfectior, 
quae  est  anima  vegetativa  et  sensi- 
tiva  simul,  et  ultimo  cedente,  suc- 
cedit ultima  forma  completissima, 
quae  est  anima  rationalis.'  To  these 
three  elementary  stages  St.  Augus- 
tine, in  the  De  Quantitate  Atiiniae, 
adds  four  more,  that  of  moral  effort, 
in  which  the  soul  is  seeking  virtue, 
that  of  moral  perfection  and  rest, 
that  of  spiritual  effort  or  tendency 
towards  God,  and  that  of  the  soul's 
union  with  and  rest  in  God. 


Reflections  on 
the  sin  of 
unbelief. 


370 


WFCLIF'S 


Christian 
courage. 


2  Kings  vi.  i6. 


falsly  ?  and  jjanne  Jjei  seien  jjat  God  is  fals.  And  |)us  God 
shulde  meve  men  falseli,  whanne  evere  J?ey  synnen\  and  Jjus 
he  were  a  fals  God  in  punishing  of  sinful  men.  For,  sij>  fals- 
hede  in  God  is  good,  3eve  we  him  ynowj  ]jerof ;  for  God  mai 
not  have  a  name,  but  3if  he  passe  al  oj^er  ]>ing.  Blessid  be 
treu])e,  jjat  made  us  passe  alle  sich  fals  fantasies,  and  wite  ]>2X 
alle  creaturis  ben  trewe  in  |?at  J?at  J)ei  ben  of  God. 


On  translation  of  Seint  Martin". 

[SE  RMON     CIX.] 

Nolite  timer e pusilus^  gr ex. — [Luke  xii.  32.] 

In  |)is  short  gospel  Crist  confortid  his  servantis,  and  biddi]? 
hem  not  drede;  for  treu|)e  is  strengere  |>an  alle  J^er  enemyes. 
Men  shulden  not  drede  but  for  synne  and  lesing  of  vertues, 
for  peyne  is  just  and  of  Goddis  wille ;  whi  shulden  men  drede 
or  sorewe  jjerfor?  And  ]jus  sinful  men  shulden  have  drede 
and  hope  togidere,  of  diverse  j^ingis ;  as  |?ei  shulden  have 
sorowe  and  joie  togidere  of  dyverse  })ingis.  And  |)us  synne 
concludij?  men  moost  of  al  )?ing  ]?at  mai  be  ;  for  it  bringi]?  man^ 
to  fyve  markis  ^  more  noyousli  })an  o]jer  skills.  Crist  sei]?  here 
to  hise  apostlis,  ]?at  pei  shulden  not  drede,  al  3if  ]?ei  ben  a  It  til 
flok.  For  to  rekene  ]?e  firste  treu|?e,  and  alle  J)e  aungels  j^at 
ben  wi|)  him,  J?e  part  of  a  just  man  is  betere  J)an  fals  part 
of  a  jjousaund;  and  ]7us  biddij?  ]?e  prophete  his  child,  |)at  he 
shulde  not  drede  him,  for  many  moo  ben  wi)?  hem  jian  wi]) 
j)e  contrarie  part.  Stonde  a  man  in  vertu  and  treu))e,  and  al 
J>is   world  overcome))  not  him.      For  if  ])ei  over  comen  him 

^  pusillis,  E ;  a  clerical  error  for  pusillus. 


^  So  E  ;  be  syntie\>,  A 
•''  ora  E. 


^  The  feast  of  the  translation  of 
St.  Martin's  relics  (July  5)  is  not  in 
the  Roman  missal,  the  office  for  the 
day  being  of  the  octave  of  SS.  Peter 
and  Faul.  The  gospel  which  the 
Sarum  use  appropriated  to  tliis  fes- 
tival is  found  in  the  Roman  missal 


among  the  gospels  for  the  Common 
of  a  Confessor  not  a  Bishop. 

^  hringi\>  man  to  fyve  markis.  This 
seems  to  be  a  proverbial  expression, 
used  of  a  person  who  was  brought 
to  poverty,  or  into  any  desperate 
strait. 


SERMONS. 


M 


wi}>  I'is,  j)ei  overcomcn  God  and  his  aungels ;  and  |)anne  j>ei 
shulden  make  hym  ^  not  God,  but  betere  ]?ing  shulde  make  |ns. 

But  here  men  scien  comunli,  )>at  ])er  j^en  ]>yq  manere  of 
dredis  :  kindeli  drede,  and  drede  of  sones,  and  |)erwi|?  drede 
of  servantis.  Kindeli  drede  was  in  Crist,  whanne  he  dredde 
to  suffre  dee}).  But  jiis  drede  cam  ^it  of  synne,  for  ellis  no 
man  shulde  have  suffrid  peyne.  And  |)us  peyne  is  unkindeh, 
for  to  loke  to  bigynnyng  j^erof.  pe  secounde  drede  ha))  many 
degrees,  after  J>at  men  ben  betere  wi]?  God.  Sum  is  bigynnyng 
drede,  whanne  men  dreden  to  wraj)|>e  God;  and  |ns  is  bigyn- 
nyng to  fle  synne,  and  rote  of  alle  mannis  wisdom,  i^it,  whanne 
man  dredij?  more  for  to  synne  a3ens  his  God,  and  his  tempting 
is  overcomen  ]?at  shulde  moove  him  to  synne,  jjanne  hajj  he 
chast  drede;  but  wel  is  him  J>at  ha|?  ])is  drede.  pe  ]>ridde 
degree  is  best  of  alle,  )>at  men  clepen  holi  drede;  and  j)is 
dwelli})  here  in  erjje,  and  evermore  wi])  man  in  blis.  And  ])is 
drede  ha]?  no  peyne,  but  unpower  for  to  synne.  And  J)us  aungels 
have  J)is  drede  more  jjan  ony  ojjer  jjing.  But  ])e  Godhede 
mai  not  drede,  for  it  bi  kynde  mai  not  synne.  Bojje  ))es  dredis 
bringen  not  in  synne.  But  ])e  jjridde  servant  dredde.  Whanne 
a  ^  man  synne]?  a^ens  God,  and  mote  nede  be  ponished  of  him, 
|)is  is  oon  ^  unkindeli  drede,  as  it  is  unkindeli  to  synne ;  and 
))is  drede  forfendi]?  Crist  in  J?es  wordis  |)at  he  seij?  here.  And 
))us  men  seien  comunli,  |)at  man  shulde  not  drede  to  fi3te  ^if 
his  cause  and  manere  be  good,  for  no3t  but  synne  maki|>  man 
coward.  For  5if  man  fi3te  wijjout  cause,  to  be  holden  an 
herti  man,  he  beri|)  wij?  him  )>e  synne  of  pride,  jjat  makij?  him 
coward  a3ens  God.  And  ))us  ))ingis  jjat  loven  pees  ben  moost 
hardi,  as  J)ingis  in  hevene. 

And  Crist  telli]?  here  a  cause  to  make  his  disciplis  hardi, 
))at  |)ei  shulden  not  drede  |)us  :  For  it  likide  io  per  Fadir  to  yve 
hem  pe  rewnie.  Here  mai  we  see  many  treujjis  in  j^es  wordis 
|)at  Crist  seij).  First,  how  j^e  Godhede  of  God  is  Fadir  of  alle 
|)at  he  3eve|)  blisse.  pe  secounde  treu])e  in  Cristis  wordis  is 
nede  to  3yve  j)is  blisse.  For,  as  j^ingis  |)at  ben  passid  nedli 
moten  have  be  passid,  so  al  ])at  God  ordeyne]?  nedeli  moten 


Three  kinds 
of  fear. 


Motives  of 
hopefulness. 


'  So  E  ;  not  viahe  him,  A.  ^  om.  E. 

B  b   2 


afi,  E. 


zn 


WVC  LIF'S 


The  possession 
of  riches  tends 
to  make  men 
cowardly. 


have  be  ordeyned.  And  ]>e  ])ridde  treujje  of  j?es  wordis  is, 
J)at  Crist  shewide  to  ]?es  disciplis  ]?at  |)ei  shulde  come  to  blisse, 
for  he  telli]?  \er  Fadir  likede  so.  Here  may  we  gadere  opun 
resoun  ))at  Cristis  children  shulden  not  drede ;  for  ^if  God 
5eve  a  betere  f^ing,  he  3eve]?  al  ]?at  sue]?  J)erof ;  as  God  mai  not 
5eve  a  bodi,  but  ^if  he  5eve  quantite  and  figure.  And  so,  si|) 
pees  sue]?  of  J>is  blisse,  God  mote  jeve  pees  whanne  he  5eve]> 
blisse.  Also,  si}?  God  is  almy^tti,  alwitti,  and  al  wilful,  no  ]?ing 
]?at  is  a3ens  God  mai  overcome  him  }?at  is  wi]?  God ;  for  si}? 
God  se}?  )>is  fijting  \  or  him  faili]?  power  or  wille,  ^if  his  ser- 
vaunt  be  overcomen  in  fi3ting  for  Goddis  cause.  And  })us 
trewe  men  ben  confortid  to  putte  awei  }?is  ]?ridde  drede  ;  for 
be  ]?ei  never  so  fewe  or  feble,  }?ei  bileven  }?at  })ei  mai  not  be 
disconfitid.  And  }?us  ]?e  cause  }jat  Crist  here  tellij?  maki}?  his 
kny5ttis  to  be  hardi. 

And  ]?us  Crist  confortid  his  apostlis,  for  to  sue  him  in  povert : 
He  biddip  hem  silk  pat  pei  have  and  yve  almes  prudentli.  For 
certis,  among  alle  cowardisis,  cowardise  of  richesse  is  ]?e  moste. 
For  many  men  }?at  have  richessis  dare  nei]?er  seie  a  so}?,  ne 
defende  a  so}?  seid,  for  drede  of  leesing  of  }?is  richesse.  And 
so  men  loven  richesse  more  ))an  \€\  loven  treu]?e  of  ]?er  God. 
And  in  }?is  cowardise  ben  freris  and  o}?er  ordris  ]?at  ben  dowid. 
And  unne]?e  ony  riche  man  wanti}?  clene  }?is  cowardise.  And 
})is  is  more  })an  cowardise  of  bodi,  }?at  come}?  to  man  for  drede 
of  bodi ;  for  a  man  shulde  kindeli  love  more  his  bodi  ]?an  his 
goodis,  si}?  goodis  of  kynde  ben  mouche  betere  }>an  ben  goodis 
of  fortune.  But  Crist  telli}?  ofte  to  his  martirs,  }?at  )?ei  mai  not 
be  his  disciplis  but  5if  }?ei  loven  more  him  }?at  is  treu]?e  }?an 
loven  ]?er  owne  liif.  And  wi]?  ]?is  fei]?  was  Baptist  armed,  and  o}?er 
apostlis,  wi}?  Cristis  martiris ;  for  }?ei  wisten  wel  ]?ei  my5ten  not 
faile  in  victorie,  to  die  }?us.  And  ]?us,  for  richesse  of  ]?is  world 
maki}?  moost  cowardise,  Crist  bad  his  kny5ttis  be  pore,  and 
sille  her  possessiouns,  and  of  }?at  priis  jeve  almes,  or  ellis  of 
meeblis  ]?at  ]?ei  hadden.  But  wite  wel,  it  is  noon  almes  to 
make  ypocritis  more  cowardis,  or  to  5eve  }?es  newe  ordris 
]?ingis  }?at  \€\  ben  chargid  bi,  for  }?is  is  not  work  of  almes-, 
but  work  of  unmercy  to  men. 

*   God  is>  fi'^ting,  E.  ■''  mercy,  E. 


SERMONS. 


313 


And  jjus  Crist  meevej)  to  be  pore  bi  resoun  of  surete.  3fake 
y  to  '^ou  sachelis  pat  wolen  not  waxe  ooldy  but  trcsour  pat,/ailtp 
7iot  in  hevene,  tvhidir  pe  pef  comep  not,  ne  pe  mowifpe  distriep  ; 
for,  cert  is,  where  is  pi  tresour,  per  is  pi  herte,  and  j)i  wille. 
Tresour  is  clepid  comunli,  prescious  |>ing  J^at  man  tellij?  muche 
bi  and  hidij?  sumwhere.  And  so  men  J)at  shal  be  saved  maken 
|>er  tresour  in  God ;  for  J>is  tresour  is  of  ojjer  kynde  ))an  ben 
|)es  riche  men,  and  it  is  prescious  good,  for  it  is  good  of  grace. 
And  si))  Crist  is  al  jiing  J)at  seintis  have  nede  of,  j)is  ti-esour 
is  more  nedeful  ])an  al  J>is  erjjeli  tresour;  for  jjeves  mai  not 
stele  J)is,  as  jewels  or  moneie,  and  moujtis  mai  not  feble  ])is, 
as  \e\  mai  clo])is  or  jewelis.  And  so,  si]?  j)is  tresour  is  more 
prescious  and  more  sikir,  what  man  shulde  not  traveile  moost 
for  to  have  ))is  tresour?  ^if  ])0u  traveile  treuli  to  have  \q  blis 
of  hevene,  Jjou  hidist  ]>is  tresour  where  it  mai  not  faile ;  for 
God  shal  be  ]ji  cloj^ing  J^at  mai  not  wexe  old,  for  he  is  charite ; 
and  he  shal  be  ])i  peny  ])at  mai  never  be  rusty ;  and  jjeves  mai 
not  come  to  hevene,  ne  take  of  hevenes  blis.  pis  is  eende  of 
wisdoms,  to  traveile  for  sich  a  tresour.  And  drede  we  not 
pat  ne  man  mai  bi  good  liif  wynne  him  God,  ])at  is  al  maner 
of  tresour,  to  make  him  blessid  in  hevene.  For  ))is  is  kyndeli 
eende  to  which  man  is  ordeyned ;  for  man  is  ordeyned  ^  to 
blisse,  and  to  laste  ever  more,  and  have  wijjout  defaute  al  jjat 
hem  nedi]?. 


Pe  Gospel  on  Octave  dai  of  Petre  and  Paul. 

[SERMON    ex.] 

Jussit  Jesus  discipulos  assendere  in  navidam^. — Matt.  xiv.  [22.] 

pis  gospel  tellij)  a  storie  that  ech  man  shulde  wite,  but 
speciali  apostlis  and  vikeris  of  hem.  Crist  bad  his  disciplis  stie 
into  a  bote,  and  go  bifore  him  on  pe  water  til  pat  he  lefte  pe  peple. 
And  Crist  leftepe  puple  a?id  stiede  in  to  pe  hit,  for  to  preie  aloojie 


Treasure  in 
heaven. 


^  So  E;  A  om.  the  words /or — ordeyned. 
ascendere  and  naviculam. 


^  errors  of  the  scribe  for 


Peter  walking 
on  the  water. 


374 


WrCLIF'S 


Mystical  Inter- 
pretation of 
the  Gospel. 


for  staat  of  his  Chirche.  And  so,  whamie pe  evenyng  cam,  he  was 
per  aloo7ie;  for  his  disciplis  were  in  j^e  water,  and  ]?e  peple  hadde 
left  him.  A7id  pe  boot,  amydde  pe  ivater,  was  shaggid^  wip 
wawis,for  pe  wynd  was  conirarie  to  hem.  And  pe  fourpe  vigile  of 
pe  ny-i^i,  J>at  was  n}'5  J)e  dai,  Crist  cam  to  his  disciplis  walkinge 
on  pe  ivater.  And  pe  disciplis,  seeyng  him  walki?tg  upon  pe  ivater, 
weren  troublid  among  hemsilfe,  and  seiden  it  was  a  fantum  ^. 
And  for  drede  pei  crieden.  And  anoon  fesus  spak  to  hem  a?td  seide 
to  hem  J)us :  Have  5^  trust,  I  am;  drede  y  not.  And  Petre 
answeride  and  seide.  Lord,  yfpou  be  Crist,  comande  me  to  come 
to  pee  upo7i  pe  waters.  A  fid  Crist  seide  to  Petre,  Come.  And 
Petre  wejite  doun  out  of  pe  boot,  and  walkide^  on  pe  waters,  for  to 
come  to  fesus.  But  Petre,  seeyng  pe  wynd  grete,  dredde  him  of  \e 
peril ;  a7id  whanne  he  bigan  to  drenche,  he  criede  and  seide.  Lord, 
mak  me  saaf  And  anoon  Crist  held  forp  his  hond,  and  toke 
Petre,  and  seide  to  him,  pou  of  litil  bileve,  whi  doutidist  pou 
here?  And  whanne  Crist  steie  in  to  pe  boot,  pe  wynd  cesside, 
and  pei  pat  weren  in  pe  boot  camen  anci  loutiden  Crist,  and  seiden, 
Verrili  pou  art  Goddis  Sone. 

pis  storie  men  tellen  to  \)Q  secounde  witt  of  Goddis  word, 
and  seien,  ]?at  ]?is  boot  traveilinge  in  j^e  water  is  ))is  Chirche 
here  ]?at  wandrijj  to  J^e  daie  of  dome,  pis  wending  of  Crist  to 
]?e  hill  is  his  stying  to  hevene.  pere  he  preie]?  aloone  for  man- 
kinde  here ;  for  al3if  o]>er  seintis  preien  |>ere  in  spirit,  ne]?eles  in 
bodi  and  soule  preie]?  Crist  3it  aloone.  And  whanne  ]je  sunne 
wente  doun,  was  Crist  aloone  preiyng  |)us.  But  he  visitide  his 
Chirche  ]?e  four|je  vigile  of  ny3t,  whanne  he  shewi|>  perilis  to  his 
Chirche  |)at  fallen  to  men  here  in  er]?e.  But  Crist  goi|)  upon 
]>Q  water,  for  worldli  soris  ^  noien  him  not.  And  J)is  boot  is 
troublid  here,  but  it  drenchi]?  not  uttirli.  Petre  is  \>q  moste  man 
J>at  sue])  Crist  in  his  Chirche;  and  he  wolde  sue  Crist  here, 
but  he  faili]>  in  bileve.  But  he  mai  not  be  drenchid,  for  Crist 
wole  have  his  Chirche  saved.  Crist  come]?  into  |)is  boot 
whanne  he  haj?  alle  )?es  men  to  hevene,  and  jjanne  ceessen  alle 
)?e  tempestis  J)at  men  suffren  here  in  erj^e,  and  j^ei  knowen 
verrili  how  jjat  Crist  is  Goddis  Sone. 

*  scboggyd,  E.  ^  E  om.  the  words  and—fatitum.  ^  So  E; 

*  sores,  E. 


ivalhing,  A 


SER3I0NS. 


Z1S 


And  jns  witt  appliej>  J^e  pope,  wij?  his  cardinalis,  to  hem,  and 
seien  ])at  |)ei  ben  Cristis  Chirche  ))at  flooteri|>  ^  )?us  in  j)is  boot ; 
and  ))ei  mai  nevere  be  drenchid,  al  if  |?ei  fallen  in  many  perilis. 
But  ]jes  men  shulden  wite,  first,  |)at  Jjei  sue  ^  Crist  in  lyvyng  in 
poverte  and  mekenesse,  and  in  lore  of  jje  gospel;  for  ellis  |?ei 
gon  not  bifore  Crist  on  |>is  water,  to  make  redi  to  him,  but 
ben  raper  drenchid  in  ])is  water,  and  seken  after  worldli  goodis ; 
or  ellis  ben  jje  peple  ]>at  Crist  leevej),  ]jat  disturblen  him  and 
hise.  Bileve  techijj  trewe  men  jjat  ]jis  Chirche  goij?  not  bi  kyn, 
but  bi  manere  of  suynge  of  Crist  in  perfit  weie  of  vertues. 
But  as  preestis  weren  worse  til  j?ei  weren  at  lowest  degree,  as 
preestis  of  ]?e  olde  lawe  ]?at  weren  fordone  in  Cristis  tyme,  so 
mai  J)is  court  drede  for  liif  contrarie  unto  Crist,  leste  ]>ei  ben 
J)e  worste  men  J>at  lyven  here  in  Jjis  Chirche.  For  ypocrisie 
maki]?  hem  not  good,  but  more  stynke  bifore  treu])e.  And  jjei 
ben  not  porest  here,  making  hem  tresour  in  hevene,  for  al  ]?er 
breej>  and  J>er  liif  is  about  worldli  goodis ;  and  ]?us  ]jei  lasten 
not  in  ]7is  boot,  but  ben  drenchid  in  ])is  see.  And  ])us  \e\  axen 
not  Crist  helpe,  as  dide  Petre,  whanne  he  sank ;  but  al  ])er  hope 
and  desire  is  in  jjingis  )jat  ben  bine]>e.  For  ^if  ]?ei  lyven  con- 
trarie to  Crist,  in  |>is  world  ben  no  falser  men.  And  nei|>er 
kynrede  ne  place  maken  men  Cristis  vikeris,  but  suyng  in  weie 
of  vertues,  what  manere  men  J)at  ever  ])ei  ben.  Errour  in  sich 
wittis  maki]?  many  dremeris  to  faile,  for  jjei  taken  noon  hede  to 
good  Hif,  but  to  fals  opynyouns  here. 


How  applied 
by  the  Roman 
Court. 


This  applica- 
tion refuted. 


pE  Gospel  on  >e  feeste  of  Sevene  Bri]>eren. 


[SERMON     CXI.] 


Loqimite  Jesii  ad  turbas. — Matt.  xii.  [46.] 

pis  gospel  tellij)  a  storie  \2X  touchi]?  mouche  witt,  and  telli}) 
how  Cristis  children  ben  knyttid  here  in  charite.  Matheu  tellij?, 
how  Jesus  spake  to  pe  peple  ;  and  lo,  his  jjiodir  and  his  hreperen 


Christ's  true 
kindred. 


1  flote\>,  E. 


^  suedeti,  E. 


37^ 


.WrCLIF'S 


This  f;ospel 
misinterpreted 
by  many. 


The  writer's 
interpretation. 


slooden  wipouten  io  speke  wip  hiin.  And  sum  men  seien  J>at 
Cristis  bre|?eren  weren  men  of  his  kynrede.  But  his  apostlis 
weren  wi]>  him,  and  herden  him  speke  to  ])e  peple,  as  jjei  weren 
in  streitere  place,  and  more  hard  to  come  to.  And  oon  seide  io 
Crist,  Lo,  pt  modir  aitd  pi  brepereft  stonden  wtpouten,  sekyng  pee, 
A  fid  Crist  answeride  to  him  pat  tolde  him  pis,  and  axide  who  was 
his  modir  and  his  breperen.  And  Crist  stretching  his  hands  to 
his  disciplis  seide  pes  ivordis  of  witt :  Lo,  here  my  modir  and  my 
breperen.  For  who  ever  doip  pe  with  of  my  Fadir  pat  is  in  hevene, 
he  is  my  broper,  and  my  sistir,  and  my  modir  also. 

pes  wordis  of  Crist  ben  scorned  of  gramariens  and 
devynes.  Gramariens  and  filosophris  seien,  ]?at  Crist  knewe 
not  his  gendris ;  and  bastard  dyvynes  ^  seien  algatis  |)at  ]?es 
wordis  of  Crist  ben  false,  and  so  no  wordis  of  Crist  bynden, 
but  to  j)e  witt  Jjat  gloseris  tellen.  But  here  we  seien  to  )?es 
trowauntis  jjat  J>ei  blaiberen  ^  )>us  for  defaute  of  witt.  Leeve  we 
)>es  heretikes  as  foolis,  and  seie  we  sum  witt  ]>2X  God  haj)  50vun 
us.  So])li,  Crist  techi]?  here  jje  preciousite  of  his  preching,  J)at 
man  shulde  not,  for  fleishli  kyn,  lette  to  teche  Goddis  word. 
And  J)es  wordis  seij?  Crist  to  him  ]>at  was  aboute  to  lette  his 
lore.  And  ]?us  telli)?  Crist  a  sutilte  J)at  is  of  goostli  brejieren  in 
God ;  for,  be  it  man  or  be  it  woman  |)at  serve]?  God  treuli,  he  is 
on  ]?es  ]?ree  maneres  knitt  to  Crist  in  sibberide  ^  For  dis- 
tinccioun  of  kynde  is  litil  to  telle  bi  in  J?is  matere.  First,  he  is 
Cristis  bro])er  bi  ^  his  soule,  |)at  is  his  spirit ;  si}>,  he  is  Cristis 
sistir  bi  his  fleish,  )>at  is  worse ;  and  after,  he  is  Cristis  modir  bi 
()is  hool  kynde,  made  of  hem  two.  For  J)is  modir  haj>  conseyved 
Crist,  and  norisij)  Crist  wi})inne  hir ;  and  ])is  is  betere  cosyn- 
nage  and  more  sutil  ]jan  is  of  kynde.  And  make  ])es  gramariens 
sorewe  J^at  \q\  knowe  not  jjes  gendris,  and  so  ])es  founed  philo- 
sophris  shulden  sorowe  of  |;er  error,  j^at  J?ei  witen  not  of  oo 
man  |)at  he  is  ech  of  ]>es  |)ree  |>ingis ;  he  is  soule,  he  is  bodi,  he 
is  man,  maad  of  J^es  two.  But  to  J)e  hool  man  is  merit  or 
demerit  proprid.  Leeve  we  here  |?ese  trowaunt  doutis,  and 
enforce  us  to  lerne  Cristis  wordis,  to  preche  hem  to  j^e  peple, 
and  leeve  })ing  J)at  is  lesse  worj),  and  |>anne  fleishli  cosynnage 
shulde  not  lette  us  to  do  ]?is. 
^  So  E ;  dyvenes,  A.  ^  blaberen,  E.  ^  sybred,  E.  *  to,  E. 


SERMONS, 


Z11 


pE  Gospel  of  Maudelen  Dai  is  red  on  Fridai  in  t  Quarter 
Tense  t^  in  Septembre  among  Ferials 

On  Seynt  James  Dai. 

[SERMON    CXIL] 

Accessit  ad  Jesum. — Matt.  xx.  [20.] 

pis  gospel  telli]>  how  fleishli  kyn  procurij)  ofte  harm  to  ]?e 
soule,  and  how  a  womman,  Cristis  aunte,  Mary,  James  iJiodir 
a?id  Joones,  J>at  was  Sebedeus  wiif,  cam  to  Crist  for  j)is  enchesoun. 
But  she  cam  wi])  J>es  children  and  loutide  Crist,  and  axide 
hi?n  ;  for  it  is  seid  comunli  ))at  wymmens  preier  is  wel  herd. 
Crist  axide  hir"^  what  she  wolde,  and  she  seide  to  him,  Comaunde 
pat  pes  two  apostlis,  ]>at  ben  ?7iy  sones,  and  J)i  cosyns,  sitte  next 
pee  in  pi  rewme,  pe  toon  on  pi  ri^t  side  and  pe  toper  on  pi  left 
side.  Crist  knewe  wel  Jjis  wommans  witt,  and  how  it  cam  of 
j?es  apostlis ;  for  jjei  herden  bifore  of  Crist,  how  J)at  he  shulde 
have  a  rewme,  and  jjei  trowiden  ]>at  Crist  shulde  be  an  er]?eli 
kyng  in  ]?is  world ;  and  J>ere  ])ei  wolden  be  ny^  Crist,  for 
cosynnage  and  traveile  here.  Crist  spekinge  to  }>es  apostlis, 
and  levynge  to  speke  wi]>  ]jeir  modir,  seide  how  J>is  cam  of 
hem,  and  how  men  shulden  have  ordre  in  speeche,  everemore 
speking  jjere  where  ]?ei  hopen  moost  to  profite.  Crist  seide  to 
pes  apostlis,  ^e  witen  not  what  5^  shulden  gladli  axe ;  for  J?ing 
\zX  profiti|>  to  mannis  soule  shulde  he  axe,  and  nou3t  ellis. 

And,  as  Joon  sei]?  wi]?  ]?e  gildene^  moujj^,  Jjis  word  of  Crist 
li3ti]^  |)e  world,  and  dampne)?  here  many  men,  \2X  coveiten 
hyenesse  of  worldli  stat.  For  many  men  bi  weyward  witt  co- 
veiten here  to  be  popis  cardinalis  or  bishopis,  or  o|?er  worldH 


^  So  E ;  here,  A. 

a  The  MS.  has  two  words  here 
inexplicably  contracted ;  but  they 
evidently  stand  for  '  Quatuor  Tem- 
pera,' or,  as  it  is  called  in  Ireland, 
Quarter  Tense ;  for  the  gospel  read 
on  St.  Mary  Magdalen's  day  (July  22) 


^  golden,  E. 

is  the  same  as  that  for  Ember  Friday 
in  September,  on  which  there  is  a 
sermon  (No.  112  of  the  Ferial  Ser- 
mons) in  the  present  collection. 

^  St.  Chrysostom,  Homil.  in  Matth. 
XXXV. 


The  petition  of 
tlie  niotlier  of 
James  and 
John. 


Commentary 
on  the  gospel. 


S1^ 


WFCLIF'S 


dignite,  not  for  hele  of  ))eir  soule,  but  to  have  here  worldli 
wynnyng.  And  all  |?is  dampne]?  Crist  here.  For  ]?is  wille  is 
venymous;  and  it  falli]?  ofte  tyme  ]?at  sich  havyng  of  worldli 
worship  dampne})  men  ever  more  in  helle ;  and  so  it  doi])  harm 
to  ]?e  soule.  But  3if  men  wolen  be  hye  in  hevene,  Jjei  moten 
lerne  anojjer  lessoun,  to  profite  to  ]>e.  Chirche  ])at  J?ei  mai,  and 
to  leeve  worldli  worship.  And  |)is  profit  nedi]?  ofte  to  sufFre 
anoies  here  in  jjis  world,  J>at  ]?ese  prelatis  fleen  algatis,  for  ))ei 
wolden  here  have  ]>e  contrarie.  perfore  Crist  axide  of  J)es 
disciplis  a  questioun  pertinent  herto,  Mai  y  two  drynke, 
seip  Crist,  pe  chalis  pat  I  shal  drynke  ?  And  wijjouten  drede 
Crist  undirstood  bi  ])is  chalis  his  passioun.  And  })es  two 
disciplis  my^ten  not  for  shame  denye  to  dr}aike  of  )>is  coppe. 
And  ))us  pei  graimtiden  to  Crist,  pat  pei  my^ten  drynke  of  his 
coppe ;  for  it  were  al  a3ens  skile  to  coveite  sich  a  prelacie,  but 
3if  men  have  ]?e  ende  J?erof  wherefore  Jjei  shulden  coveite  it. 
And  s\]>  Crist  is  al  wiys,  and  drinki]?  himsilf  of  J>is  coppe, 
what  man  shulde  bi  resoun  forsake  to  drynke  herof  ?  For  bi 
])is  is  ])e  soule  fed,  and  disposid  to  come  to  blis,  but  bodili 
fode  is  for  Jje  bodi,  and  maki]?  wormes  mete  redi.  And  ]jus 
Crist  grauntip  pes  apostlis  pis  betere  drynke,  and  leevejj  J)e 
to])er.  But  5it  Crist,  of  his  curtasie^,  interpreti]?  ])er  wordis 
to  goode;  and  doi]?  worship  to  his  Fadir  bi  trewe  wordis,  as 
he  shulde.  Supposing  \2X  J^ei  undirstonden  sitting  in  ]>e  rewme 
of  hevene,  Crist  seip,  pat  it  fallip  not  to  him  to  graunte  hem 
sich  sittinge,  but  sich  sitting  shal  po  men  have  to  whom  it  is 
ordeynid  of  his  Fadir.  Here  grutchen  Anticristis  disciplis  and 
seien,  Jjat  Crist  sei]>  here  fals;  for  %\\  Crist  is  \^  same  God 
]?at  is  ))e  Fadir  and  J)e  Goost,  whatever  ))e  Fadir  5eveJ>  or 
graunti]>,  Jjc  same  ]?ing  graunti|>  Crist.  But  here  |)ese  foolis 
moten  undirstonde,  ]?at  Crist  speke))  ofte  bi  his  manhede ;  for 
))e  peple  knewe  his  manhede,  and  undirstood  it  speciali.  And 
jjus,  whanne  Crist  biheeti]?  to  hem  \2X  him  falli]>  not  to  5eve 
hem  J>is,  he  undirstood  J>es  wordis  J^us,  Jjat  he  shulde  not,  bi 
his  manhede  principali,  5eve  ]?em  ])is;  but  he  shulde  5eve  to 
hem  )?is,  to  which  it  is  ordeyned  of  his  Fadir.  And  so,  5if  ])ei 
disserven  jiis,  he  sikerid  hem  }>at  \€\  shulden  have  Jiis. 

'  curte&ie,  E. 


SERMONS. 


379 


And  j)us  spekijj  Ambrose «,  saynge  comun  speche  of  Crist, 
j)at  J)e  sacrid  oost  is  not  breed,  for  it  is  not  principali  breed. 
And  such  error  blindij)  many,  in  j)e  sacrament  of  j^e  auter,  to 
seie  j^at  it  is  an  accident  wij^outen  suget,  and  no  breed,  as 
Ambrose  sei]>.  But  j^es  foolis  my3ten  bettere  seie  J)at  ne|?er 
James  ne  Joon  ben  blessid  for  Crist  sei])  )>at  him  falli]?  not 
to  graunte  hem  ony  degree  of  blisse.  But  )?is  is  ful  of  eresie, 
as  falshede  in  which  it  is  groundid.  And  defaute  of  undir- 
stonding  j^at  shulde  be  of  Goddis  lawe  and  of  J?is  doctour, 
Ambrose,  blyndij?  here  J)es  eretikis. 


On  Assumpcioun  Evyn. 

[SERMON    CXIIL] 

Loqtiefite  Jesu  ad  iurhas. — Luc.  xi.  [27.] 

pis  gospel  teni|)  how  it  is  more  to  heere  Goddis  word  and 
kepe  it,  j?an  to  here  Crist  bodih  and  norishe  him,  as  Mary  dide. 
And  so  a  Htil  storie  is  told  in  presing  ^  of  our  Ladi ;  and  after  is 
knitt  a  blessid  sentence  bi  distinccioun  of  Crist,  pe  storie  telli]> 
how  Crist  spak  to  pe  peple  of  soule  hel]?e.  Afid  a  womman  of 
pe  puple  hadde  devocioun  in  his  wordis,  and  hurst  out  in  an 
hy-^e  vois,  and  seide  on  J>is  manere  to  Crist :  Blessid  he  pe 
womhe  pat  bare  pee,  and  pe  tetis  pat  pou  didist  soke.  And  Crist 
answeride  to  pis  womman,  and  tolde  a  more  presciouse  treu])e, 
and  seide  pat,  hut  hi  more  resoun,  blessid  he  pei pat  heeren  Goddis 
word  and  kepen  it. 

But  we  shal  undirstonde  here,  j?at  on  two  maner  is  Goddis 
word  herd, — first  bodili,  bi  eeren  of  bodi,  and  eke  goostli,  bi 
eeren  of  soule.    pe  firste  heeringe  is  litil  wor]?,  but  in  as  mouche 

^  preysyng,  E. 


^  St,  Ambrose,  De  Sacramentis, 
lib.  iv.  cap.  5  :  '  Antequam  con- 
secretur,  panis  est ;  ubi  autem 
verba  Christi  accesserint,  corpus  est 
Christi.'  Wyclif  in  his  Con/essio 
{Fasciculi  Zizaniorutn,p.  127)  quotes 


a  passage  from  the  same  work,  differ- 
ing slightly  in  words,  but  precisely 
to  the  same  effect.  The  '  for  it  is 
not  principali  breed '  is  Wyclif 's 
gloss  upon  the  words  of  St.  Am- 
brose. 


Those  truly 
blessed  who 
hear  the  word 
of  God  and 
keep  it. 


Two  ways  of 
doing  so. 


38o 


WrCLIF'S 


Ps.  Ixxxv.  8. 


The  privileges 
of  Mary. 


Against  letters 
of  fraternity. 


as  it  helpijj  to  jje  to))er;  sij?  Scarioth  herde  Crist  ))Us,  and 
beestis  and  briddis  my5ten  also.  On  J)e  to]>er  manere  heeri|> 
no  man  but  3if  he  knowe  sentence  of  Goddis  word.  And  on  jjis 
wise  seij?  Jje  Psalme  ^  jjat  I  shal  heere  what  ]>e  Lord  God  speki]> 
in  me ;  but  wel  Y  woot  ])at  he  shal  speke  pees  and  love  to  his 
peple.  And  J)us,  on  two  maneris,  may  a  man  kepe  Goddis 
word;  first,  to  printe  ])e  witt  in  his  soule,  and  after  to  reule 
his  liif  ]>erbi.  And  |?us  shulde  ech  Cristen  man  heere  and  kepe 
J>e  word  of  God.  But  over  J>is  kepyng  shulde  preestis  kepe 
wiseli  J)e  word  of  God,  and  shape  hem  for  to  preche  it,  for 
profit  of  |)e  Chirche ;  and  ))is  is  ]?e  beste  work  ])at  ony  man  mai 
travaile  here.  And  ]?us  mai  we  lijtli  see  how  |)is  sentence  of 
Crist  is  soj) ;  si}>  no  man  mai  come  to  blis  but  jif  he  heere  and 
kepe  Goddis  word ;  but  many  men  and  wymmen  ben  saved  J)at 
baren  not  Crist  bodili ;  ne  oure  Ladi  my5te  not  come  to  blisse, 
but  3if  she  hadde  herd  and  kepte  jjis  word. 

And  herfore  God  ordeynede  hir  to  be  maistiresse  to  his 
apostlis,  for  she  fel  not  fro  Jje  fei]?,  ne  fro  ]je  wordis  of  hir  sone, 
but  kepte  hem  wel  in  her  herte,  and  caste  wel  what  J>ei  menten. 
And  herfor  it  is  no  wondur  5if  she  be  more  blessid  )>an  o]>er. 
pe  Chirche  singi]?  of  oure  Ladi  ]?at  she  ha])  distroied  alle 
heresies  %  for  she  is  special  maistiresse  to  distroie  J?es  heretikes. 
And  sij>  she  is  aftir  \q  dai  of  dome,  whanne  ])ei  shal  no  more 
noie  |)e  Chirche,  it  is  so|)  to  |)is  entent  j^at  she  ha])  distroied  alle 
heresies. 

And  si})  she  was  occasioun  of  ])e  wordis  })at  Crist  seide 
here,  se  we  how  ])es  wordis  helpen  men  to  distroie  ])es  vices. 
A  comune  heresie  J)at  now  rengne])  in  })e  Chirche  is  lettris 
of  fraternite,  generali  among  ])es  ordris^'.  And  herfor  se  we 
how  ]?es  lettris  stonden  wi])  Goddis  lawe.  Heryng  and  kepyng 
of  Goddis  word  is  betere  ])an  J)e  bir])e  of  Crist;  ])is  bir])e  is 
betere  ])an  })es  lettris ;  and  so  heeryng  and  kepyng  of  Goddis 
word  is  algatis  betere  ])an  ])es  lettris.  But  Cristis  word  in  no 
place  techi})  J)at  men   shulden   have   })es  lettris ;    and  })erfore 

1  So  E ;  Salm,  A. 


a  « Gaude  Maria  virgo,  cunctas 
haereses  sola  interemisti.'  Tract 
used    in   Masses  of  the   B.  V.  M. 


from  Christmas  to  Easter. 
^  See  p.  67,  note  B. 


SERMONS. 


381 


shulden  men  reste  in  jjes  wordis,  and  traveile  not  aboute  )?es 
lettris.  For  as  ful  and  suiBciaiint  is  Cristis  lawe  as  his  man- 
hede ;  but  his  manhede  is  ynow5  wijjouten  o)>er  to  come  to 
hevene ;  and  so  his  lawe  is  ynow^,  to  here  his  word  and  to  kepe 
it,  for  to  come  to  blisse  of  hevene,  wijjouten  ony  sich  lettris. 
And  )>is  }?ing  mai  be  confermed.  For  5if  a  man  have  a  jjousand 
of  sich  lettris,  but  ^if  he  kepe  Goddis  word,  he  shal  be  dampned 
in  helle.  And  ^if  he  kepe  wel  Goddis  word,  wijjouten  havyng 
of  sich  lettris,  he  shal  be  savyd  in  hevene,  as  oure  bileve  techi)? 
us.  And  so  havyng  of  siche  lettris  is  o|)er  impertinent  to  blis, 
or  ellis  it  is  harmful,  letting  men  to  come  to  blisse.  Also  bi 
siche  lettris  is  not  sibbirede  ^  getun  of  Crist ;  but  3if  Jjei 
brou5ten  a  man  to  hevene,  ]>ei  maden  |)at  man  Cristis  bro])ir 
and  sister  and  his  modir,  as  |)e  gospel  berij?  witnesse.  For 
Crist  seij),  Whoever  doi]?  Jje  wille  of  his  Fadir  ]jat  is  in  hevene, 
he  is  Cristis  brojjer,  and  his  sister,  and  his  modir.  Also,  jif 
sich  lettris  diden  J?is  good  to  men,  brennying  or  dstroiyng  of 
hem  shulden  pryve  ]?es  men  fro  sich  good,  ou]?er  in  bodi  or  in 
soule.  And  so,  ^if  we  hadden  J)es  lettris  brent,  or  eeten  wi]? 
myis ",  or  distroied,  we  shulden  wante  )>e  profite  of  |)es  lettris ; 
jhe,  jif  we  weren  Jeanne  betere  wi])  God.  Bi  siche  resouns 
jjinken  many  men  ]?at  ]7es  lettris  mai  do  good  for  to  covere 
mostard^  pottis,  but  not  ])us  for  to  wynne  men  blis;  si}>  sich 
men  j>at  graunten  ]jes  lettris  wyten  not  whejjer  |jei  ben  fendis 
lymes,  or  J)at  her  preier  shal  ou3t  availe  to  hem  silf  or  to  o|>er. 
And  |>es  resouns  letten  many  to  chaffre  wi]?  ]>eir  preier.  For 
preier  of  men  mai  profite  to  ojjcr,  but  not  ]>us  bi  chaffaring ;  sij? 
parting  of  meritis  of  men  hangi]?  oonli  in  Goddis  wille,  and  not 
in  shewing  of  sich  lettris,  nei]>er  to  God  ne  to  man ;  si]>  we 
oblishen  not  us  bi  hem  to  j)ing  j)at  is  not  in  oure  power.  And 
|?us  |)is  help  is  newe  feyned  to  injurie  of  God,  si]?  it  is  propre 
to  God  to  graunten  sich  help  to  whom  he  wole.  And  ]?es  lettris 
helpen  not  ]>erto,  but  ra]?er  letten,  for  blasfemye.  And  sich 
bro})irheed  of  blasfemes  shulden  be  fled,  for  fendis  sibreden. 


sibreden,  E. 


^  tnys,  E. 


^  mustard,  E. 


3«2 


WrCLIF'S 


Jesus  in  the 
house  of 
Martha  and 
Mary. 


J^E  Gospel  on  Assumpcioun  Dai. 

[SERMON     CXI  v.] 

Intravit  Jesus  in  quoddam  castellum. — Luc.  x.  [38.] 

pis  gospel  telli]?  a  storie  of  Crist,  how  he  tau3te  to  his 
Chirche  which  is  jje  beste  stat  here.  Luk  seij),  \2X  Jesus  entride 
in  to  a  casiel,  and  a  womman  pat  hi'i^te  Martha  toke  Crist  in  Mr 
hous,  to  fede  him  and  his  aposdis.  And  manye  men  ]?inken 
here  |?at  ]?is  castil  was  a  wallid  toun,  for  ofte  tymes  \e  gospel 
clepi]?  sich  wallid  touns,  castels.  Men  supposen  over  ]^is,  |)at 
|>is  Martha  and  hir  sistir,  and  Lazarus  J?er  bro]?ir,  hadden  al  ]?ing 
in  comune ;  and  ]>is  Martha  was  beste  hous-wyf,  and  best 
coude  ordeyne  for  hir  hous ;  and  Jjus  she  hadde  speche  to  men 
bifore  hir  brojjir  and  hir  sistir.  \>is  sister  was  Marie  Mawdeleyn, 
|)at  was  a  ful  devout  womman  fro  |)e  tyme  Jjat  she  was  purgid  of 
Crist,  and  sett  in  ]?e  weie  of  hevene.  And  so  |>is  Marie  Mawde- 
leyn,  fro  |?e  tyme  J^at  Crist  cam  to  hir  hous,  sat  mekeli  at  Jesus 
/eet,  to  heere  Goddis  wordis  of  him.  For  Jesus  hadde  ])is  maner, 
to  speke  ever  Goddis  wordis  whanne  he  wiste  ]>at  \q\  shulden 
profite  to  ony  peple  |>at  herden  hem.  And  so  Crist  prechide 
ofte,  now  at  mete,  and  now  at  soper,  and  what  time  Jjat  it  was 
covenable  ony  peple  to  heere  him.  And  so  Martha  fedde  Crist 
bodili,  but  he  fedde  hir  sistir  goostli.  And  so  he  ^af  Jjc  beter 
for  |>e  worse,  as  it  fallij?  God  to  ^eve.  Martha  e7iforside  her 
bisili  to  serve  Crist  aftd  his  disciplis,  but  Marie  sat  stille  at  Cristis 
feet  to  heere  ]je  wordis  ]>at  he  spake.  And  Martha  stood  bijore 
Crist,  and  playnede  to  him  of  hir  sistir  ^  Sir,  she  seiJ,  takist 
pou  noon  heede  pat  j?is  Marie,  })at  is  my  sistir,  hap  lejt  me  alootie 
to  serve  to  pee,  and  to  my  gueestis.?  I  preie  |?ee,  seie  to  hir,  pat 
she  rise  and  helpe  me.  And  ]ms  Crist,  )>at  was  taken  for  juge  to 
acuse  IMawdeleyn,  was  maad  avocat  of  ])is  Marie;  for  he  holdi)> 
ever  for  trewe  part  ^.     And  ])us  many  trewe  men,  bo|)e  aprentis 


*  So  in  E ;  A  includes  ofhir  $htir  in  the  italics. 


\>e  trewe  part,  E. 


SEKMOiYS. 


3«3 


and  avocatis^  wolen  no^  procure  in  a  cause  bifore  |>at  j>ei 
heeren  it,  and  ))is  cause  to  }>er  witt  haj)  \e  part  of  ri3t\visnes ; 
for  ellis  j>ei  maden  hemsilf  avocatis  a^ens  treu|)e  wi]>  )?e  fend. 
And  a^ens  }>is  foule  synne  shulden  men  speke  upon  resoun. 
For  al  5if  Goddis  lawe  teche  ))at  procuraturis  shulden  have  hire, 
and  jugis  shulden  have  noon  hire  of  men  ]?at  jjci  travailen  fore, 
ne]?eles  ])is  is  mys-turned,  for  ri5t  is  turned  to  coveitise.  Crisl 
spak  a  meene  weye,  and  tau5te  jje  Chirche  in  })es  wymmen,  and 
spak  in  pes  wordis  :  Martha,  Martha,  poii  art  bisie  and  trouhlid 
abouteful  many  pingis  ;  but  certis,  o  ping  is  nede/ut,  and  betere 
|)anne  |)es  many  |>ingis :  Marie  hap  chosen  pe  beste  pari,  pat  shai 
not  be  taken  from  hir. 

It  is  seid  comunli,  |)at  jjes  two  wymmen  ben  two  lyves,  actif 
and  contemplatif ;  j>e  first  is  Martha,  and  ]>q  to]?er  Marie.  And 
actif  Uif  axi]?  in  mesure  bisynesse  aboute  worldli  J?ingis;  and 
al3if  ]?is  liif  be  good,  |>e  toj^er  liif  is  moche  better.  And  so,  for 
men  failen  ofte  in  ]7is  liif  fro  love  of  God,  Crist  doubli}>  ])is  word 
Martha,  for  two  passen  fro  unyte.  Crist  telli]?  how  actif  liif 
mut  nede  be  troublid  for  many  |?ingis;  but  contemplatif  liif 
stondi]?  in  oo  ]>ing,  ]>at  is,  God,  and  haj?  no  bisynes  aboute 
j>ingis  of  ]?is  world.  For  as  a  man  bisie])  him  not  how  his 
shadewe  shal  passe  ])e  water,  so  men  |)at  ben  contemplatif  bisie 

^  not,  E. 


'"'  aprentis  and  avocatis;  that  is, 
barristers  practising  in  the  common 
law  courts,  and  pleaders  belonging 
to  the  church  courts.  By  the  term 
Apprentitius  (from  the  French  ap- 
prendre,  to  leam),  as  applied  to  the 
legal  profession,  was  originally 
meant,  according  to  Ducange,  a 
law-student  merely, — one  who  fre- 
quented the  courts  and  universities 
in  order  to  gain  legal  knowledge. 
But  at  an  early  period  it  became, 
in  England  at  least,  a  more  honour- 
able appellation.  In  Fleta,  the 
author  of  which  wrote  under  Ed- 
ward I,  the  Apprentitius  appears  as 
the  lowest  kind  of  legal  practitioner 
admitted  to  the  king's  courts  ; — '  in 
curia  autem  regia  sunt  servientes, 
narratores,  attornati,  et  apprenticii' 
(lib.  II.  cap.  37).  In  the  reign  of 
Edward  II,  the  term  seems   to  be 


used  much  in  the  same  way  as  '  bar- 
rister '  is  now-a-days ;  thus  the  jurist, 
Andrew  Horn  (on  whom  see  Selden's 
Dissertatio  ad  Fle/atn),  dedicates  his 
treatise  Speciduni  Jtistitiarnm  {Justi- 
tiariorum  ?)  to  the  '  Apprentitii  ad 
barras.'  Spelman  (Glossarium  in 
voce),  says  that  the  Apprentitius, 
after  a  course  of  legal  training  ex- 
tending over  seven  years,  was  per- 
mitted '  cancellos  salutare,'  i.  e.  to 
come  up  to  the  bar,  and  there  to 
plead.  He  thus  corresponded  to 
the  '  outer  barrister '  of  modern 
times  ;  and  so  completely  is  this  the 
case,  that  Fortescue  (quoted  by 
Spelman),  with  Selden,  Plowden, 
Sir  Henry  Finch,  and  Sir  Edward 
Coke  (quoted  in  Cowell's  Interpre- 
ter), speak  of  Apprentitius  as  being 
only  another  name  for  barrister-at- 
law. 


The  two  sisters 
signify  the 
active  and  the 
contemplative 
life. 


384 


WrCLIF'S 


Some  think 
that  three 
modes  of  life 
are  here  ap- 
proved ; 


but  of  these 
the  third, 
the  contem- 
plative life, 
is  the  highest. 


hem  not  aboute  worldli  goodis,  but  J>ei  trusten  and  hopen  in 
God  )>at  alle  ]?es  ]jingis  shal  falle  to  hem.  And  oonli  in  swet- 
nesse  of  God  |>ei  bisien  hem,  and  taken  Jje  to|?er  in  mekenes 
and  in  poverte,  as  Crist  ha]?  taujt  in  word  and  dede. 

But  men  supposen  over  j?is,  J)at  Crist  approve}?  here  ]>ree 
lyves.  pe  first  is  good,  as  children  lyven  whanne  J>ei  ben 
cristened.  pe  secound  Hif  is  J^e  betere ;  and  j>is  is  clepid 
actif  liif,  whanne  men  travailen  for  worldli  goodis  and  kepen 
hem  in  ri^twisnesse.  And  ]?is  is  hard,  but  it  is  possible ;  and 
al3atis  jif  coveitise  be  left ;  for  Crist  techi]>  bi  Matheu  ]jat  men 
shulden  not  be  besie  aboute  her  fode  and  hilyng,  but  bisynesse 
shulde  be  for  hevene,  Jjat  shulde  be  eende  of  mennis  traveile. 
And  exces  of  ]?es  goodis  lettij?  ofte  tymes  ]?is  eende.  pe  jjridde 
liif  is  ]>e  beste,  as  Crist  seij?  ])at  mai  not  lye.  And  jjis  is  sum- 
what  here  in  erjje,  but  fulli  in  ]je  blisse  of  hevene.  And  here 
douten  many  men  whe])ir  of  ]>es  two  lyves  is  betere.  But  men 
])at  biholden  ^  bileve  of  Crist  witen  |?at  ]>\s  )?ridde  liif  is  best ; 
for  Crist  sei}-  ])us  J>at  mai  not  lye,  and  chees  to  lyve  ever  jjis  liif. 
For,  al3if  Crist  dide  erjjeli  workes,  ne]3eles  he  dide  on  sich 
mesure  })at  his  soule  was  ever  fed  in  contemplacioun  of  God. 
And  in  jjis  many  apes  weenen  to  sue  Crist  here  and  j>ei  slippen 
into  ]?e  fendis  weies  for  defaute  of  Cristis  lore. 

pree  resouns  ben  comune  ]>at  ]>is  ])ridde  is  J?e  beste  liif.  Oon, 
for  Crist  j^e  beste  maistir  seij)  J>us,  and  mai  not  lye.  Also,  ]>is 
lif  mote  nedis  laste  in  blis  of  hevene  wi]?outen  ende ;  but  ]?es 
o))er  two  lyves  moten  nedis  be  eendid  here.  And  so  ])is  liif  j^at 
maki]?  men  betere,  and  more  lasti]?  wij?  hem  in  joie,  mote  nede 
be  betere  ]?an  ]>q  to|?er  J^at  algatis  moot  be  taken  from  man ;  and 
]?is  is  ))e  resoun  of  Crist  in  pe  laste  word  of  J)is  gospel.  Also, 
an  eende  ]?at  kinde  ordeyne]>  to  come  to  men,  bi  certeyn 
meenes,  is  al3atis  betere  jjan  ]?es  meenes,  ])at  comen  nevere  but 
for  |)is  eende ;  as,  si|)  mannis  liif  is  eende  of  his  eting  and  oj^er 
dedis,  })is  liif  is  betere  ])an  |)is  eting,  or  ellis  kynde  ordeyned 
amys.  And  so,  si|>  ]>es  two  firste  lyves  ben  meenes  to  |)is  jjridde 
liif,  algatis  ])is  |)ridde  is  j?e  beste,  j^at  God  ordeyned  to  ende  j>es 
two.     And  in  no  persone  ne  ony  stat  ben  J)es  first  "^  lyves  for 


bohien,  E. 


-'  two  first,  E. 


WYCLIF. 


SERMONS. 


385 


to  preise,  but  ^if  ])ei  ben  quykened  bi  jjis  ]?ridde,  J)at  shal  laste 
evere  perfitli. 

And  3if  |>e  pope  haj)  maad  a  lawe  contrarie  to  J)is  sentence, 
or  5if  an  aungel  come  from  hevene  or  from  helle,  reversing  it, 
trowe  not  to  ]?es  aungels,  but  trowe  to  Crist  )>at  sei|)  |>is  sentence. 
And  resouns  a^ens  Crist  ben  not  wor])i  to  be  rehersid ;  as  sum 
men  seien,  J)at  ^  ellis  }>e  pope  lyvede  evere  a  synful  liif,  sij)  he 
chesi]?  |>e  worse  and  |?e  hardere  for  ]?e  betere.  But  here  we 
graunten  to  ))es  men  j^at  ))is  is  soj?  whanne  \ei  have  proved  )?at 
j>e  pope  leeve]?  )?e  |>ridde  liif  for  ^  |?e  secounde.  For  J>e  Chirche 
shulde  beter  be  governed  5if  alle  preestis  lyveden  Jjis  ])ridde  lif ; 
for  |)us  it  was  in  Cristis  tyme,  and  in  tyme  of  his  apostlis. 


V^  Gospel  on  Seint  Bartulimew  Dai. 

[SERMON     CXV.] 

Facta  est  contencio  inter  ^. — Luk.  xxii.  [24.] 

Men  seien  jjat  Seint  Bertolomew  was  nobleste  of  ]>e  apostlis^  : 
and  herfore  in  ])is  daie  is  |?is  gospel  red.  Men  seien  ])at  Cristis 
apostlis  streven  for  a  good  cause ;  for  J?ei  wolden  have  a  captain 
afcir  |>at  Crist  was  deed.  But  I  can  not  excuse  hem  of  a  vein 
wille.  But  however  it  be  of  |?is,  )?is  gospel  seme]?  to  teche  us 
jjat  synne  of  prelatis  now-a-daies  passijj  ])is  presumpcioun. 
For  apostles  streven  jjanne,  not  who  shulde  be  more  to  God, 
ne  more  to  \e  world,  but,  ivho  shulde  be  holde  more  ;  for  ellis 
mi3te  strif  be  among  hem  which  shulde  be  put  bifore,  and 
decisioun  of  ]>is  my3te  oonys  for  ever  ceesse  ])is  discord.     But 


1  So  E ;  and,  A. 

a  In  the  Roman  Missal  this  gospel 
is  assigned  to  the  feast  of  St.  Apol- 
linaris  (July  23)  ;  that  for  St.  Bar- 
tholomew's day  is  taken  from  Luke 
vi.  12-19.  The  writer  of  these  ser- 
mons, like  the  Prayer-book,  follows 
the  Sarum  use. 

^  Referring  to  this  legend,  Cave 

SERMONS.  C  C 


^  or,  E. 

says,  in  his  Antiq.  Apostolicae, — '  By 
some  [St.  Bartholomew]  is  thought 
to  have  been  a  Syrian  of  noble 
extract,  and  to  have  derived  his 
pedigree  from  the  Ptolomies  of 
Egypt,  upon  no  other  ground,  I 
believe,  than  the  mere  analogy  and 
sound  of  the  name.' 


and  no  au- 
thority is  to  be 
listened  to  on 
the  other  side. 


The  strife 
among  the 
apostles. 


I 


386 


wr  CLIP'S 


Temporal 
greatness  with- 
held by  Christ 
from  his  dis- 
ciples. 


Their  supe- 
riority is  in 
meekness. 


now,  among  oure  prelatis,  we  moven  not  who  shulde  be  holde 
more,  but  which  is  more,  uttirH,  boj^e  to  God  and  to  |?e  world. 
And  here  we  synnen  doubli,  deniyng  ]?at  we  kno^vun  not,  and 
reversing  Cristis  sentence  of  morenesse  \2X  he  spake  of.  But 
oure  goode  maistir,  Crist,  determynede  ]?is  discencioun;  and 
seij)  J>at  })er  is  double  gretnes  among  men  here  in  er])e, — 
gretenesse  among  kny^ttis,  and  gretenesse  among  clerkis. 
Cristis  disciplis  shulden  not  coveite  gretnes  of  kny5ttis,  but 
gretenes  of  clerkes  is  morenesse  of  mekenesse  and  morenesse  ^ 
in  service,  wij^outen  ony  booste. 

And  pus  seip  Crista  pat  kyngis  and  gejitilefolk  have  lordship 
of  hejji,  and  po  pat  have  power  on  hem  ben  clepid  goode  doeris. 
But  y  shal  not  pus  lyve,  in  noon  of  )?es  ]>tq  pointis.  For  worldli 
lordshipis  shal  not  be  among  50U ;  ne  power  to  prisoune  shal 
be  in  oon  upon  o]?ir ;  ne  ^our  goode  dedis  shal  not  stonde  in 
5yvynge  of  worldli  goodis;  but  he  pat  is  more  amonge  -^ou  be 
maad  as  'ganger,  and  he  pat  goip  bifore,  be  he  as  a  servere.  pat 
is  to  seie,  ])e  mekere  of  50U  is  more  of  50U,  and  oon  shal  go 
bifore  anoj^ir,  not  for  worldli  worship,  but  to  serve  more  mekeli 
to  o]>ir  of  his  felouship.  And  })is  mai  5e  se,  seijj  Crist,  bi  my 
lyf  among  30U  :  Whepir  holde  y  more  him  pat  settip,  or  him  pat 
servep  ?  Certein  5e  holde  more  him  pat  sittip  at  pe  mete.  But 
Crist  is  among  hem  as  a  good  servere.  On  ]>e  day  bifore,  Crist 
washide  her  feet  and  wipte  hem  \\\\  a  cloi{^,  as  |)e  gospel  of 
Joon  telii]) ;  and  J>anne  he  putte  in  dede  soilyng  of  |?is  ques- 
tioun.  And  sip  apostlis  ben  po  ilke  pat  wereji  wip  Crist  whattne 
he  was  temptid,  and  Crist  ordeynede  siche  meenes  to  a5enstonde 
pryde,  preestis  shulden  ])enke  on  Jjis  lore,  and  traveile  aboute 
mekenes.  And  ])is  lyf  is  not  wi])Oute  mede,  bi  witnesse  of 
Crist.  And  herfore  he  ordeynede  hem  Jje  kingdom  of  hevene, 
as  his  Fadir  ordeynede  hym,  for  mekenesse  |?at  Crist  hadde. 
And  ]?anne  shal  ])ei  ete  and  drynke  upon  Cristis  bord  in  his 
rewme ;  and  |>is  is  mede  wi])Outen  eende,  more  J?an  ony  worldly 
mede.  For  Jeanne  shal  ]>ei  sitte  upon  troones  and  juge  kynredis 
of  Israel ;  whiche  kynredis  ben  seintis  in  hevene,  |)at  shal  knowe 
bi  aposdis  ]?at  more  mekenesse  in  ])is  world  axi]?  more  hyenesse 
in  hevene. 

'  So  E ;  inoresse,  A. 


SEJiMONS. 


387 


And  wel  were  him  ]jat  coude  ]?is  lore,  jif  |)e  gospel  tau^te 
him  no  more.  And  reversing  of  J)is  lore  now,  bi  dowyng  of 
j>is  Chirche,  ha|)  maad  al  newe  prcestis  and  oJ)er  ordir  fro 
Cristis  Chirche  ^.  For  more  worldli  lordship  axi|?  |)e  more 
service  to  preestis,  and  letti])  hem  to  be  more  servauntis,  and 
more  hie  in  Cristis  rewme.  And  |?us,  whanne  Crist  biddi]?  ]jat 
his  preestis  shulden  not  lyve  ))us,  J)at  preest  is  now  holden 
betere  Jjat  lyvej?  more  lordli.  And  ])is  pride  of  jje  fend  distriej? 
myche  of  J^e  Chirche ;  and  Y  can  see  no  more  mede  ]?an  to 
distrie  ])is^  preestis  pride.  Take  awei  |>es  brondis  ^if  })0U  wole 
quenche  Jje  fier. 


tlioufjh  the 
lives  of  the 
clcrg'y  set  aside 
this  truth. 


pE    DECOLLACIOUN   DAI    OF    SEINT   JOHN   BaPTIST    IN    HERVEST, 

}>E    GOSPEL. 

[SERMON     CXVI.] 


Misit  Her  odes. — Mark  vi.  [17.] 

pis  gospel  telli])  j^e  cause  and  forme  whi  j)at  Baptist  was  do 
to  de|>,  and  sei]?,  how  ]>at  Heroude  pe  kjmg  sente  and  held  Joon 
Baptist,  and  bonde  hym  in  prysoiin  for  a  wonwian,  Herodias,  which 
was  wiif  and  weddid  to  Philip,  Heroudis  bropir.  For  Joon  seide 
to  pis  Heroude,  It  is  not  leeveful  to  pee  for  to  have  pi  broperis 
wiif,  while  3e  bojje  ben  on  lyve.  And  herfore  |?is  Herodias 
aspiede  Jooii  many  gatis,  how  he  myi,te  be  do  to  dep.  But  aljif  she 
wolde  do  })is,  yt  she  my^te  not  co?ne  perto.  pe  cause  of  envie 
to  Joon  was  his  tellinge  of  treu]?e,  |?at  shulde  be  profitable  to 
Heroude  and  eke  to  ]?is  wickide  womman.  And  )?is  cause 
shulde  glorifie  martirdome  of  a  man;  for  it  touchi]?  Goddis 
ri3t,  and  profit  of  |)e  yvel  part,  and  charite  of  J)e  martir  ])at 
telli}?  jjis  for  Goddis  sake.  And  beter  cause  ha]?  no  man  in 
suffringe  of  martirdome.     ]>is  Heroude  dredde  Joofi  Baptist,  for 


I 


\>es,  E. 


^  That  is,  —  church-endowment, 
practised  in  defiance  of  the  teaching 
of  Christ,  has  separated  the  modem 


clergy,  as  well  as  the  cloistered 
orders,  from  the  true  Church  of 
Christ. 


The  beheading 
of  John  the 
Baptist. 


C  C   2 


388 


WVCLIF'S 


he  wiste  pat  he  was  a  just  man,  and  perto  an  hooly  man,  and  kepte 
him  more  tenderli.  For  men  have  kyndely  drede  of  God  and 
of  his  lawe.  And  jjerfore  Heroude  herde  Joon,  and  aftir  him 
dide  many  pingis,  and  herde  Jooti  wip  good  wille,  in  Jjingis  |)at 
touchide  conscience.  Atid  luhan  a  covenable  day  fell  to  Heroude 
and  J>is  wickide  womman,  Heroude,  in  pe  dale  pat  he  was  horn 
inne,  made  a  feste  to  tribunes  and  to  princis  of  J)e  temple,  and  to 
pe  gretteste  maistris  pat  dwelten  in  Galile.  And  ]jus  many  men 
|)enken  Jjat  Heroude  was  an  ypocrite ;  for  he  caste  to  slee  jjis 
Seint  Joon,  and  florishide  it  wi]>  falshede.  And  as  men  sup- 
posen,  al  |?is  cast  cam  first  of  J)is  false  womman.  For  as 
wymmen,  where  jjei  ben  goode,  passen  ojjer  creaturis,  so, 
where  ]?ei  ben  turned  to  yvel,  jjei  passen  many  oJ)er  fendis. 

A7id  ivhajtne  pe  dou-^ler  of  ))is  womman  was  entrid  in  to  pe 
halle,  and  pleside  to  Heroude  and  his  gestis  bi  tumbleris  lepyng^,  pis 
kyng  seide  to  pis  wenche  pat  she  shulde  axe  what  she  wolde.  And 
he  swore  to  pis  wenche  pat  whatever  she  axide  him  he  shulde  yve 
it  to  hir,  if  it  were  half  his  rewme.  And  bi  J>es  wordis  it 
seme]?  |>at  })is  fraude  was  cast  bi  |)is  womman  and  Heroude; 
or  ellis  he  were  to  greet  a  fool,  to  5yve  half  his  rewme  for 
lepyng  of  a  strumpet.  And  pis  wenche  wente  forp  and  axide 
at  hir  modir,  what  she  shulde  aske  of  |)is  kyng  Heroude.  A7id 
hir  modir  bad  hir  axe  pe  heed  offoon  Baptist.  A?id  whaniie  pis 
ivenche  cam  in  anoon  wip  haste  to  pe  kyng,  she  axide  afid  seide, 
I  wole  anoon  pat  pou  yve  me  pe  heed  of  foofi  Baptist  in  a  dishe. 
And  pe  kyng  was  sori ;  for  his  grete  oop  and  for  his  gestis  he 
wolde  not  make  pis  wenche  sorowful,  but  sente  for  a  man-sleere, 
and  bad  brynge  to  him  pe  heed  of  foon  Baptist.  And  he  girde 
of  his  heed  in  prisoun,  and  browt^te  his  heed  in  a  dishe  and  "^afit 
to  pis  wenche,  and  she  '^af  it  to  hir  modir.  And  whanne  pis  ping 
was  herd,  pe  disciplis  of  foon  camen  and  token  his  bodi  and  putten 
it  in  a  sepulcre. 


*  The  bpxr]<yoLnkvqs  of  the  original 
is  rendered  in  the  Vulgate  '  quum 
saltasset,'  which  the  first  Wycliffite 
version  naturally  translates, '  whanne 
the  douBter  ....  hadde  lepte,'  and 
the  present  writer  understands  of  a 
tumbler   or   female   acrobat.     Such 


displays  were  common  in  the  middle 
ages.  Chaucer,  in  describing  a  fes- 
tive meeting  (Rotnaunt  of  the  Rose, 
near  the  beginning),  speaks  of  '  sail- 
louris : ' — 

'  There  was  many  a  tynibester. 
And  saillouris  that  I  dar  wel  swere 
Couthe  her  craft  ful  parfitly. 


SERMONS. 


389 


What  man  wolde  not  suppose,  ])at  ne  al  |?is  )>ing  was  done 
bi  fraude  of  jjis  fals  womman,  for  treuj)e  of  Joon  displeside  hir? 
And  doyng  of  Heroude  was  not  wijjouten  blame,  for  he  shulde 
not  swere  jjus  to  a  3ong  strumpet ;  and  3if  \\s  fool  hadde  swore 
]?us,  he  shulde  not  fulfille  ))is  00]) ;  for  folie  hepid  upon  folie 
grevej)  God  more.  She  axide  )?is  heed  in  a  dishe  bi  feyned 
addicioun,  for  so  she  mv^te  more  li3tli  brynge  \>\s  heed  in  to 
|)e  kyng,  and  wite  more  sikirli  bi  j?e  si3te  of  many  men  |>at  it 
was  Baptistis  heed  J)at  she  hadde  in  \>q  dishe.  And  men  ]?at 
sawun  ]?is  done  shulden  not  rebelle  a3ens  ))e  kyng,  for  it  was 
done  in  ))e  prisoun  pryvyly  fer  from  men. 

And  feyned  treu]?e  of  ]?e  kyng  seme]?  to  foolis  to  excuse  |jis 
deed,  and  so  it  semede  no  help  ^  to  venge  )>e  dede  J>at  was 
done.  And  sich  a  cautil  of  ]?e  fend  is  in  many  grete  synnes. 
For  men  feynen  bi  ypocrisie  })at  |>is  Jjing  moste  nede  be  done, 
and  goodnesse  wi])  treu]7e  of  hem  excusi]?  hem  of  ]>q  dede. 
And,  for  wymmen  ben  of  short  witt,  ]?ei  ben  meenes  to  siche 
dedis.  But  folie  and  lustis  of  men  ben  often  more  to  blame 
]?an  wymmen.  As,  ^if  wymmen  knewun  not  Goddis  lawe  in 
dowyng  of  preestis,  and  it  seme])  to  wymmens  witt  bo])e  almes 
and  merci,  and  Jjei  meeven  lordis  herto, — as  {^es  wymmen  diden 
Eroude, — J)is  synne  is  in  ])es  proctours,  but  more  in  jies  lordis. 
And  ])us  fendis  wilis  of  freris  aqueynten  hem  wi))  ladies,  and  J)ei 
ben  meenes  to  lordis  to  have  ])at  |)es  fendis  axen.  And  |)us  is 
fi3ting  broujt  in,  and  Goddis  lawe  reversid.  For  who  may 
denye  ))at  ne  lordis  done  aftir  ladies,  or  ])at  freris  conseilen  wij) 
ladies,  or  myche  synne  is  now  up  bi  workes  of  lordis .?  And 
knytte  alle  })es  togidere,  and  freris  ben  ground  ])erof,  more  sutil 
and  sinful  ])an  |)is  lepynge  strumpet.  But  unknowynge  of 
Goddis  lawe  excusi])  hem  not  here,  for  ])at  shulden  lordis  trowe, 
and  not  |)es  fals  meenes.  For  fendis  and  |)er  giles  shulden  be 
put  bihinde  God,  and  treu|)is  of  Goddis  lawe  shulden  be  taken 
in  worshipe. 

^  So  in  E,  which  has  the  word  boote,  crossed  out,  before  help ;   A  reads 
HO  but  to  vetis^e. 


Application 
of  the  conduct 
of  Herod  and 
Herodias  to 
modern  times. 


390 


WYCLI  F'S 


pE  Gospel  on  Nativyte  and  Consepcioun  daies  of  oure 
LaDI  ;  AND  on   CrISTEMASSE  NY3T  bifore  Te  Deum. 


The  trenealogy 
of  Christ. 


[SERMON     CXVIL] 

Liber  generacionis. — Matt.  i.  [i.] 

pis  gospel  tellijj  pe  gejidrure  hi  which   Crist  cam  of  Jewes. 
For  he  cam  of  his  modir,  and  she  and  Joseph  weren  of  oo 
kynne.      Matheu^  was  tau5t  of  God  to   write   ])us  |>is  booke, 
and  in  J)re  fourtenes  to  eende  ]?us  ])is  gendrure.     He  taki]?  two 
bigy?t7teris,  Davip  and  Abraham ;    for  to  J>es  two  was  speciali 
Jesus  Goddis  Sone  bihi^t.     DaviJ)  was  putt  bifore  for  worshipe 
and  acordaunce,  al3if  Abraham  was  bifore  and  brou3te  for]?  holi 
kynredis.       Abraham  gat  Isaac,   and  Isaac  gat  Jacob ;  Jacob 
gat  Judas  and  his  oper  breperen,     And  |)es  j^re  patriarchis  weren 
]?ree   hoU  men.       Of  |?es  twelve  Jacobis   sones  Judas  was  J)e 
beste;    neij^er  J>e  firste,   ne  ]?e  last,  but  cam  of  his  first  wyf. 
And  of  him  tolde  Jacob  |?at    Crist  shulde   come.    Judas  gat 
Phares  and  Zaram  oj  Thamar,     pis  Phares  and  Zaram  weren 
bo])e  getun  togidere ;  and  jjis  Thamar  was  not  jje  firste  wyf  of 
Judas.     Phares  gat  Esrom,  and  Esrom  gat  Aram  ;  Aram  gat 
A?nynadab,  and  Amynadab  gat  Nasoun  ;  Naasoun  gat  Salomoun, 
and  Salomoun  gat  Booz,  of  a  womman  j^at  was  Raab  '^,  jje  which 
was  an  alien,  and  helpide  mouche  Jewes ;  Booz  gat  Obeth  of 
Ruth,  ]jat  was  an  alien ;   Obep  gat  Gesse,  and  Gesse  gat  Davip 
pe  king.     And  in  J?is  firste  fourtene  ben  aliens  and  synful  folk, 
for  Crist  wolde  save  aliens  and  o]?er  synful  men.      Davi]?  |?e  .. 
laste  of  |>es  fourtene  is  clepid  a  kyng ;  for  God  made  him  kyng ; 
and  bifore  ]?is  Davij?  weren  patriarkes  and  jugis,  and  no  kyngis 
of  Jewis,  as  Goddis  lawe  telli];.     Saul  was  J)e  firste  kyng  of 
Jewis  bifore  Davij),  but  he  was  a  wickide  man,  and  Crist  cam 
not  of  him. 

Davip  gat  Salomon  of  hir  pat  was  Uryus  ^  ivy/;  Salomon  gat 
Roboam,  and  Roboam  gat  Abias  ;  Abias  gat  Asa,  and  Aza  gat  A 


'  So  E;  Mathu,  A. 


^  ]iat  hi-^te  Raab,  E. 


^  Uries,  E. 


SERiMONS. 


391 


Joscphat ;  Josephat  gal  Jofam,  and  Joram  gal  Os/as  ;  Josias  ^ 
gal  Joalhan,  afid  Joathan  gat  Achaz  ;  Achaz  gal  Ezechi'e,  and 
Ezechie  gal  Manassas ;  Manasses  gal  Anion,  and  A??ion  gal 
Jose ;  Jose'" gat  Jeconie,  and  opir  breperen  whamie pei  were-n  laJicn 
to  Babi/oyne,  bi  werre  of  J)e  kyng.  pis  is  j^e  to]>ir  fourtene  j>at 
IMatheii  telli}>,  and  leevep>  here  foure  kyngis  \vi|>outen  liynge. 
For  he  |)at  bigeti]>  a  sone  bigeti]>  his  sones  sone ;  and  so  foure 
kingis  weren  left  '\  so]?H  for  greet  cause. 

And  whanne  |?es  kyngis  weren  ceessid  of  worship  of  ]>er 
kyngdom,  but  not  of  ]?er  gQwdxMVQ,  Jeconie  gal  Salaliel ;  Salaliel 
gat  Sorobabel ;  Sorobabel  gal  Abyut ;  Abyid  gal  Eliachyni ; 
Eliachym  gat  Azor ;  Azor  gat  Sadoc ;  Sadok  gal  Achym  ; 
Achyfn  gal  Elyut ;  Ely ut  gat  Eliazar  ;  Eh'azar  gat  Malhan  ; 
Malhan  gat  Jacob,  and  Jacob  gat  Joseph,  Mai'ies  hoiisebonde  ; 
of  which  Marie  is  Jesus  born,pe  which  is  clepid  Crist.  And  so, 
to  counte  Joseph  Marie  and  Crist,  is  ]?is  J^ridde  fourtene  fillid 
j)at  ]je  gospel  spekij)  of.  And  al5if  we  have  not  |)is  j^ridde 
gendrure  in  holi  writt,  5it  we  trowen  ]jat  it  is  so}?  ^  bi  autorite 
of  IMathew,  as  we  trowun  |?e  firste  gendruris  bojie  bi  autorite 
of  Genesis.  Mathew  come])  dounward  in  rekenynge  of  Cristis 
eldris,  and  Luk  goi|)  upward,  rekenyng  of  more  fadris.  For 
it  sufficide  to  Mathew  to  telle  how  Crist  bicam  man  bi  |?es 
jjree  fourtenes,  biginnynge  at  Abraham.  But  Luk,  figure  of 
preestis  ^,  tellijj  more  diffuseli  how  man  stiej?  up  to  God,  from 
Adam  to  }>e  Trinite.  And  variyng  of  names,  wi]?  leevyng 
of  sum  fadris,  techi])  how  Matheu  and  Luk  varien  not  in 
sentence  c. 


Explanation  of 
the  differences 
in  the  two 
genccilogies. 


1  O&ias,  E. 


Josy,  E. 


^  So  E ;  A  has  s,oi\->. 


*  The  four  kings  left  out  are — 
Ahaziah,  Joash,  Amaziah,  and  Elia- 
kim.  See  the  note  on  die  subject 
in  Dean  Alford's  Greek  Testament. 

'j  Luh,  figure  of  preestis.  The 
figure  of  the  calf  in  the  Apocalypse 
(ch.  iv.)  was  very  early  associated 
with  St.  Luke,  who  was  thought  to 
treat  more  fully  than  the  other  Evan- 
gelists of  the  priestly  office  of  Christ. 
See  Cave's  A?itiq.  Apost.,  p.  169.  In 
the  Legenda  A  urea,  it  is  said,  '  Lucas 
figuratur  in  vitulo,  agens  de  Christi 


sacerdotio ;'  and  it  is  shown  at  great 
length  how  this  evangelist  was  '  recte 
ordinatus,'  in  relation  to  God,  to 
his  neighbour,  to  himself,  and  to  his 
office  of  writing  the  gospel. 

^  Dean  Alford  (in  his  notes  on 
Matt.  i.  and  Luke  iii.)  thinks  that 
no  attempt  to  reconcile  the  two 
genealogies  has  succeeded,  laying 
stress  at  the  same  time  on  the  fact 
that  both  give  the  line  of  Joseph, 
not  that  of  Mary. 


392 


WYCLIF'S 


Romans  xv.  4. 


Christ  con- 
tending ai^ainst 
Satan  and 
jud'<jing  the 
world, 


And  ]?is  text  moten  preestis  knowe,  to  unclirstonde  Goddis 
lawe,  and  to  defende  it  from  false  men  J^at  arguen  a^ens  it. 
For  si]?  it  is  our  bileve,  we  trowun  fulli  jjat  it  is  so]?^;  and  many 
helpis  })er  ben  to  undirstonde  ])is  gendrure.  For  we  may  wite 
how  Crist  cam  of  aliens,  and  how  J)is  comyng  was  figurid  in 
o))ir  dedis  ]jat  Crist  dide ;  as  |)e  gospel  of  Luk  telli}?  how  Crist 
cam  to  Jerusalem,  bo}>e  ]?our3  Samarie  and  ]?e  cuntre  of  Galile ; 
and  si])  Samarie  was  J)anne  in  ])e  hondis  of  gentile  men,  and 
Galile  was  ]?anne  in  \&  hondis  of  Jewis,  ])is  comyng  bitokene}> 
])e  gendrure  of  Crist,  how  he  cam  bo])e  of  Jewis  and  gentil 
folk.  And  ]?is  bitokene]?  over,  how  he  w^olde  save  hem  bo})e. 
Crist  cam  not  evere  of  ])e  firste  sone,  but  ofte  of  ]?e  to])er  sone ; 
to  teche  us  })e  lore  \2X  spiritual  gendrure  is  figurid  by  Cristis 
comyng,  and  God  telli])  more  ]7erof  ])an  of  kyndeli  gendrure. 
And  ])us  ech  word  of  ])e  gospel  were  lore  to  Cristene  men,  to 
travaile  and  to  undirstonde  \q  privytees  of  God.  And  ]?us 
shulden  preestis  3yve  hem  to  contemplacioun,  and  leve  worldli 
occupacioun,  wi])  vanytees  of  })e  world.  For  wordis  of  Poul 
techen  us  ])at  what  kyn  ])ingis  ben  writun  ben  writun  to  oure 
lore,  and  to  confort  of  us.  And  so  bi  suche  confort  we  shal 
growe  in  hope. 


On  Hooli  roode  Day  in  hervest. 

[SERMON    CXVIIL] 

Nunc  judicium  est  mimdi. — John  xii.  [31.] 

pis  gospel  telli]?  how  ]?at  Crist  in  al  his  liif  was  a3ens  ]?e 
fend,  and  speciah  in  his  passioun  ]?at  he  suffride  of  so  greet 
love.  And  J)us  sei]?  Crist  of  greet  witt ;  Now  is  jugeinent  of  pe 
world,  now  pe  prince  of  pis  world  shal  he  cast  out.  —Here  men 
undirstonden  ]?e  world,  ]?o  men  ]?at  lyven  worldli,  and  mesuren 
hem  not  bi  Cristis  lawe,  for  to  go  }?e  weie  to  hevene.  Al  })e 
folk  of  ]?is  soort  is  a  world  ]?at  shal  be  dampned.     Al  ]?e  liif  ]?at 

'  So  E ;  A  has  soi)>. 


SERMONS. 


393 


Crist  lyvede  here  was  a  jugement  of  \\s  world,  for  it  was  an  open 
mater  to  juge  it  at  |?e  dai  of  dome.  For  no  man  may  excuse 
jjis,  sij?  God  and  man  lyvede  })us  to  teche  men  ]>e  weye  to 
hevene  and  fie  ]>e  falsnesse  of  J)e  fend,  and  3it  man  leve)>  Cristis 
lore,  and  goi]j  J>e  weie  ])at  ]?e  fend  techij),  })at  ne  ])ei  leden  ^  a  liif 
here  to  make  hem  dampned  aftirward.  And  so  dampnacioun  is 
taken  now  for  dampnyng  executid.  And  now,  for  cause 
of  ))is  dampnyng,  as  |)is  gospel  speki])  here,  ]?is  world  J)at 
))us  shal  be  dampned  ha|>  a  capteyn,  Jjat  is  \q  fend,  \e 
which  is  clepid  kyng  and  prince;  for  he  is  kyng  of  alle  ])e 
children  of  pryde,  and  he  is  prince  of  |>is  world,  for  he  ledij) 
his  lymes  jjis  weie.  But  Crist  sei]j  here  ))at  ]jis  prince  shal  be 
cast  out  bi  him.  For  Crist  overcam  ]?is  fend,  and  tau^te  anoJ>er 
good  lore,  how  |jat  men  shulden  come  to  hevene,  and  leeve  ]>e 
fendis  weie  ]jat  he  tau3te.  For  al3if  ]je  fend  have  children  |?e 
whiche  he  bigili]?  jjus,  nej^eles  ]>q  ground  is  Goddis,  si})  ]?ei  have 
her"  kynde  of  God.  And  so  J)e  fend,  in  al  his  werkes,  is  a 
tirant  and  a  J)eef. 

But  here  shal  we  undirstonde  jjat  al  ]?at  God  ha])  ordeyned  to 
peyne  moten  nedis  be  dampned  in  helle ;  but  many,  bigilid  bi 
])e  fend,  weren  ordeyned  to  turne  to  Crist ;  and  j^es  weren  ever 
ordeyned  to  blis,  and  nevere  to  be  dampned  in  helle.  And  to 
))is  entent  speki]>  Crist  in  J>e  word  Jjat  come]?  afdr,  Jjat  yf  he  be 
hiydfro  pe  erj?e,  he  shal  drawe  alle  pingis  to  hi7n  silf.  No  doute  I  ^'"^^^'J^fj^^'i 
Crist  speki])  here  of  his  passioun  of  })e  crosse ;  for  ]?anne  Crist 
is  hi3ed  fro  ])e  er})e  to  many  undirstondingis.  And  3if  Crist 
semede  ])anne  faile  power  to  do  0U3t,  3it  he  was  Jjanne  almy3ti, 
and  his  drawing  was  ful  strong,  for  ]>anne  he  drow3  bi  his 
vertue  alle  men  }?at  he  shoop  to  blis.  And  so  he  drow3  fro  ]?e 
fend  many  ]?at  he  wenede  to  have,  and  so  ])es  \2X  leeven 
undrawun  wanten  })e  eende  \2X  \€\  shulden  have,  and  so  \€\ 
ben  clepid  nou3t  oftetymes  in  holi  writt.  And  ])us  speki}) 
Crist  here,  ])at  })ei  ben  alle  ])ingis  \2X  he  drawi]).  Defaute  is  not 
in  ]?is  drawer  whi  ])es  fendis  lymes  ben  not  drawun,  but  defaute 
is  in  hem,  \2X  \€\  fasten  not  on  ]>is  drawere,  si}>  noon  is  drawun 
but  wilfulli,  and  he  wanti]?  good  will ;  \€\  ben  so  slipre  and  so 
hard  \2X  Goddis  word  taki])  not  in  hem. 

^  and  \>ns  \>ey  leden,  E.  ^  )pe,  E. 


things 
to  himself. 


394 


WYC  LIE'S 


Rom,  xiv.  23. 


j-Ms  same  gospel  expowne})  to  what  entent  Crist  seide  J?es 
wordis.  Certis  Crist  seide  pis,  to  telle  what  deep  he  shulde  die. 
But pe  puple  answer ide  to  Crist,  and  seide  pat  pei  have  herd  of  pe 
lawe  pat  Crist  dwellip  wipoiite7i  ende,  and  how  seist  pou  pat 
mannis  Sone  mote  be  hiydP  who  is  he  pis  ??iannis  So?ie,  and  how 
shulde  he  suffre  J^is  de]??  But  Jesus  saw  how  j^is  peple  un- 
dirstood  sumwhat  bileve,  and  |>ei  failiden  on  o]?er  side  of  jjingis 
]?at  ]?ei  shulden  undirstonde.  And  ))erfore  seip  Crist  Jjus  :  '^it 
a  litil  li^t  is  in  ^ou.  Walke  y  while  y  have  li'^t,  pat  derknesse  take 
yu  7iot.  It  seme]?  J)at  J)is  peple  wiste  how  Crist  tolde  \2X  he 
shulde  die  upon  Jje  crosse  for  mankynde,  and  J>erbi  drawe  his 
children  to  him ;  but  it  seme]?  \tx  wisten  not  now  ])at  Crist  was 
bo]?e  God  and  man,  and  bi  his  soule  he  mai  not  die,  as  he  die]? 
not  bi  his  Godhede ;  but  whanne  he  is  deed  bi  his  fleish,  his 
soule  passij?  and  drawi}?  from  helle.  And  ]?us  Crist  sei]?  J?ei  have 
a  litil  li3t,  for  ]?ei  have  but  litil  bileve.  But  ]?ei  shulden  walken 
in  ]?is  bileve,  and  so  come  to  more  li3t ;  for  5if  ]?ei  walkyn  in 
derkenesse  of  unbileve,  ]?ei  gone  amys,  sij?  al  ]?at  is  not  of  bileve 
mote  algatis  be  synne.  For  Crist  seip  afterward,  ]?at.  He  pat 
walkip  in  derhtes,  he  wool  not  whidir  he  goip.  And  so  it  is  in 
goostli  walking ;  he  ]?at  wanti]?  bileve  of  Crist  woot  not  for  ]?at 
tyme  whe]?er  he  goi]?  to  hevene  or  helle,  for  li^t  of  fei}?  wanti]? 
him. 

And,  for  Crist  is  bileve,  ]?e  which  }?at  men  shulden  trowe 
here  and  se  aftir  clerli  in  blisse  whanne  })ei  ben  clene  come  to 
hevene,  ]>er/ore,  seip  Crist  aftirward,  pe  while  y  have  li'^t,  bileve 
y  in  11-^,1,  pat  y  ben  children  of  li-^t;  J?e  which  li3t  is  God  himsilf. 
Here  mai  we  se,  in  bileve,  how  fei]?  is  nedeful  for  to  have,  and 
how  fleishli  lif  here  is  contrarie  to  Cristis  crosse,  and  how  ]?at 
worldH  liif  is  dirk  and  maki]?  men  go  from  God. 


-M^^^*■^i£^%«s5=?)^ 


SERMONS. 


395 


p£  Gospel  on  Seynt  Matheu  Evyn. 

[SERMON     CXIX.] 

Vidit  Jesus  ptiblicaniim''. — Luc.  v.  [27.] 

pis  gospel  telli}^  how  Matheu  was  chosen,  and  how  heretikes 
grutchiden  herfore ;  for  treujje  haj>  evere  adversaries,  |)at  beren 
hevy  ])at  it  shulde  shyne.  pe  gospel  tellij?  |)at  Jesus  saw  a  pup- 
lican  pat  h^te  Levy.  And  |?is  Levy  was  Mathew^  as  many  men 
have  diverse  names,— as  jjis  Mathew^  Petre,  and  Poul,  varieden 
))er  names  whanne  ]?ei  weren  aposdis.  And  J)is  manere  have 
l^e  popis,  whanne  })ei  ben  newe  maad  popis.  But  God  wolde 
})at  |>ei  changiden  to  vertues  as  dide  apostlis  of  Crist.  But  sum 
men  seien  ])ei  changen  to  synnes,  for  her  chesyng  is  not  of 
God ;  l^ei  ben  not  clepid  of  Crist  to  mekenesse,  but  to  pride 
and  worldli  liif.  And  |?us  al  is  ypocrisie,  and  no  fruyt  to  ])e 
Chirche  J)at  ]?ei  done,  in  j^is  chesing  bi  ordenance  of  mannis 
lawe ;  and  ]?is  envenyme]?  myche  of  ]?e  Chirche  bi  process  of 
tyme.  Jesus  si5  ]?is  Levy  sitting  at  pe  tol-bope,  ajtd  seide  to  htm, 
Sue  me.     And  wi])  |>is  word  he  5af  him  vertue. 

And  here  ]?e  fend  blyndi]?  men  whanne  \>t\  proven  bi  Goddis 
lawe  J)at  |jei  shulden  make  siche  chesing,  for  Crist  clepide  his 
apostlis.  But  certis  an  ape  is  not  so  blynd  in  knowing  of 
diversite.  It  seme]?  ]?at  bi  Goddis  lawe  men  shulden  purge 
first  ]je  popis  state,  and  algatis  |?at  he  were  pore  and  witti,  and 
Willi  ^  for  to  profite  to  jje  Chirche  after  Goddis  lawe ;  and 
Jeanne  chese  him,  as  Mathi  *  was  chosen.  And  J)is  were  sum 
similitude  to  sue  here  Crist  and  his  apostlis.  For  wel  Y  woot 
)>at  alle  |)es  cheseris  witen  not  wher  J^ei  chesen  a  fend ;  as  J>ei 
witen  not  wher  j^ei  lawe  be  evene  a5ens  Goddis  wille  ^.  And  Jjcs 
two  ben  to  dirke  weies  to  lede  alle  Cristyndoom  to  hevene. 

pe  storie  telli])  how  jjat  Mathew^'  forsok  al  pat  he  hadde,  and 

^    So    E ;     Vidit   Jhesus  puplicatinm,    A.  ^    So    E ;    Mathu,    A. 

^  willy,  E.                 *  Mathi,  i.  e.  Mathias,  is  the  reading  of  E,  and  seems 

preferable ;  A  has  Mathu.     Compare  Sermon  CI.  ^  laive,  E.           ^  So 
E ;  Mathu,  A. 


Tlie  call  of 
Matthew. 


Popes  should 
be  chosen  in  the 
same  way  that 
St.  Matthias 
was  chosen. 


Gospel  con- 
tinued. 


39^ 


WFCLIF'S 


The  modern 
Pharisees,  from 
covetousness, 
hinder  poor 
priests  from 
communing 
with  the  poor 
and  sinful. 


suede  Jesus,  boj^e  in  place  and  in  vertues.  \)is  Leevy  made  Crist 
a  greet  feeste  in  his  hous,  wi]?  mouche  folk ;  for,  as  J>e  gospel 
telli]>,  per  was  moche  puple  of  puplicans,  and  of  oper  men,  his 
aqueintis,  pat  weren  come  to  ete  wip  him.  A  fid  Phariseis  and 
scribis  of  hem  grutchiden  ayns  Crist,  seiyng  to  his  disciplis,  Whi 
etin  y  and  drynken  bop  wip  puplicans  and  sinful  men  ?  Sich  men 
ben  puplicans  ]3at  traveilen  aboute  comune  work,  to  gadere 
tollis  and  comyne  rentis,  to  j?e  use  of  |)e  emperour.  And  )>is 
travail  dampneden  Jewis,  as  traveile  of » sinful  men;  and  for 
using  of  ])is  work  j^ei  dampnyden^  men  ])at  comuneden  wi)?  hem. 
And  Jesus  answeryng  seide  to  hem,  Hool  men  have  noo  nede  of 
leche,  but  seke  men  in  ])er  bodi.  And  so,  si]?  Crist  cam  to  heele 
men,  and  se])  ]>at  sich  men  mai  be  hool,  he  moot  bi  resoun 
comune  wij)  hem,  and  maken  hem  hool  as  he  disposij?.  For 
Crist  cam  not  to  clepe  just  men,  but  sinful  men  to  do  penauiice. 

Here  mai  we  see  ]?at  it  is  good  to  sum  men  to  comune  wi]? 
sinful  men;  but  ]?ei  moten  be  as  Crist  was,  not  to  be  worsid 
wi])  |)es  men.  But  whanne  |?ei  mai  do  hem  good,  it  were  synne 
to  lette  \\%  good.  But  ]?es  scribis  and  Phariseis  magnefieden 
|>er  owne  stat,  ]?at  no  man  shulde  take  from  hem,  but  encreese 
in  worldli  goodis.  And  Jjus  seien  now  oure  Phariseis,  boj^e 
religiouse  and  preestis.  But  Crist  telli])  not  bi  j)is  sentence, 
for  it  is  nest  of  coveitise.  For  stat  Jjat  Crist  jaf  to  his  apostlis 
is  now  to  generali  dispisid,  Jjat  men  shulden  be  apaied  wi]? 
foode  and  wi]?  hiliyng  to  her  bodi.  And  al  mennis  bisynesse 
shulde^  be  sett  to  gete  vertues  to  }?e  soule,  for  ])anne  \t\  seken 
])e  rewme  of  God,  and  ri3twisnesse  of  ]>is  rewme.  And  \\\\  jjis 
God  mai  not  faile  of  })es  two  })ingis  to  mannis  bodi;  as  Crist 
prove])  bi  Matheus  gospel,  bo])e  bi  foulis  and  bi  lilies.  For  if 
men  failen  in  foode  or  hilyng,  Jjat  is  for  her  synne  bifore.  And 
jjat  is  more  for  ]?er  profit,  jif  \€\  ben  wise  and  pacient;  for  a 
betere  wey  to  hevene  is  algatis  more  profitable,  and  he  is  an 
overmyche  fool  \2X  wole  have  al  his  goodis  here. 


*  So  E ;  dampne/i,  A. 


^  So  E;  ^hiil,  A. 


SERMONS. 


397 


fE  Gospel  on  Seint  Matheus  Day. 

[SERMON     CXX.] 

Cum  transiret  Jesus. — Matt.  ix.  [9.] 

pis  gospel  ]?at  Mathew  sei]?  here  is  nyj  al  oon  wij?  |)e  laste ; 
but  ^it  00  gospelere  ^  expownej?  ano]?er,  and  varie]?  sumwhat  to 
cure  lore.  Matheu  ^  telli]?,  pat  Jesus  passinge  saw  a  77ian  pat 
was  clepid  Matheu'^.  And  ]?is  he  mene]?  bi  himsilf,  for  it 
sownej)  to  Goddis  worship  and  to  repreef  of  himsilf.  What 
worship  shulde  |)is  Mathew  have,  ]jat  he  sat  in  J^e  tol  bo]je, 
occupied  wij?  j^e  worldli  workes,  and  }?us  fer  fro  jje  liif  of  Crist  ? 
Grace  and  mercy  is  in  Crist  |>at  he  wolde  clepe  ])us  siche  a 
man,  boj^e  bi  vois  and  bi  wille,  to  leeve  siche  worldli  workis, 
and  to  go  ri^t  J>e  weie  to  hevene  in  suynge  pis  good  duke. 
INlatheu  leeve])  of  his  feeste,  for  it  sownej?  to  worldli  fame,  and 
telli])  how,  Jesus  eet  in  pe  hous,  and  puplicans  and  many  sifijul 
wip  him.  And  ])is  word  sowne]?  not  to  boost  of  Matheu^, 
but  to  mercy  of  Jesus  Crist.  But  Fariseis  of  Cristis  tyme 
haddefi  desdeyn  of  ))is  dede,  and  seide  to  Cristis  disciplis,  in 
repreef  of  him  and  hise,  Whi  eiip  your  Maistir  wip  puplicans 
and  sinjul  men,  J)at  is  unleeveful .?  For  who  shulde  comune  wij) 
cursid  men,  lest  ))at  he  were  foulid  wij?  hem.?  And  |)is  word 
wolde  be  li5tli  seid  now  of  men  ]?at  we  feynen  cursid ;  for  we 
holden  a  more  synne  to  ete  and  drynke  wi|?  sich  men  J)an  us  ^ 
to  do  a  cursid  dede  J)at  were  a^ens  Goddis  worship.  For 
Phariseis  coveiten  j)er  owne  wynnyng,  and  leeven  ]>e  worship  of 
God.  ^vX  Jesus  herde  pes  blynde  wordis,  and  seide  to  ])es  Pha- 
riseis, A  leche  is  not  nedejul  tmto  men  patjaren  wel,  but  to  syke 
7?ieTi  pat  Jaren  yvel ;  and  so  it  is  goostli.  Aiid  Crist  bad  pese 
men  gojorp  and  telle  Jolk  what  it  is,  pat  he  wolde  mercy  and  not 
sacrifice. 

And  who  so  cam  J)is  dai  in  })e  Chirche,  and  tolde  ))is  ordre 


'  gospeller,  E. 


2  So  E;   Matbu,  A. 


\>us,  E. 


Humility  of 
St.  Matthew 
exemplified  in 
his  account 
of  his  own 
conversion. 


The  modern 
clergy  perse- 


398 


WFCLIF'S 


cute  those  who, 
like  Christ, 
preach  mercy 
before  sacrifice. 


wi]?  |?is  ^  sentence,  preestis  wolden  clepe  him  eretike,  and 
moven  o]?er  men  to  holden  him  siche,  for  ]?ei  tellen  more  bi 
))er  wynnyng  J>an  bi  treuj?e  of  Goddis  lawe.  ^ii  ])OU  wolt  asaie 
])is  now,  preche  opinli  to  \e  peple  |>at  God  telli)?  more  bi 
workes  of  mercy,  ]?e  which  ben  in  a  mannis  soule,  J?an  bi 
offring,  or  by  dymes,  or  oper  goodis  30vun  to  freris,  and  ]>o\i 
shalt  have  enemyes  anoon  to  bere  heresie  on  J^ee.  For  jjei 
holden  as  bileve  j^at  5if  j^e  ordre  ]>at  Crist  ordeynede  were 
holden  streitli,  as  he  bad,  holi  Chirche  were  distroied.  But 
Crist  sei]>  ]?at  he  cam  not  to  clepe  just  men  from  ]?er  weie,  but 
to  clepe  sinful  men  from  J>er  errour  j^at  j^ei  ben  inne.  Here 
mai  we  wel  witen  }>at  Crist  move]?  alle  good  men ;  sum  y vel 
men  Crist  clepij?  from  WTong  weie  ]?at  |?ei  ben  inne ;  and  sum 
good  men  Crist  moove]?  to  go  gladlier  her  ri^t  weie.  And  so 
Crist  move]?  ever  to  good,  and  from  errour  Jjat  men  ben  ynne. 


On  My3HEoiasse  Dai. 


[SERMON     CXXI.] 


Who  is  the 
greatest  in  the 
kingdom  of 
heaven. 


Accesserimt  discipidi  ad  Jesiim. — ]\Iatt.  xviii.  [i.] 

pis  gospel  telli])  how  Crist  love}?  men  ]?at  dwellen  in  ]?is  world. 
And  we  shulen  take  as  bileeve  }?at  Crist  love]?  more  vertuous 
men,  whiche  he  ha]?  ordeynede  to  blisse,  ]?an  all  }?e  men  ]?at 
shal  be  dampned,  for  Crist  love]?  ech  |?ing  aftir  ]?at  it  is  good. 
And  }?us  sei]?  };e  storie  of  Matheu,  how,  Disciplis  cam  to  Jesus 
and  axiden  him,  who,  he  hopij?,  is  more  in  pe  reiv??ie  of  hevene  ? 
Leeve  we  gramariens  doutis "  wher  '  quis  putas '  be  two  wordis 
or  00  word,  and  of  what  part,  and  w^hat  is  ]?e  witt  ]?erof ;  for 
here  us  }?inki])  it  is  o  word  and  J?is  is  ]?e  witt  J?erof ;  What  is 
]?i  jugement,  which  man  is  more  here ;  for  hope  of  Crist,  ]?at 


^  So  E ;  \>ese,  A. 


a  De  Lyra  mentions  no  such 
doubts,  and  it  is  difficult  to  realize 
the  state  of  mind  of  ihat '  gramarien,' 
who  should  speculate  on  the  possi- 


one 


bility  of  '  quis  putas'  being  one 
word.  Both  Wycliffite  versions 
translate,  '  Who,  gessist  thou.' 


SERMONS. 


399 


mai  not  erre,  is  his  ri5t  jugement,  and  |>is  word  wanti|)  noumbre 
and  persone  and  ^  witt  of  wordis  bi  hemsilf. 

And  Jesus  tau5te  his  answere  in  dede,  for  it  is  profitable  to 
men ;  s\\>  whomever  Crist  jugi)>  more  is  more  algatis,  si]?  juge- 
ment  of  j^e  world  and   of  men   failli))  ofte.    Jestcs  toke  a  litil 
child,  in  quantite  and  in    soule,  for  he  was  litil  in  bodi,  and 
l^erwij?  he  was  meke.     Rekke  we  not  who  ]?is  man  was,  ne 
trowe  we  not  to  mennis  talis  J)at  ]?is  was  Marcial,  or  Joon,  or 
ano]?er  apostle «;    for  5if  Crist  wolde   \2X.  we  couden   j)is,   he 
wolde  have  tolde  |)is  in  his  gospel.     But  kepe  we  us  in  meke- 
nesse    ]?at    Crist   wolde    put  us  inne.      For   ignorance  of  ])is 
doute   doij?  noon  harm   to   Cristen  men,   and  knowyng  jjerof 
shulde   do   no  good  to  geting  of  ])e  blisse  of  hevene.     Crist 
toke  J)is  litil  man,  and  putte  him  in  myddil  of  aposilis,  and  seide 
io  hem,  SoJ?li,  but  ^if  3^  hen  eonvertid,  and  be  maad  as  litil  children, 
y  shal  not  entre  into  pe  reivme  0/ hevenes,  for  30ur  pride.      For, 
ever  as  a  man  is  more  meke,  evere  ]>q  betere  man  he  is.     And 
so,  as  Crist  is  beste  man,  so  is  he  J)e  mekeste  man.     And  as 
nou5t  mai  be  lowere  J)an  centre,  so  noon  mai  be  mekere  j^an 
Crist.     And  it  is  oon  to  suppose  J)at  }?is  is  ]?e  mekeste  man 
and  J^at  ]?is  man  is  Crist,  ou]jer  on  o  manere  or  o]?er.     Alle 
men  of  |?e  rew^me  of  hevene  drawun  to  )?is  centre,  to  make  ]?is 
rewme.     And  ]>is  centre  holdi}?  up  al  J^ing,  and  put^  it  in  his 
degree.    But  |?is  centre  is  everywhere,  and  not  only  in  00  point, 
pis  word  of  Crist  may  wel  be  proved  undirstonding  sadnesse 
in  vertues ;  for  no  man  mai  have  ony  vertue  but  ^if  he  have 
mekenesse,  ground   of  alle.     And   si|)  no  man  mai  come   to 
hevene,  but  ^if  he  be  clo]>id  in  vertues,  it  is  open  to  trewe  men 
])at  no  man  mai  come  to  hevene,  but  5if  he  have  mekenes  to 
grounde  his   toure   up  to  hevene.      And   sif?  bileve  techi})  us 
]?at  holi  Chirche  is  a  bodi,  and  |)is  noble  bodi  is  ordeyned  of 
Crist,  bi  every  part  and  joynture  |)erof,  it  seme]?  to  many  men 


^  as,  E. 

^  St.  Jerome,  in  his  commentary 
on  this  passage,  is  silent  respecting 
the  identity  of  the  little  child.  But 
Petrus  Comestor  in  the  Historia 
Scholastica  (cap.  xc),  and  Nicholas 
de   Lyra,   both    give    the   tradition 


2  putte\>,  E. 

referred  to  in  the  text,  namely,  that 
this  little  child  grew  up  to  be  a 
certain  St.  Marcialis,  who  was  sent 
into  Gaul  by  vSt.  Peter,  and  preached 
the  faith  to  the  people  of  the  Li- 
mousin- 


Christ's  answer 

to  the  question. 


400 


WFCLIF'S 


])at  alle  j^es  newe  ordris  ben  rotyn  postumes,  and  tatered  cloutis. 
Lord !  si])  freris  blamen  wel  tatring  of  mennis  cloJ)is,  how 
myche  were  it  to  blame  tatring  of  \e  Chirche  cloutis.  But  J)at 
]?at  jjes  newe  ordris  leeven  in  mannis  si3te,  \t\  fulfillen  in  oure 
modir,  jjat  is  a  betere  persone.  For  alle  J>es  ordris  ben  cloutid 
bi  Cristis  religioun  wij^outen  his  autorite,  and  departid  among 
hem  silf.  And  it  seme]?  to  many  men  Jiat  ])ei  ben  ])e  charge  ^ 
of  ]>e  chirche,  and  enpeiren  Cristis  ordre  his  lawe  and  his 
ordenaunce.  And  })us  ])enken  many  men  ])at  \>e\  shulden  be 
suspect,  bifore  ]>at  ])ei  hadden  groundid  her  liif  in  Cristis  lawe. 
And  many  men  have  conscience  to  for]>ere  Jjes  ordris,  in  word 
and  in  dede,  bifore  ]?at  }>ei  ben  tau^te  }?at  Crist  approve])  ]>es 
ordris ;  for  ellis  ])ei  reversiden  Crist  and  weren  wij?  Anticrist. 
And  so  alle  ])es  novelries,  }>at  ben  not  groundid  in  Cristis  lawe, 
men  supposen  as  heresies  til  ]jat  ]?ei  ben  tau5te  })e  contrarie. 
And  dymes,  and  offringis,  and  defending  of  J?is  persone  Jjat 
doi})  a^ens  Goddis  lawe,  semen  bi  lawe  of  conscience  to  be 
a^ens  Goddis  wille,  and  so  shulden  men  leeven  hem.  But 
leeve  we  ])is  matere,  and  trowe  to  Cristis  word,  J>at  whoso 
meki'J?  hiniy  as  pis  y)ng  man,  he  is  pe  more  in  pe  rewme  of  hevenes. 
And  whoso  takip  sich  a  litil  oojt  in  pe  name  of  Crist,  he  takip 
Crist ;  at  ])e  leste  in  his  membre.  For  we  supposen  \2X  Crist 
preise])  not  Jje  fend  in  ])is  5ong  man.  And  whoso  slaundrip  oon 
of  pes  litil  pat  troweji  in  me,  it  spedip  to  hit}i  pat  a  ??iyl?te  stoon 
be  tied  in  his  nekke,  and  pat  he  be  dreint "  in  pe  depenes  of  pe  see. 
And,  as  Gregori  seij?  ^,  it  spedi])  to  ])is  man  ])at  he  have  hevy 
worldis  charge  to  depe  him  in  worldli  traveile ;  for  ])anne  he 
shulde  mekelier  in  caas  be  dampned  in  helle  ])an  he  now 
shulde.  Woo  be  to  pe  world  of  sdaundris  I  For  it  is  nedefil pat 
slaundris  comen,  but  iiepeles  woo  be  pat  man  bi  whom  slaundre  come. 


*  grete  charge,  E. 

*  Commenting  on  this  passage  of 
St.  Matthew  in  his  Mornlia  (hb.  vi. 
§  57)  St.  Gregoiy  says  that  by  the 
sea  we  must  understand  this  world, 
— by  the  mill-stone,  worldly  busi- 
ness,— and  that  there  are  some  who, 
forsaking  the  common  life  of  the 
world,  and  betaking  themselves  to 
spiritual  contemplation,  not  only  go 
astray   themselves,  but  mislead  the 


^  dreynt,  E. 

little  ones  of  Christ.  '  Qui  ergo 
unum  de  minimis  scandalizat,  melius 
illi  fuerat,  alligata  collo  mola  asina- 
ria,  in  mare  projici ;  quia  nimirum 
perversae  menti  expeditius  esse  po- 
tuisset,  ut  occupata  mundo  terrena 
negotia  ageret,  quam  per  contem- 
plationis  studia  ad  multorum  per- 
niciem  vacaret.* 

WYCLIF. 


SERMONS. 


401 


Slandre  is  wrong  dede,  Jjat  makij?  man  falle  in  synne.  And 
j?is  falli)?  bo])e  in  worldli  men  and  ojjer,  and  speciali  in  ypocritis 
of  J)es  newe  religiouns ;  for  jjei  done  woo  to  ojjer '  ordris,  and 
jugement  of  o}>ir  men  for  her  ypocrisie  makij)  many  men  be 
sclandrid.  For  novelries  in  oure  lawe  maken  errours  in  juge- 
ment, and  so  ]?ei  barmen  |)e  Chirche  bojje  in  soule  and  bodi. 
Crist  biddij)  aftirward,  '^if  pi  hond  or  pi  foot  sclaundir  pee,  kiite 
it  of,  and  caste  it  fro  pee.  Here  men  seien  so])li,  ]7at  bi  her 
bodili  lymes  ben  undirstonden  mennis  workes  and  mennis 
affeccions;  and  J>es  ben  kittid  fro  men  whanne  \q  vertue  of 
}>eir  soule  wanti])  sich  workes,  and  occasioun  to  do  ])us.  //  is 
beter  to  pee  to  he  here  feble  or  crokid,  and,  wip  pis,  co?7ie  to 
hevenli  liif  pan  to  have  here  pes  lymies  and  after  be  se7it  to  helle. 
pis  word  is  ful  dredeful  to  men  Jjat  wolen  here  be  greet,  and 
have  many  servantis,  or  many  of  her  ordre,  and  after,  for 
parting  of  her  synne,  ben  dampned  to  helle.  And  ])us  was 
Joon  Baptiste  wijjouten  hondis  or  feete  here^,  and  so  he  was 
my3ty  in  hevene  for  his  symple  meeknesse.  And  to  ])is  entent 
seij)  Crist,  ^if  pin  iy  sclaimdre  pee,pyke  it  out,  and  caste  it  fro 
pee.  Bi  ]?is  i^e  we  undirstonden  yvel  si^te  of  a  mannis  eye ; 
as  leecherous  and  coveitous  have  ofte  wickid  i^en.  Caste  awei 
l^es  wickide  workis,  and  turne  ])ee  to  medeful  si^te.  And  ^if 
j?ou  be  a  greet  maistir,  as  bishop  or  erchedekene,  and  ])0u  have 
a  wickide  servaunt  ]>at  turne]?  ]?ee  to  coveitise,  putte  him  out 
of  his  office  and  remeeve  him  fer  awey.  //  is  betere  to  pee  to 
come  wip  oon  iy  to  pe  liif,  pan  here  have  two  iyn  and  after  be 
sent  to  pe  fier  of  helle,  as  it  is  betere  to  men  to  lyve  here  a 
simple  liif,  and  come  after  to  hevene  for  mekenesse  of  ]?e 
herte,  |)an  after  myche  myrjje  here  be  dampned  in  helle. 

Be  y  war  pat  y  dispise  not  oon  pat  is  litil  here  ;  for  sopli  I  seie 
to  yu,  pat  her  aungels  seen  evere  pe  face  of  my  Fadir  which  is 
in  hevene.  Al^if  men  seien  comunli  J)at  ech  man  ha}?  two 
aungels,  a  good  and  an  yvel,  to  do  him  good  and  traveile  him, 

1  So  E ;  her,  A. 

a  The  words  must  not  be  taken  but  simply  as  meaning, 'in  this  sense 
literally,  for  no  such  astounding  John  the  Baptist,  after  he  was  thrown 
legend  was  ever  afloat  concerning  into  prison,  was  helpless  and  re- 
John  the  Baptist  or  his  martyrdom,  sourceless,  reaping  thereby  a  greater 
so  far  at  least  as  I  can  discover, —  reward  in  heaven.' 

SERMOXS.  D  d 


The  poor  and 
simple  of 
Christ  oug^ht 
not  to  be 
despised. 


402 


WYC  LIE'S 


The  unity  of 
believers. 


nejjeles  men  j^at  shal  be  saaf  have  algatis  blessid  angels 
which  in  al  her  worching  seen  evere  God  clereli,  for  God  is 
everywhere,  and  see]?  syche  gode  werkis  \  And  ]?is  meeve]> 
many  men  to  dispise  not  ]?es  pore  men  ^  and  of  simple  state 
here;  for  we  witen  not  how  God  love]?  hem.  And  among 
evidence  \2X  shulde  meeve  men  to  mekenes,  bileve  of  ]?is 
gospel  shulde  meeve  men  to  flee  dispite.  For  ^if  a  man  were 
ayre  aparant  ^  of  Englond  or  of  France,  many  men  wolden  do 
him  worship  for  ]jis  work'li  titil;  myche  more  5if  a  man  be 
eire  of  Jje  blisse  of  hevene.  And  apparaunce  of  ))is  heritage 
is  more  licli  to  trewe  men,  bi  good  lyf  of  men  after  jje  lawe  of 
Crist,  ))an  apparaunce  of  worldli  lordship  bi  dissence  of  heritage. 
And  so  wickid  liif  of  men  maki]>  hem  serve  ])e  fendis  children ; 
as  it  is  seid  ]?at  a  bishop  haj?  a  Jjousand  i^en  to  noie,  but  he 
ha|>  not  half  an  i5e  to  profit  after  Goddis  lawe.  And  jjus  many 
men  supposen  \2X  ])es  ben  blynde  fendis  children.  For  many 
men  have  molworpis  ^  izen,  jjat  J)inken  evere  of  worldli  goodis, 
and  ])es  ben  no  good  lederis  to  teche  men  jje  weie  to  hevene. 


pE  Gospel  on  Alle  Halwen  Evyn. 

[SERMON    CXXIL] 

Respicihts  Jesus  in  discipulos. — John  xvii.  [ii.]^ 

pis  gospel  telli])  how  Crist  preied  for  his  apostlis  upon  jje 
pursdai  \2X  he  shulde  die  on  |je  morewe.  And  so  he  medli]> 
many  treujjis,  bojje  hije  and  sutil.  Joon  sei)>  pat,  Jesus  lokynge 
upon  hise  discipUs  seide :  Holi  Fadir,  kepe  hem  in  pi  name  which 
pou  hast  yvun  me,  pat  pei  ben  oon,  as  we  two  ben  oon.  And 
here  it  is  seid  comunli,  ]?at  ech  oonhede  is  of  sum  fourme. 
And  so  ))er  ben  foure  oonhedis  ]?at  men  speken  of  comunH. 

^  So  E ;  A  reads  seen  wDp  siche  worhes,  which  makes  no  sense.         ^  So  E  ; 
cm.  A.  3  jjgyy.  apparaunt,  E.  *  moldwarpis  or  mollis,  E. 

a  In  the   modern   Roman  missal      for  All  Hallows  eve  is  taken  from 
this  gospel  belongs  to  the  mass  '  for       Luke  vi.  1 7-23. 
the  removal  of  Schism  ;'  the  gospel 


I 


SERMONS. 

pe  leste  oonhede  is  in  peple'^,  jie  which  ben  oon  in  kynde; 
and  ^if  jjei  ben  oon  in  vertues  jjan  Jjei  ben  more  oon.  pe 
secounde  oonheede  is  of  man;  jjat  many  partis  of  him  ben 
knitt  in  oo  soule  and  governed  bi  jie  vertue  of  it.  Leeve  we 
ojjer  oonhedis  of  ojjer  bodies  bi  her  fourmes.  pe  jjridde 
onhede  is  of  jje  Chirche  and  of  her  partis,  oon  in  God;  and 
))is  is  more  woundirful  jjan  ony  man  can  her  ^  telle,  pe  fer jje 
oonhede  and  j^e  moste,  J>at  is  rote  of  alle  o]jir,  is  oonhede  of 
]>e  Trinite,  in  J)e  fourme  of  oo  Godhede.  And  ]?us  ]?ree  per- 
soones  ben  oon,  and  noon  ojjer  mai  j)US  be  oon.  Nej^eles 
Crist  preie)>  |>at  hise  apostlis  ben  oon,  as  }>e  Trinyte  is  oon; 
but  not  in  ]>q  same  manere ;  but  as  j)e  Trinite  is  oon  in 
oonhede  of  substaunce,  so  Cristis  apostlis  ben  oon  in  ]>q  same 
Godhede,  and  mai  nevere  after  be  severid,  as  J>es  jjree  per- 
soones  mai  nevere  be  severid.  And  ]7is  is  sum  similitude,  al 
5if  it  be  fer  fro  God.  And  betere  preier  mi^te  no  man  preie 
to  God  for  synful  men.  Crist  seip  of  his  apostlis :  Whanne  he 
dwelte  wip  hem,  he  kepte  hem  in  his  Fadirs  name,  and  noon  of 
hem  perishide  but  pe  child  of  lesyng ,  \2X  moste  nedis  be  lost,  for 
he  was  a  quyk  fend,  to  fulfille  Holi  Writt.  And  here  men 
douten  comunli  whi  Crist  chees  Judas,  sij)  Crist  wiste  ]?at  he 
shulde  be  dampned.  But  here  we  seien  J?at  ^  for  helpe  of  \t 
Chirche  ]?at  Crist  wiste  J?at  he  shulde  do,  and,  as  Crist  himsilf 
sei]>  here,  to  fulfille  holi  writt.  And  jje  same  questioun  maist 
j>ou  axe,  whi  God  made  men  )?at  shulde  be  dampned,  si])  \2X 
God  wiste  of  ])ese  men  al  Jjat  shulde  befalle  of  hem  ?  %\\  God 
ordeyne])  good  for  hem,  and  good  \2X  falli])  to  his  Chirche ; 
for  ]?ei  have  levere  ])us  to  be  dampned  ]?an  nevere  to  have  be ; 
but  })ei  wolen  not  ])is  expresli,  al^if  \t\  wolen  ])is  pryvyli. 
And  myche  good  cam  of  Judas,  wherefore  we  shulde  jjanke 
God,  and  dampne  J)is  traitour  to  Crist,  and  flee  siche  bi 
ensaumple  of  him.  Lord!  si]?  Scarioth  was  ordeyned  to  be 
in  Cristis  religioun,  ])e  which  is  \q  beste  ]?at  mai  be,  and  Crist 
suffride  him  to  go  out  J^erof,  whi  shulden  not  ])es  newe  ordris 
suffre  men  to  go  from  hem,  and  speciali  whanne  \€\  synnen 


403 


^  \>e  puple,  E. 


^  here,  E. 


»  Understand,  after  \>ot,  the  words  ♦  Christ  chose  him.' 

D  d  2 


404 


WFCLIF'S 


Strength 
through  truth. 


and  men  wolden  go  out  for  vertues  ?  And  many  of  ])es  newe 
ordris  passen  Scarioth  in  coveitise,  and  for  averise  of  goodis 
jjei  ben  traitours  to  treujje. 

Many  Jjingis  tellij?  |?e  gospel  of  Crist  and  of  Scarioth,  ]>q 
which  ben  li^t  to  men  after,  5if  ]>e\  wolden  take  hem.  Crist 
tellij?  bifore  of  traiterie  of  Scarioth,  and  how  he  shal  be  dampned 
to  helle,  notwijjstonding  his  ordre.  Crist  seip  aftirward,  pat  he 
comep  to  his  Fadir,  and  spekip  pes  pingis  to  his  disciplis,  pat  pei 
have  his  joie  fulfillid  in  hem.  And,  as  Crist  my^te  not  faile  of 
]jis,  so  ]?ei  myjten  not  faile  of  J>is  ende.  And  al^if  Crist  was 
evermore  in  wending  to  his  Fadir, — for  he  my3te  not  gon  abak, 
ne  erre  in  his  weye  bi  synne, — ne])eles,  in  tyme  of  his  de]?,  he 
wente  out  of  ]7is  worldli  iyf.  Crist  i^a/  to  his  disciplis  Goddis 
word  for  to  preche,  and  pe  world  hatide  hem,  for  pei  hen  not  of 
pe  world,  as  Crist  is  not  of  Jjis  world;  and  ]?erfore  weren  ]>ei 
goode  prechours.  He  ]?at  love|)  worldli  goodis  and  worldli 
dwelling,  as  propre  to  him,  is  lettid  to  seie  ])e  treujje,  as  we 
mai  se  in  jjes  ordris.  Crist  preiep  not  to  take  he?n  '^it  out  of  pe 
world,  hut  to  kepe  hem  hexQ  fro  pe  greet  yvel,  and  ]?at  j^ei  profite 
to  ])Q  Chirche  in  ]?e  name  of  ])e  Trinite.  Crist  sei]>  of  hise 
apostlis,  pat  pei  hen  7iot  of  pe  world  as  he  is  7iot  of  pe  world. 
And  })is  men  undirstonden  J)us ;  ]?is  world  is  alle  j?o  men  jjat 
ben  dampned  for  love  of  ])e  world.  And  jjanne  ]?is  word  of 
Crist  is  open,  for  |?ei  loven  heven  and  litil  J?is  world.  For  sich 
as  is  ]?is  fadir  and  priour  of  J>e  ordre  of  Cristyn  men,  sich  ben 
his  children  of  his  covent,  and  haten  jje  welj>e  of  Jjis  world. 
And  bi  J>is  mai  men  knowen  which  ben  disciplis  of  Crist. 

And  Crist  preie}>  to  Jjis  ende,  pat  his  Fadir  stahle  hem  in 
treiipe,  and  J?anne  he  stablij?  hem  in  his  word;  for  his  word  is 
pe  firste  treupe.  He  biddij?  not  stable  hem  in  worldli  wordis, 
as  ben  fablis  and  feyned  lesingis,  but  in  treu|>e  of  Jesus  Crist, 
which  ]?ei  shulden  trowe  and  teche.  And,  to  conferme  J)is 
preier,  Crist  speki]?  to  his  Fadir,  As  pou  sentist  me  in  to  pis 
world,  so  V  sente  hem  in^  pis  world"^.  Crist  cam  in  to  )>is 
world  to  witnesse  treujie,  and  to  li5te  ]?is  world;  and  as  Crist 
bojje  God  and  man  cam  hidir  to  j?is  entent,  so  alle  his  disciplis 


'  into,  E. 


^  So  E;   in  A  the  words  Ai> — world  are  not  italicized. 


SERMONS. 


405 


traveilen  ]?us  unto  her  dee]?.  How  shulde  treu|)e  not  kepe  hem 
Jjat  stonden  Jjus  to  defenden  treujje?  Crist,  and  Baptist,  and 
ojjcr  moo  hadden  not  here  reward  for  |)is,  but  in  hevene  blis, 
hid  fro  men,  for  jje  world  is  unworthi  to  take  it.  And  trowe 
we  not  )?at  clepid  miraclis  }?at  ben  maad  at  ]?e  tumbis  of  seintis 
maken  hem  more  blessid  in  hevene  })an  o|?er  Jjat  done  not  here 
sich  miraclis.  And  to  conferme  ]?is  word  of  seintis,  sei]?  Crist 
of  himisilf:  For  hem  I  conferme  mysilf,  pat  pei  ben  confermed  in 
irupe.  Alle  ]?e  dedis  |)at  Crist  dide  here  weren  so  stabled  in 
God,  jjat  bo])e  ]>ei  and  manere  of  hem  moten  nedis  come  as  jjei 
camen.  And  |)es  dedis  of  Cristis  liif  weren  maad  ensaumple 
to  his  disciplis,  \2X  jjei  shulden  sadli  do  Goddis  workes,  and 
take  |?erto  ensaumple  of  Crist. 

Crist  5eve]j  us  after  a  confort  and  sei|>,  He  preiep  not  oonli  for 
hem,  hut  for  alle  pat  comen  after  and  bileve  in  Crist  bi  her  word. 
And  jjes  wordis  seid  of  Crist  shulden  quykene  men  ])at  ben 
dede,  and,  3if  bileve  stood  in  hem,  make  hem  do  as  apostlis 
diden.  For  alle  men  ])at  shal  be  saf,  rijt  to  ))e  dai  of  dome, 
moten  nedis  in  J?is  sue  Crist,  and  ellis  \€\  shal  not  make  00 
Chirche. 

And  ]?us  sei]?  Crist,  ])at  his  preier  moot  nedis  make    alle 

seintis  oon;   for  o  bodi,  jjat  is  holi  Chirche,  drawij>*  to  Crist, 

as  er])e  to  jje  centre.     For  as  it  is  seid  bifore,  holi  Chirche  moot 

nedis  be  oon,  as  pe  Fadir  is  in  pe  Sone,  and  pe  Sone  is  in  pe 

Fadir;  and  so,  bi  stabilnes  of  Cristis  membris,  pat  pe  world 

trowe  pat  God  sente  him'^.     And  now  prelatis  traveilen  to  litil  to 

maken  men  trowe  ]?is  bileve,  for  |?ei  gon  not  in  Cristis  w^ie, 

nei]?er  bi  word  ne  bi  dede.     And  Crist  seij?  of  )>es  membris, 

pat  he  -i^af  hem  pe  clarite"^ pat  his  Fadir  "^i^af  hem;  pat  pei  ben  oon 

after  oonhede  of  Persones  ;  and  so  ]?is  oonhede  be  |jus  maad, — 

pat  Crist  be  in  his  lymes,  as  pe  Fadir  is  ifi  Crist.     And  so  pei 

ben  endid  iti  oon,  be  fillid  ^  in  Jje  blisse  of  hevene,  for  pus  shal  pe 

Chirche  wite  how  pe  Fadir  sente  his  Sone  and  lovede  membris  of 

pe  Chirche,  as  he  hap  loved  Crist.     Fadir,  po  pat  pou  "^avest  me, 

V  wok  pat  pei  be  pere  pat  Y  am,  pat  pei  see  7ny  clarite^  which 

*  So  E ;   \>at  drawi]),  A.  ^  So  E ;  the  clause  is  not  italicized  in  A. 

^  charite,  E ;  clerenesse  in  both  Wycliffite  versions.  ■*  and  so  )pey  ben  in 

one,  and  t>:s  endyng  in  one  schal  befulfillyng,  E.  ^  charite,  E. 


Comfort  for 
Christians  who 
have  believed 
without  having 
seen. 


Christ's  prayer 
for  unity. 


4o6 


WFCLIF'S 


On  the  eight 
beatitudes. 


Immense  sig- 
nificance of 
the  Sermon  on 
the  Mount. 


pou  hasl  'T^ovun  vie.  And  confermyng  of  ]?is  preier  is  treujje  of 
|jes  wordis,  pat  pe  Fadir  lovede  Crist  bifore  pe  viakhig  of  pe 
world.  Juste  Fadir,  pis  world  hap  not  knowun  pee,  hut  Y  have 
knowun  pee,  and  pes  knewen  pat  pou  sentist  me.  And  Y  have 
maad  k?wwu7i  pi  name  to  hem,  and  I  shal  make  it  hiowun,  pat  pe 
love  pat  pou  hast  loved  me  he  in  hem  afid  Y  in  hem.  And  in  jjis 
hi3e  unite  is  endid  ])e  blisse  of  ])e  Chirche. 


pE  Gospel  on  alle  Halewen  Day. 

[SERMON     CXXIII.] 

Videns  Jesus  turhas  ascendit. — Matt.  v.  [i.] 

pis  gospel  tellij?  of  ei5te  blessis  jjat  answeren  to  eijte  vertues 
in  J?e  weie,  and  bi  ])es  shulden  Cristyne  men  dispose  hem  to 
come  to  blis.  Jesus  seying  pe  puple  stiede  in  to  an  hit,  and 
whanne  he  was  sett  his  disciplis  camen  to  him.  And  he  ope?iede 
his  moup  and  tau^te  hem  attd  seide,  Blessid  he  pore  7?ien  in 
spirit,  for  hern  is  pe  rewme  of  hevene.  Ech  word  of  ]?is  gospel  is 
of  greet  wisdoom.  For  it  is  ful  notable  ]>at  Jesus  saw  ]?is  peple 
able  to  be  lerned,  and  hadde  mercy  on  hem,  and  5af  hem  so 
plentenously  ]jes  5iftis  of  goostli  mercy,  for  ))es  3iftis  ben  betere 
Jjan  ^iftis  of  bodili  mercy.  Crist  wente  into  an  hil,  and  his 
disciplis  wenten  wi|?  him,  to  teche  |>at  J^ei  shulden  be  nyj 
hevene  ]?at  shulde  teche  or  lerne  J)is  lore.  And  |)us  molde-worpis^ 
J?at  wroten  ]je  er]?e  ben  unable  to  ))is  loore.  Sitting  of  Crist  in 
]?e  hil  bitokenejj  stabilnes  in  ))is  lessoun.  And  herfore  seintis 
writen  mouche  of  |)is  sermoun  of  oure  Lord  in  Jjc  hil,  for 
auctorite  of  ])e  doctour,  and  many  circumstanciis  of  him,  maki]> 
]>is  lore  notable  to  alle  Cristene  men  aftir.  For  what  man  of 
bileve  trowij)  }>at  Crist  openede  jjus  his  mou]?,  (and  he  is  wisdom 
of  J)e  Fadir  and  jje  same  God  wi])  him,  and  as  he  openede  his 
mou))  to  speke,  so  he  openede  hertis  of  men  to  heere  and  undir- 
stonde  jjes  wordis,  and  teche  hem  men  ]?at  camen  aftir),  |>at  ne 


'  mollis,  E. 


SERMONS. 


407 


he  wolde  forse  ^  him  to  knowe  hem,  bojje  for  worshipe  and  for 
profit  ? 

Crist  sei]?  first,  Blessid  ben  \>o  ])at  ben  pore  in  spirit;  and 
here  Crist  techi]?  mekenesse,  a^ens  pride  of  worldli  men.  And 
here  men  seien  soj^li,  ))at  Crist  clepide  povert  in  spirit,  for 
bodili  poverte  is  no^t,  but  ^if  it  have  |)is  poverte.  For  bojje 
vertues  and  synnes  ben  first  in  ]>e  spirit.  And  wanting  of 
goodis  standi]?  wi)>  a  dampned  man;  as  beggeris  and  Jjeves 
ben  ofte  porer  ]>an  Joob  was;  but  poverte  in  spirit  stondij) 
in  mekenes, — whanne  a  man  knowi);  )7e  makere  above,  how 
he  is  riche  wi])Outen  eende,  and  we  ben  pore  beggeris, — and 
puttij)  hem  ^  mekeli  in  )?e  ordenaunce  of  God.  How  |?at  God 
wole  ordeyne  for  his  servaunt  ou])er  do  or  suffre,  he  holdi]?  him 
wel  paied ;  si))  God  is  a  ferour  ^  and  he  is  Goddis  instrument, 
redi  wher  God  wole  make  him  hamer,  or  tongis,  or  a  sti|)ie,  to 
suffre  howevere  ])at  God  wole.  And  certis  noon  come]?  to 
hevene  but  ^if  he  be  ]?us  pliable ;  for  a  ferrour  forme]?  not  his 
metal,  but  ^if  it  wole  be  temperid,  and  J?is  vertue  lasti]?  bo])e 
here  and  in  hevene.  And  ]?erfore  sei]?  Crist,  J)at  sich  pore  men 
have  ]?e  rewme  of  hevene.  For  ]?e  blisse  of  hevene  fallij?  not  to 
a  creature  but  5if  he  be  ]?us  pore;  as  Crist,  and  aungels,  and 
o]?er  blessid  seintis  have  fulli  J?is  poverte,  and  ]?erfore  \>q\  ben 
blessid.  And  no  man  my^te  here  lerne  more  nedeful  lessoun 
t?an  bigynne  at  ]?is  poverte,  and  grounden  him  wel  ]?erinne. 
And  so  shulden  men  note  ]?e  firste  proude  noumbre  ^,  and  ajen 
ech  part  of  it  grounden  hem  in  mekenesse.  Sum  men  ben 
proud  for  holynesse  ]>at  ]?ei  feynen ;  and  J?es  men  ben  ypocritis 
moost  perilous  of  alle  o])ere.  Sum  men  ben  proud  for  cunnyng 
|)at  ]?ei  have;  as  ]?e  laste  frend  of  Joob  seide,  his  beli  was  ful  as 

^  bisyen,  E.  ^  puiten  hym,  E.  ^  ferrour,  E. 


*  The  number  2  is  probably 
meant  by  the  '  firste  proude  noum- 
bre.' The  Pythagoreans  called  it 
tSXhtj  among  other  things,  and 
assigned  to  it  various  revolutionary 
attributes.  But  no  author  that  I 
have  consulted  speaks  of  the  num- 
ber 6  otherwise  than  as  synonymous 
with  perfection,  as  symbolizing  ma- 
trimony, creation,  and  a  hundred 
other  excellent  things.     The  num- 


ber 9  on  the  other  hand  was  treated 
with  great  indignity  ;  Peter  Bungus 
says  that  it  denotes  the  ruin  of  the 
angels,  who  fell  through  pride,  and 
of  whom  there  were  nine  orders,  that 
it  embraces  all  heretics,  and  charac- 
terizes infidels  and  idolaters,  &c.,  &c. 
See  the  Denarius  Pythagoricus  of 
Meursius  in  Gronovius'  Thesaurus, 
vol.  IX,  and  the  Numerorum  Hys- 
teria of  Petrus  Bungus. 


The  first 
beatitude. 


Job  xxxii.  19. 


4o8 


WrCLIF'S 


The  second. 


The  third. 


a  toune  fillid  wi))  must  Jjat  wantide  aventing.  And  J)us  seien 
wise  men,  |)at  Crist,  in  ]?e  firste  word,  undirstondi|>  bi  spirit  )je 
wynd  J>at  a  man  haj),  for  it  falli]?  to  meke  men  to  be  wi]}Outen 
bostyng,  for  sich  proude  bostours  hav  to  mouche  of  sich  wynd. 
But  5it  oJ?er  proude  men  bosten  of  bodili  strengjje ;  and  summe 
of  beute  of  bodi,  as  Roboam  and  Absolon.  pe  fif]?e  pride, 
and  ]?e  laste,  is  pride  of  worldli  richesse, — as  Jje  gospel  tellij>  of 
bosting  of  a  proude  man,  how  he  wolde  reste  in  his  goodis  and 
alarge  his  bernes.  And  as  many  5iftis  as  man  ha]?  of  God 
may  he  be  proud  of  but  oonli  of  vertues.  And  so  sum  men 
tellen  sixe  J?e  secound  proude  ^  noumbre  ^,  how  sum  men  ben 
proud  for  nobley  of  her  kyn.  But  povert  of  spirit  is  medecine 
for  alle  sich.  Bigynne  here  |)is  poverte  and  ende  it  in  hevene. 
For  5if  ]?ou  be  J)us  pore,  Jjou  dispisist  ]>is  world. 

pe  secounde  vertue  in  ]?is  weie  nedeful  to  us  here,  zs  myldenes 
in  heryng^  J)at  sue]?  of  J^e  firste ;  for  whoever  is  pore  in  spirit  is 
mylde  to  his  nei3bore,  boj^e  in  word  and  in  dede,  and  not  fel  as 
a  lioun.  And  as  pride  is  quenchid  bi  poverte  of  spirit,  so  bi  jies 
two  vertues  ben  quenchid  envie  and  ire.  And  Crist  sei|?  wiseli 
|)at  mede  of  Jjis  vertue  shal  after  he,  havyng  of  pe  lond  of  lyf. 
And  J)is  is  for  to  come,  as  ]?is  myldenes  is  here ;  for  in  hevene 
mai  no  man  be  austerne  to  ojjer.  And  al3if  sich  myldenes 
maki|>  men  here  lordis,  nejjeles  bi  ))is  lond  Crist  undirstondijj  J?e 
lond  of  blisse.  For  alle  |)es  ei5te  vertues  have  for  her  mede  |)e 
bhsse  of  hevene  by  diverse  resouns. 

pe  l^ridde  word  of  J»is  ei^te  is  seid  in  jjis  maner :  Blessid  be 
pei  pat  weilen,for  pei  shal  be  confortid.  '^s.i  a  man  avise  him 
how  Goddis  wille  is  reversid  by  synne  Jjat  rengne}>  in  ]?e  world, 
in  persones  and  comynetees,  he  shal  have  mater  to  morne,  and 
litil  to  be  glad.  For,  si]>  ech  man  is  holden  to  confourme  his 
wille  to  Goddis,  he  is  not  on  Goddis  side  Jjat  is  glad  of  sich 
synne.  For  al3if  God  sorew  not  as  men  maken  sorowe,  ne]>eles, 
bi  Goddis  lawe,  God  is  seid  to  be  ireful,  and  algatis  wi]? 
sovereyne  joie  God  ordeyne)>  for  peyne;  and  j)is  is  mater  to 
morne  to  men  \2X  ben  in  charite.     And  ^if  a  man  be  glad  for 

^  So  E ;  om,  A. 

*  See  note  on  preceding  page. 

WYCLIF. 


S  F I^  J/  O  N  S. 


409 


sich  synne,  \vi|)  o]>er  men  of  his  lond,  for  him  jjinkij?  })at 
hardynesse  or  worldli  profile  come])  jjerof,  he  assenti)>  on  two 
maners  to  {^e  synne  of  hem.  And  for  sich  assenting  God 
poneshi])  juste  men  wi|)  shrewis,  bo})e  in  pestilence  and  werris, 
and  o})er  comyne  veniauncis.  For  fewe  or  noon  ben  in  ]>e'^ 
rewmes  ])at  ne  )>ei  assenten  ])us,  oujjer  faillinge  in  helpe  to 
distrye  siche  synnes,  or  faillinge  in  repreef  of  men  jjat  synnen 
J)us.  But  in  blisse,  where  we  shal  see  ])at  God  doi]?  al  for  \>e 
beste,  and  men  shal  be  confortid  bo]?e  of  joie  and  peyne,  men 
shal  be  fuUi  confortid  for  sich  welling  here.  And  ]>is  moove]? 
many  men  to  seien  her  Pater  nosters,  and  preie  in  ^e  J>rid  "^ 
word  ]?at  Goddis  wille  be  done.  And  so  of  ]?e  same  ])ing  men 
mornen  and  have  joie.  And  so,  ^if  we  ]?enken  of  welling  of 
oure  owne  synne,  and  mournyng  of  oure  nei5boris  synne  ]>at 
we  dwellen  wi]?,  and  tariyng  of  oure  blisse  ]jat  we  shal  have  in 
hevene,  we  have  litil  mater  for  to  lau5he,  but  rajjer  for  to  morne. 
For  companies  and  castelis  maken  us  not  syker  here. 

Crist  seij)  in  ]>e  ferjje  word :  Blessid  be  pei  pat  hungren  and 
pirsten  rii,tivisnesse,/orpeishalbefidIid  in  \q  blisse  of  hevene. 
And  as  J>e  nexte,  mornyng,  lettij?  slouj^e  in  Goddis  service  ^,  so 
])is  fourj^e,  hungring,  letti]?  men  fro  coveitise.  For  3if  we 
Jjenken  on  Goddis  lawe,  and  speciali  of  preestis,  how  ]jei  de- 
foulen  Cristis  ordenaunce,  turnynge  a5en  to  synne  of  fleishe  Jje 
world  and  \q  fend,  a  just  man  shulde  hungre  and  ])irste  \e 
ri3twisnesse  of  sich  men.  And  more  desire  ])at  man  shulde 
have  to  perfourme  ]?is  ri5twisnesse  can  Y  not  see  here,  jjan  wille 
})at  Cristis  ordenaunce  were  fillid  in  mesure  and  noumbre  and 
wei^te  |)at  Crist  ha]?  ordeyned  for  his  Chirche;  and  algatis  in 
poverte  of  spirit  ]jat  his  prestis  ^  shulden  have.  For  3if  J)e  state 
of  preestis  be  more  worldli  Jjan  kny^tis  state,  who  dredi]?  jjat  ne 
pride  wole  sue,  wij?  averice  and  lecherie,  and  leevyng  of  ]?e 
office  ]}at  Crist  bad  his  preestis  do  ?  And  so,  in  stede  of  heerdis 
j)at  shulden  teche  })e  weie  to  hevene,  ])e  Chirche  is  ful  of  wolves 
])at  sinken  and  drawun  men  to  helle.  For  Cristis  ordenaunce 
was  ri3twise,  and  speciali  of  preestis  poverte ;  al3if  newe  sectis 
seien  now  jjat  Cristis  ordenaunce  were  now  ful  of  venym.     pis 


The  fourth. 


1  om.  E.  -  \>ridde,  E. 

SERMONS. 


^  servauntis,  E. 
E  e 


*  So  E;  prest,  A. 


4IO 


WYCLI  F'S 


The  fifth. 


The  sixth. 


shulden  lordis  ]?enken  on,  and  traveilen  to  amende  J>is ;  for  ellis 
Jjei  shal  not  be  fillid  in  hevene  bi  blisse  of  J>e  lymes  of  Crist. 
For  whoso  sei])  \2X  \€\  consenten  not  to  ]jis  synne,  J)at  is  rote 
of  o]?ir,  he  disseyve]?  |jes  lordis  in  lore  \2X  schulde^  be  her  soulis 
helj?e.  But  al3if  sum  men  mornen,  and  crien  of  J)is  defaute  in 
j?e  Chirche,  3it  jje  fendis  part  is  so  strong  J?at  grete  and  harde 
gobetis  wolen  laste  to  jje  tyme  of  \^  laste  dome.  And  so  we 
shal  hungir  here  and  after  drynke  softeli  ri3twisnesse.  For 
after  domes  dai,  we  witen  wel  ]jat  |?e  fendis  part  shal  not  be  ])us 
strong. 

pe  fif|)e  word  of  Crist  is  jjis:  Blessid  he  merciful  men,  for  pet 
shal  sue  ^  mercy,  Jjat  shal  be  comyn  to  al  J^e  Chirche.  And  here 
J)e  fend  bindij?  men,  and  telli]?  hem  ]?at  mercy  axi]?  jyving  of 
riches  and  of  worldli  jiingis  ]?at  mooven  men  to  do  a^ens  God. 
pese  heretikes  j^enken  not  how  Crist  ponishi]?  here  his  children, 
which  he  wole  be  pore  here,  to  be  riche  after  in  hevene.  And 
J>is  vertue  servejj  a5ens  al  synne,  but  al^atis  a^ens  averise. 

pe  sixte  word  J)at  Crist  seide  stondij?  in  |)is  forme :  Blessid 
be  men  of  dene  herte,for  pei  shal  see  God.  And  ]jis  vertue  is 
bridil  a3ens  fleishli  synnes,  and  al5atis  a3ens  leccherie.  For  love 
of  sich  men,  which  ben  as  beestis,  is  fer  from  ))e  love  of  God. 
And  al^if  men  changen  her  willis  after  her  eldis,  nejjeles  })ree 
willisben  here  to  oure  purpos.  Sum  men  have  childis  wille, 
J>at  feden  her  wittis  wi]?  sensible  J>ingis  and  3aping  ^  a  of  childis 
gamen,  as  ^if  \€\  weren  foolis,  and  after  ]?is  comen  to  mannis 
witt  ])at  holdiJ>  al  ))is  foli.  But  J>ei  5yven  hem  to  justing  and 
sheeting*  and  wrastling^;  and  })es  suen  ofte  more  foli  ])an  doi]? 


^  So  E ;  shtdden,  A. 


^  have,  E. 


3  japifig,  E. 


scbeling,  E. 


°  gaping  or  japing  is  trickery. 
Chaucer  says  of  his  Pardoner  (Pro- 
logue to  Canterbury  Tales), — 

'  And  thus  with  fained  flattering  and  japes, 
He  made  the  persone  and  the  peple  his  apes.' 

And  we  read    in   Gower  {Confessio 
Aynantis,  lib.  II), — 

'  This  Geta  forth  bejaped  went, 
And  yet  ne  wist  he  what  it  ment.' 

^  to  justing,  sheeting,  and  wrastling; 
in  other  words,  to  the  favourite 
pastimes  of  the  upper,  the  middle, 
and   the    lower   class    respectively. 


With  regard  to  the  first,  it  must  be 
remembered  that  our  author  wrote 
but  a  few  years  after  the  death  of 
Edward  III,  the  reviver  of  the 
Round  Table,  and  the  founder  of 
the  order  of  the  Garter,  whose 
reign  was  the  culminating  period  in 
England  of  the  spirit  of  Chivalry. 
Justing  was  then,  and  continued  to 
be  for  a  century  and  a  half  after- 
wards, the  favourite  amusement  of 
persons  of  condition.  It  was  usually 
practised  with  '  arms  of  courtesy,' 


SERMONS. 


411 


J)e  firste  elde.  In  j^e  )>ridde  eelde  men  have  fleishli  willis,  and 
wille  of  worldli  goodis  to  maynteyne  hem  longe.  And  |>is 
lastijj  in  worldeli  men  wel  ny3  to  her  eende.  But  sum  men, 
after  ]jes  ]?re,  have  good  wille  or  yvel,  as  men  ]?at  delitin  hem 
in  ri3twisnes  of  God,  or  ellis  in  )?e  fendis  synne,  J)at  ben 
calendis^  to  |)e  to])er  liif.  And  peril  in  ]?is  liif  is  moost  for 
to  flee.  For  whanne  fleishli  likyngis  passen  from  a  man,  ^if 
he  shulde  be  dampned,  he  ha|?  pride,  envie,  and  ire,  and 
coveitise  of  worldli  goodis  lasti]?  ever  wi]?  him;  and  ])is  he 
berij)  in  his  soule  aftir  |?at  he  be  deed.  And  men  of  sich 
unclene  hert  ben  leed^  in  to  tempting.  And  liif  |jat  men 
shulde  lede  evere  is  begunne  in  |)is  eelde ;  and  ])us  it  were  ful 
nedeful  to  lyve  wel  in  ]jis  laste  elde.  For  as  worldli  lustis 
ben  fer  from  aungels,  so  worldli  desiris  ben  passid  fro  ]?is  eelde. 
Lovynge  of  clenenesse  and  ri^twisnesse  for  |?is  tyme  shulde 
occupie  mannis  soule,  as  it  doi]?  in  hevene  :  for  ellis  he  ha)? 
a  fendis  liif,  and  occupie]?  him  in  ]?es  foure, — in  pride,  envie, 
and  ire,  and  coveitise,  jjat  never  is  fillid. 

pe  seven]je  vertue  ])at  man  haj)  is  for  to  make  pees,  or  to 
procure  pees,  or  ellis  to  preie  for  pees,  or  to  lyve  ri3tli  for  to 
procure  men  ^  to  pees.  And  of  ])es  pesible  men,  Crist  seip,  pat 
pel  ben  hlessid,for  pei  shal  be  clepid  aftir  Goddis  children.  And 
meede  of  alle  jjes  sixe  is  markid  for  to  come,  for  eende  of  hem 


halendis,  E. 


2  led,  E. 


that  is,  headless  lances,  and  blunted 
swords  without  points  ;  but  some- 
times, as  when  certain  knights  un- 
dertook to  maintain  the  honour  of 
their  country  in  a  foreign  land,  wea- 
pons a  Voulrance  were,  though  under 
regulations,  employed,  and  most  often 
witli  deadly  effect.  Chaucer  gives 
us  the  whole  order  and  regulation  of 
a  tournament  in  the  Knight's  Tale. 
(See  Scott's  Essay  on  Chivalry  among 
his  Miscellaneous  Prose  Works.) 

Shooting  with  the  bow  was  an 
out-door  occupation  which  was 
well-nigh  universal  among  the  mid- 
dle and  lower  classes  in  the  four- 
teenth and  fifteenth  centuries.  The 
men  exercised  in  shooting  regularly, 
to  keep  their  hands  in  as  archers. 


^  ri^twisly/or  to  siire  men,  E. 

Even  ladies,  as  the  illustrations  of 
old  MSS.  shew,  were  much  given 
to  the  use  of  the  bow,  both  with 
the  sharp-headed  arrow  in  the  pur- 
suit of  deer,  and  with  the  blunt 
arrow  in  bird-bolting. 

Wrestling  was  a  popular  amuse- 
ment with  our  forefathers  as  far 
back  as  the  Saxon  times  ;  in  the 
Middle  Ages  it  is  mentioned  along 
with  bull  and  bear  baiting,  putting 
the  stone,  throwing  the  bar,  foot- 
ball, and  the  like.  It  does  not  ap- 
pear that  they  were  sufficiently 
brutalized  at  that  time  to  enjoy 
boxing.  See  Wright's  Domestic 
Manners  in  England  dtiring  the  Mid- 
dle Ages. 


The  seventh. 


412 


The  eighth. 


WYC  LIE'S     SERMONS. 

alle  is  first  in  ]?e  to]?er  world.  But  it  is  ful  myche  to  be  clepid 
])anne  Goddis  child ;  for  ])anne  a  man  is  eire  of  Crist,  and  so 
confermed  in  blis ;  for  alle  ]>es  vertues  ben  not  fulle,  but  ^if 
blisse  sue  hem. 

pe  ei5ti])e  word  and  ])e  laste  \2X  Crist  speki]>  in  |)is  mater 
is  ^€\di^  pat  pei  beji  blessid  pat  suffren  pursuyng  for  r^t^for  hern 
is  pe  rewme  of  hevene^  as  it  is  of  ])e  first  men.  For  he  J)at  is 
pursuid  to  de})  for  defence  of  ri5twisnesse  haj>  here  sum  si3t 
of  blis,  and  sum  telling  of  sikirnesse,  and  so  he  ha]?  here  in 
eernes^  oj^er  wise  blisse  jjan  ]?es  ojjer;  and  as  men  seien 
comunli,  \€\  passen  to  hevene  wi|?outen  peyne.  And,  for  ]?is 
is  a  nedeful  vertue,  and  more  hard  ]?an  ]?es  ojjer,  |)erfore  mede 
of  ]?is  vertue  is  wel  ]?us  joyned  to  it.  For  certis,  3if  men  wolden 
stifii  stonde,  and  many  togidir,  for  ri3twisnesse,  jje  fendis  part 
shulde  be  ful  feble,  and  pees,  wi])  welfare,  shulde  men  have. 
And  so  it  were  ful  nedeful  to  moove  many  to  ]?is  vertue.  And 
si])  wanting  of  ]>is  vertue  bringi})  in  contrarie  synne,  drede  of 
cowardise  hereof  shulde  meeve  men  to  })is  vertue.  For  many 
ben  traitours  to  God,  and  proctours  to  ])e  fend, — ou])er  privy 
or  apert, — \2X  wolen  not  stonde  for  Goddis  lawe.  And  ])us 
Crist  applie])  his  wordis  speciali  to  hise  apostlis,  and  techi]) 
hem  how  pursuyng  Jjat  men  dreden  here  moost,  shulde  be 
confortable  to  hem  \2X  stonden  for  Cristis  lawe.  Blessid  shal 
y  be,  seip  Crist,  whanne  pat  men  shal  curse  ^ou,  and  whanne 
men  shal  pursue  yu,  and  shal  seie  al  maner  of  yvel  ayns  '^ou  ; 
lying,  for  me.  foie  '^ee  and  be  glad;  for  '^our  hire  is  mouche  in 
hevenes.  And  ])is  word  conforti])  men  to  stonde  a3ens  Anticrist, 
for  he  wole  faste  curse  men  and  pursue  hem  as  eretikis; 
but  he  is  cursid  ]?at  leve])  herfore  to  telle  Goddis  lawe  and  his 
wille. 

^  ernes,  E. 


»•»•«      00«>c*** 


Date  Due 

MAY  2  0 

2002 

Library  Bureau  Cat.  No.  1137 

CLAPP 


3  5002  00203  4911 


Wycliffe,  John 

Select  English  works  of  John  Wyclif 


BR    75    . W83    1869    1 

Wycliffe,     John,     d.     1384. 

Select    English    works    of    John 
Wyclif 


/ 


:^Hivi;r 

i•;<1l:5'ji]iiHi!n^li^$HH^^'haf^an< 


