Title: The Spiritual Ascent: A Devotional Treatise (De Spiritualibus
  Ascensionibus), with a Life of Gerard Zerbolt of Zutphen by
  Thomas a Kempis
Creator: Gerard Zerbolt of Zutphen (1367-1398) (trans. attributed to J. P. Arthur)
Publisher: New York: Benziger Brothers, 1908
Rights: Public Domain
Rights basis: Published 1908; public domain by date. Archive.org
  item metadata carries an explicit `NOT_IN_COPYRIGHT`
  possible-copyright-status, checked directly against the item's own
  metadata, 2026-09-25, this session.
Source: Internet Archive item spiritualascent00zerbgoog
  (archive.org/details/spiritualascent00zerbgoog), fetched directly
  (curl, raw bytes) from the item's own _djvu.txt full-text file,
  2026-09-25, this session.
Provenance note: Body text unaltered including its own OCR errors.
  Zerbolt's major devotional/method treatise, named by the census
  as 'the movement's method text' but previously wholly unvendored -
  this closes that gap directly. Includes a Kempis-authored
  biographical sketch of Zerbolt as front matter. Vendored
  2026-09-25 as part of a post-Step0-Revision-2 PD
  source-acquisition pass.

Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 



r 




H. 



Zbe 

Spiritual 
Hacent 



XEbe Spiritual Hscent 

H devotional ZTreatise 

£l? (3erarb of 

Zptpben 



mttb a Xffe of tbc flutbot 
33lS TTbomas a ftempis 



Xonbon: Burns & ^ates 

^rcbart) Street M 

Tttcmviij 



XEbe Spiritual Hscent 

H devotional ZTreatise 

£i? (Berarb of 

Zptpben 



mitb a Xlfc of tbe Hutbot 
3Bi? TTbomas a Kempts 



Xonbon: JSurttd & ^atee 
^rcbarb Street M 

"mcmvfij 



Siihtlohitat 

F. THOMAS BERGH, O.S.B. 

Censor deputatus 
Imprimatur 

^ GULIELMUS 

Episcopus t/irindeknsis 

Vicarius ^eneralis 
Westmmasterii 

die i6 Maiij 1908 






ZCbc zrran0lator'0 flotc 

THElifeof GerardZerbolt, ofZutphen, which 
is here translated, forms one of a series of 
eleven lives of members of the association which 
developed into the Brotherhood of the Common 
Life. A translation into English of these short bio- 
graphies, which were originally intended to be a 
part of the Dtalogus NovHtorum^ will be found in 
a volume entitled The Founders of a New Devo- 
tion [Kegan Paul, Trench & Co., 1905]. There 
is no doubt about the authenticity of the lives 
as the work of Thomas k Kempis, and the notice 
of Gerard of Zutphen has a special interest 
owing to the fadl that k Kempis, who joined the 
school at De venter in 1392, must have known the 
subjedl of this memoir. Lives of Amiliusof Buren 
and Florentius Radewin, who are mentioned 
above, also find a place in k Kempis's coUedlion; 
the former died in the year 1400 and the latter 
in 1404. 

The treatise here translated is that mentioned 
by k Kempis as the book entitled Blessed is the 
Many these being the opening words of the dis- 
course: the other treatise beginning A Certain 
Man is so similar in chara6ler and arrangement 
to the work under consideration that the two 
may be considered as different versions of the 
same book; but that chosen for translation is, 
from a literary point of view, more harmonious, 
whilst Homo quidam is as it were the rough draft. 

UThe last chapter, which is for the instru6lion 
of novices, forms a separate tradl, and is not 
really a part of The Spiritual Ascent. 

J. P. ARTHUR 



VIJ 



TTftc %ifc of (5erarb Zerbolt, of 
^ Zutpbcn, bi? ^boma0 a Ucmpie 

I. I will now recount briefly the virtues of that 
devout and learned man Gerard of Zutphen, and 
as a good memorial of his life will set his ex- 
ample and his writings before the generations 
that are yet to be, as their pattern; for he hath 
deserved above all others to be named amongst 
our first brothers and those that were zealous for 
the law of GrOD. Moreover, though he lived for 
but a ^hort while, yet he left to us most grateful' 
memorials of dodirine, for he was very studious 
in Holy Scripture and drew, even from dark sen- 
tences, divers kinds of aromatic wisdom, having 
virtue to quell the diseases of vice and to heal 
the languors of the soul. These do most chiefly 
appear in two little books that he put forth, of 
which the one beginneth A Certain Man, and the 
other is entitled Blessed is the Man, Now from 
his infancy and the years of his boyhood he was 
inclined toward learning, quick of genius, eager 
toward the liberal arts, and heartily averse from 
worldy business and from everything that might 
hinder the pursuit of wisdom. 

2, And when he grew up to be a youth of good 
disposition he went to foreign schools to be the 
better instrufted, and there he strove with all 
his might to be constant in attendance, to rise 
up early in the morning and to hasten in good 
time to hear the le<Slures. All the season of study 
seemed short to him, for he was ever desirous to 
gather some yet more fruitful knowledge from the 
Master's lips, and this hewould lay up carefully 



viij Gerard Zerbolt of Zutphen 

in the closet of his breast. So fiercely did his 
mind burn to make progress in knowledge that 
he was sad above measure when the masters did 
not ledlure in the school, nay he even wept some- 
times because on holidays there was no le6lure, 
being ill-content that a day should go by barren 
of such fruit. His ingenuous mind was far re- 
moved from the sloth of dullards and the idle 
wandering of the wanton: for these do run about 
the streets taking their delight in foolish plays, 
they hate the school, and seldom visit a church: 
but Gerard pondered the purpose for which he 
had come and the reason for which schools were 
set up, wherefore he got him zealously to study 
and made progress so wisely as to deserve here- 
after to become a scholar of the eternal wisdom 
when he had left scholastic knowledge. By 
the ordinance of God he came at length to the 
school of Deventer, and finding there the devout 
Brothers he clave firmly to Florentius and being 
now sufficiently instru6led, he abandoned the 
tottering estate of this world for the sake of the 
love of Christ and his own salvation. 

3. So being converted, he began to be diligent 
to amend and fervent to make progress: likewise 
to separate his thoughts from all entanglement 
with things temporal, and as a good eremite to 
love his cell, giving himself up to inward exer- 
cises and spending his hours in writing and study, 
so that many wondered because he was seldom 
seen to go forth and would not take solace out 
of doors. Yet had he for his greatest solace holy 
works, and sought the hallowed mansions of 
heaven instead of the spreading plains of earth. 
When he went across to the church he passed 
through the streets as if without noticing men: 
and being asked if he were not hindered by the 



Gerard Zerbolt of Zutphen ix 

worldlings that went by he answered, **I think 
it is a herd of swine that passeth me in the road, 
what is it to me that they have the upright pos- 
ture of men?" When he sat in his chamber he 
was so intent upon his work, his writing, reading 
and prayer, that often during the whole day he 
did not open his window, nor look without, albeit 
the weather might be fair enough. 

4. And so it was that one of the Brothers said 
to him, **Why dost thou not open thy window? 
thou sittest here as if shut in a cellar, and it were 
good to breathe some fresh air"; but Gerard, 
being given up to zeal for discipline,made answer, 
**If I had leisure and knowledge to take such 
forethought, mayhap it were good so to do." 
Being asked what he thought when the bell rang 
for dinner, he replied, **As to one duty so go I to 
another"; he cared not at all what he eat, nor when 
the hour for refeftion might be; and when need 
of food drave him, even then he hasted rather to 
hear the holy reading rather than to refresh his 
body, for he was without care for the body and 
gave thought rather to refreshing the powers of 
his soul, for which cause he would have soon 
destroyed his health and died but that Florentius 
was careful of his needs. Thus it fell out that he 
suffered in secret from the disease which physi- 
cians call ** fistula," which he bore patiently for 
a long while, being unwilling that any should be 
burdened or spend money on him, for he desired 
to suffer pain in the body as a medicine for his 
soul. But when Florentius found this out he called 
a physician to take care of Gerard until he should 
be healed. 

5. He was librarian and keeper of th« books, 
in the colledlion and writing of which he showed 
great diligence. He lent many copies of holy 



X Gerard Zerbolt of Zutphen 

books to clerks outside the house that they might 
have readings at home and in the schools, so as 
to avoid the telling of empty stories and idle 
wandering on feast days, for at these times clerks 
are specially admonished to be occupied with 
holy things. Furthermore, he was wont to say, 
'^ These books preach and teach better than we 
can by word of mouth; for holy books are the 
light and solace of our souls and the true medi- 
cine of life, and we cannot do without them, 
while we sojourn here, any more than we can 
dispense with the Sacraments of the Church." 
He loved the works of Holy Theology above all 
the riches of the world, and rejoiced more greatly 
over a well- writ copy than a sumptuous banquet 
or wine of excellent savour; for he knew that 
they shall not be wise who take their delight in 
dainty meats and drink, but they that are given 
over to the study of holy things shall be filled 
with wisdom and earn to be admitted to the 
secret things of Heaven. For this cause he held 
books in the greatest reverence, read in them 
with all diligence and kept them under careful 
ward. 

6. Also many clerks came to him to resolvo 
divers questions and doubtful matters, and did 
gladly hear his discourse, for he was a man 
learned and eloquent, proved by many exercises 
and one that had knowledge how to answer each. 
Florentius often called him to set in order the 
affairs of the House and consulted with him espe- 
cially concerning matters which demanded skill 
in law and such as seemed to require spiritual 
treatment. Wherefore, if Gerard met with any 
weighty or deep matter, he reserved the same 
for the opinion and decision of the learned, when 
it was seemly to do thus; for he listened rever- 



Gerard Zerbolt of Zutphen xj 

ently to dodlors and ever followed the authority 
ofthe Saints without wavering, openly confirming 
what he said by sacred testimony. For this cause 
he was wondrously praised by wise and lettered 
men for the genius that was gathered in him, yet 
hehimself accounted thepraiseof men asnothing. 
He was zealous not to be a follower of eloquence, 
but rather one that maintained a good con- 
science; and so in the interpretation ofthe Scrip- 
tures his long exercises of study therein helped 
him less than the informing grace of the Holy 
Spirit, who giveth understanding to little ones 
and doth reveal His mysteries to pure hearts. 
To the gaining of this purity Gerard diredled all 
his exercises, imprinting the fear of God in those 
newly converted,chiding thesluggish, and exhor- 
ting them that desired to make progress in virtue 
to mortify their vices. 

7. **If,"said he, **wenegle<Sl to strive against 
vices, our passions will prevail and we shall fall 
into the snares of the devil who doth ever lie in 
wait on the road of our progress; wherefore we 
must labour with all diligence so as to fight man- 
fully, for a crown of eternal glory hath been 
promised to him that overcometh." 

After that he received the light, this priest 
walked humbly and devoutly amongst the Bro- 
thers having much grace with him, and albeit he 
had read many books, yet before the end of his 
life he began to read again the Mirror for Monks 
and the Progress of the Religious as though he 
were but newly converted, and by these books 
he strove to gather afresh the spirit of devotion 
and to renew himself to his first fervour. Yet 
kindled as he was with such a zeal for progress, 
he did not long survive, but mindful of Lubert, 
who was dead, he followed him after a short 



xij Gerard Zerbolt of Zutpheo 

space, for he had loved him very greatly and 
shed many tears at his death. 

8. He had been sent with Brother Amilius to 
the Abbot at Dickeninghe, a man learned in 
Canon Law, with whom he was wont often to 
discuss cases of law; and turning aside he went 
to Windesem, but as he spent the night there 
he fell sick unto death. Then said Amilius to him, 
**It seemeth to me thou art near to die"; and 
Gerard madeanswer, **Soseemeth ittomealso"; 
and so it was that his sickness grew upon him, 
and he breathed forth the breath of his life as 
one lapped in a gentle sleep, upon the night of 
the feast of St Barbara, the virgin, in the year of 
the Lord 1398, and in the thirty-first year of his 
age. His body was buried by the Prior and the 
Brothers, with deserved honour, in the path be- 
fore the door of the church. But when Florentius 
heard of the death of the beloved Gerard, he was 
full of sorrow, and both he and all the Brothers 
with him wept with great lamentation, for super- 
abundant love constrained them, because from 
them was taken a brother most dear who was a 
pillar of the House, and her other hand in the 
management of affairs. 

But blessed be God, Who lent us such a man. 



XUJ 



Zbc Contente 

The Translator's Note Page v 

The Life of Gerard Zerbolt of Zutphen by 
Thomas k Kempis Page vij 

The Devout Treatise of Gerard of Zutphen, 
concerning the steps that lead upward in the 
Spiritual Life ^. ) Page i 

Chapter I. Concerning- five things needful for them that 
order themselves for progress in the Religious Life i 
Chapter II. Concerning the place and state of natural 
and primitive worthiness in which GOD did set man in 
the beginning, and concerning the many gifts which 
He gave to him. 4 

Chapter III. Concerning the valley of tears to the which 
mankind hath fallen, through the lapse of the first man ; 
also of the minishing of the powers of the soul and the 
ill-adjustment thereof which man hath incurred ; and 
how this is the first lapse from our aforesaid state of 
uprightness 7 

Chapter IV. How that mankind have not only departed 
from a state of uprightness through the fall of the first 
man, but also have gone very far to impurity of heart, 
being beguiled by their concupiscence ; the nature of 
thisimpurity of heart, and how this is the second lapse 9 
Chapter V. Of the third downfall of man, namely, by 
mortal sin, by the which he hath gone very far off, to a 
land of estrangement 12 

Chapter VI. Of the three examinations ; and how it is 
chiefiy by the remembrance of sin that a man doth 
regain his senses to perceive that his last downgoing 
was through mortal sin 12 

Chapter VII. Of the second examination by the which 
a man doth bestir himself concerning his whole state, 
both inward and outward, and through which he cometh 
to this point that he doth perceive his first downward 
step, and the minishing of the powers of his soul 16 
Chapter VIII. Of the third examination, by which a 
man doth bestir himself out of his daily excesses : for 
by this doth he learn discernment concerning purity of 
heart ; and also of the discovery of the passions 18 



xiv The Contents 

Chapter IX. How that before he doth make an upward 
step a man ought first of all to determine in his heart 
what his spiritual exercises should be, and to commune 
with some spiritually minded man as to the same ; and 
how that holy exercises are not to be changed lightly, 
but that one must persevere in them until he reach the 
end 20 

Chapter X. How that a man ought to order this in his 
heart in one way as regardeth the end, but in another 
in regard to the means leading to that end 22 

Chapter XI. Of the three upward steps which overcome 
the three falls afore mentioned, and do lead us back to a 
state of uprightness. After this it remaineth to speak in 
the discourse following of the upward steps by which 
thou oughtest to ascend and return 24 

Chapter XII. Of the first ascent against mortal sin ; the 
three steps of this ascent ; and of contrition 24 

Chapter XIII, Of Confession, which is the second step 
of this ascent 26 

Chapter XIV. Of Satisfaction, which is the third step 
of the first ascent 27 

Chapter XV. Here beginneth the second ascent, which 
overcometh the second descent, whereby a man doth 
return to purity; and how that uncleanness of heart 
consisteth in three things, to overcome which three a 
man goeth upward also in this second ascent by three 
steps 28 

Chapter XVI. Of the first step of this ascent, which 
consisteth in fear; in this step our heart is by fear 
withdrawn from hurtful affe^ions and attachments 30 
Chapter XVII. How Compunction which is bom of fear 
jnay be brought about in various and divers manners 
by exercises a|id by meditation 32 

Chapter XVIII. How that Compundtion is profitable; 
and of the manner in which it doth purify the heart 33 
Chapter XIX. A general method to be used for shaping 
meditations about death 34 

Chapter XX. General thoughts on the Last Judgement 
by which a man may strike terror into himself 37 

Chapter XXI. How that a man, by remembering the 
pains of hell, doth get Dread and Compunction 39 

Chapter XXII. Of the second step of the second ascent, 
which is through Hope and yearning for things 
heavenly and spiritual, by which a man is purged 
and made whole of the second impurity of heart 42 
Chapter XXIII. Of Coinpun^ion through love and how 
a man shall exercise himself therein 44 



The Clontents xv 

Chapter XXIV. A general method of moulding one's 
meditations concerning the Kingdom of Heaven, so as 
to have Compun^ion and a desire to reach that King- 
dom 46 
Chapter XXV. How that a man, by being mindful of the 
benefits that GOD hath done him, is inmimed in devo- 
tion and kindled to Compun^ion 47 
Chapter XXVI. Here beginneth the treatise concerning 
the third step of this ascent, which is in Charity and 
Purity of heart (for in these doth this ascent consist), 
and how a man may know when he ia come to this stqp 
of Purity and Charity 51 
Chapter XXVI I. Of the three steps of the#i9cent which 
overcome the third impurity; by these, each in his order, 
is a man so disposed as to be able to cleave more per* 
fedlly to God 54 
Chapter XXVIII. Of the types and prophecies in the 
Scriptures concerning the Incarnation of Christ 60 
Chapter XXIX. Concerning the Annunciation 60 
Chapter XXX. The Life of CHRiST.in brief until the 
Supper 61 
Chapter XXXI. Of the Lord's Supper 64 
Chapter XXXII. Concerning the Lord's Passion and 
of the three ways in which a man ought to exercise him- 
self thereon 73 
Chajpter XXXIII. The Passion of CHRIST set forth in 
brief, and divided into portions. 

The First Portion^ 80 

Chapter XXXIV. The Passion of Christ. 
The Second Portion, He was led to the house of Caia- 

?has, where the scribes and priests were waiting for 
tim 82 

Chapter XXXV. The Passion of Christ. 
The Third Portion, But as jESUS stood in most lowly 
fashion before Pilate the Governor, a great tumult and 
mighty clamour roared around Him, as the Jews them- 
selves cried out I •'Crucift^ Him, crucify Him ; we have 
a law, and by our law He ought to die," and so forth. 
Then did Pilate order Him to be most cruelly scourged 
over His whole body; and as if He had unlawfully called 
Himself a king. He was mocked with much derision, 
being clothed in kingly garb and wearing a royal cloak ; 
His head was crowned with thorns, and grievously 
smitten with a reed ; in mockery He was adored upon 
bended knees, as though he were a king 84 

Chapter XXXVI. The Passion of Christ. 
The Fourth Portien^ When He had been led to the Mount 



xvj The Contents 

of Calvary, the li^ors began to set themselves to crucify 
Him, to strip Him of His vesture, and so forth with 
each several matter 85 

Chapter XXXVH. The Passion of Christ. 
The Fifth Portion. They brake the bones and the legs 
of the thieves, but not a bone of Christ was broken, 
that prophecy might be thoroughly fulfilled. But one of 
soldiers pierced his side, whence came forth blood and 
water, and consecrated the sacraments of the Church. 
The veil of the Temple was rent, the graves of the dead 
were opened, that on the day of the ResurreAion they 
might rise thence with Christ 87 

Chapter XXXVIII. Of the manner in which the devout 
man, in making his ascents, ought to dire^ his thoughts 
to the Passion of Christ, so that he may go up by 
means of fear, make progress by means of hope, cleave 
to God by means of charity, and have his understand- 
ing enlightened 87 
Chapter XXXIX. Of the Resurrection of the Lord 90 
Chapter XL. Of the glorious Ascension of Christ 91 
Chapter XLI. Of the mission of the HoLY Spirit 92 
Chapter XLI I. How that in this life we cannot accom- 
plish perfe^ly any of the three steps aforesaid 92 
Chapter XLIII. Of the three things by which the spiri- 
tual ascent is maintained and moved forward} that is to 
say, reading, meditation and prayer 93 
Chapter XLI V. The manner in which holy reading doth 
help and sustain them that are upon the upward way, 
and how it must be ordered and dire^ed towards spiri- 
tual progress 95 
Chapter XLV. Of the manner of meditation 98 
Chapter XLVI. Concerning prayer, and the manner of 
praying loi 
Chapter XLVII. Here beginneth the third ascent by 
which, through fighting down vices, we go upward from 
virtue to virtue, and form again those powers of our 
soul which had abandoned it ; and especially of two 
things which do hinder them that go up the spiritual 
ascent 106 
Chapter XLVIII. How vices do attack the powers of 
the soul, and hinder him that goeth upward on the 
spiritual way 107 
Chapter XLIX. How some do leave their vices and get 
them to divers spiritual exercises; and of the origin of 
affection 109 
Chapter L. Of the three things needful to them that 



The Contents xvij 



would strive m lawful wise against vices, namely, 
strenuousness, staid gravity and benignity 113 

Chapter LI. How that it is expedient or necessary for a 
man who is going forward in spiritual exercises to have 
for a guide a man that is spiritual 114 

Chapter LI I. How that he who fighteth against the 
eight capital vices, doth in a manner strive against all 
inordinate affedtions 11.^ 

Chapter LI 1 1. Of the manner of fighting against vices, 
and how that a man ought not to fight against all at 
one time, but against some one chief vice 116 

Chapter LI V. How that one must fight against vices in 
different ways corresponding to the diversity of their 
nature ; and of that in which this diversity doth consist 

119 
Chapter LV. How there be three ascents to overcome 
each vice, that is three ways of going forward to the 
opposite virtue 120 

Cfhapter LVI. Of the upgoing which overcometh the 
first vice which is gluttony 121 

Chapter LVIL Of the upgoings whereby one must fight 
down the vice of luxury 125 

Chapter LVI 1 1. Of the upgoings that overcome avarice 

128 
Chapter LIX. The ascents to overcome wrath 129 
Chapter LX. The ascents that lead to love of one's 
neighbour and to the overcoming of envy 130 

Chapter LXI. The ascents whereby we overcome and 
and cast out accidie 133 

Chapter LXI I. How we go upward against vainglory 
to put it out 137 

Chapter LXIII. Of the ascents whereby we should war 
against pride 139 

Chapter LXIV. Here beginneth the fourth part, which 
concemeth the spiritual descents, which are divided into 
two: the first the descent to oneself, the second that to 
one's neighbour 143 

Chapter XLV. Of the first descent b^ which a man 
goeth down, out of regard for himself from a higher 
to a lower step 144 

Chapter XLVI. Of the second descent by which a man 
must go down by times to learn discipline in his out- 
ward condudt and bearing 146 
Chapter LXVII. The third descent, so far as it refer- 
reth to oneself. In this a man must needs exercise 
himself in the labour of his hands, seeing that for his 



xviij The Contents 

frailty he cannot always nor long continue in spiritual 
exercises 148 

Chapter LXVIIL Of the descents in reeard to, er on 
behalf of, one's neigfhboor; of which the first is made at 
the bidding of our Superior 153 

Chapter LXIX. Concerning the second descent in 
regard to our neighbour, by the which we do conde- 
8^nd to him, by giving either aid^ counsel, admonition 
or correction 154 

Chapter LXX. Of the third descent by which it is need- 
ful that a Superior go down, through care and solitude 
for those that are set under him 158 

Concerning four things in which they who are 
beginning to serve God must be cautious if 
they would make progress Page 161 



♦1^4 £te beginnetb tbe beioout treatise of 
11 |(3erat6 ot Zutpben concernfna tbe 
■■•^ steps tbat lea6 upwar6 in tbe spiri- 
tual Xite; wbicb treatise is not less neeN 
ful tban profitable to all tbem tbat desire 
to maFie progress in tbat life 

% Chapter I. Concerning five things needful for 
them that order themselves for progress in the 
Religious Life. 

BLESSED is the man whose help is from Thee; 
in the valley of tears he hath set in his heart 
steps upward to the place that he hath before him. 
I know, O man, that thou art desirous to go 
upward, and that thou dost long earnestly to be 
lifted up, for thou art a creature reasonable and 
noble, endowed with a certain greatness of mind, 
wherefore thou dost seek lofty heights and an 
ascent thereto by reason of a desire that is of 
thy nature; nor is this appetite a thing to be chid- 
den, so that it be ordered duly, that is to say, so 
that thou desire to go upward to the height of 
thine original worthiness, longing to get thee 
gone out of the valley of tears and wretchedness. 
Yet to get thee thence and thither to ascend is this 
alone, namely, to go forward in the heart by means 
of the upward ways and steps of virtue. For in 
proportion as thou dost go forward in thine heart, 
in that measure dost thou ascend ; and as thou 
failest herein, in that measure dost thou descend. 
For this cause thou must order thine upgoing in! 
thy heart, yet trust not that thou shalt go up-' 
ward by thine own virtue, but dwell continually 
in the help of the Most High, and abide in the 
protedlion of the God of Heaven. If thus thou 
dost ascend, it is a laudable thing, for blessed 
art thou: the reputation of one that doeth valiantly 
shall be thy portion; and by this means shalt 

B 



2 The Spiritual Ascent 

thou get for thy guerdon everlasting blessedness 
and glory that shall abide without end. 

When thou orderest thyself to climb upward, 
there are set before thee these five things, though 
their order is reversed, which things are expressed 
in prophecy, and though the words be few yet 
is the meaning thereof full. 

The first thing is the place to the which thou must 
ascend,theplacenamelywhichCTODhath ordained. 
This may we fitly understand to be the state of 
thy natural uprightness, in which God did of old 
place thee and create thee. Wherefore thou must 
order in thine heart an upward way to that place 
from the which thou hast in like manner gone 
downward, 

I The second thing is the place from the which 
thou must get thee forth by this upgoing, that is 
ito say the valley of tears, and this valley is, by a 
fitting interpretation, the casting out and loss of 
thy natural worthiness: here, lying as in a deep 
cleft, thou must return by the upward way to the 
mountain whence thou art fallen. 

The third thing signified to thee is the means 
by the which thou must prepare thyself to go up, 
for thou oughtest to set in order the upward steps 
in thy heart by consideringdiligently therein, be- 
fore that thou dost begin the ascent, the means 
and exercises by which thou dost desire to attain 
to thy former state ; and the purpose of this is 
that, by so taking thought beforehand in thine 
heart, thou mayest determine by what exercises 
thou canst the better recover thy lost worthiness. 
Now this ascent is not compassed by thy running 
nor by thy climbing, but is of the gift of the piti- 
ful God: wherefore in the fourth place the counsel 
,' given to thee is this, namely, that thou must ask 
aid and help from the Lord; for thine own dili- 



Of Five Things Needful 3 

gfence is nothing' save the grace of the Lord 
attend thee in all things. 

But lest thou shouldest fall backward again 
affrighted by the difficulty of this upward way, 
and overcome by the toil thereof, a reward is 
promised thee, wherefore it is said, "Blessed is 
the man"; seeing that thou art blessed indeed if 
so be thou dost make progress in the upgoing of 
thine heart. Here the blessedness lieth in hope, 
but afterward it shall be in very deed; here thou 
hast the blessing of a way of life that is set in 
virtue and justice, there thou shalt have the bless- 
ing of thine own country. In sooth, if thou shalt 
have virtue and justice, thou hast therewith as it 
were thy future blessedness, since thou dost pos- 
sess as I may say the very cause thereof. For as the 
world of nature doth in itself, by its produdlive 
force and its propagating virtue, contain the 
power to produce a certain effedl, so also future 
blessedness and eternal felicity are the comrades 
of virtue and justice. 

Wherefore remember for a little whence thou 
must ascend, and whither. Formerly thou wast 
set upon the lofty mountain of thy natural and 
primitive worthiness, whence by thine own will 
thou art fallen into a deep valley; therefore from 
this must thou get thee forth, and climb upward 
by little and little to the mountain from the which 
thou art fallen. But or ever thou dost begin to go 
upward thou oughtest to set up ladders in thine 
heart, and put in order the means of thy progress 
by the which thou may est be able the better to 
reach the place thouseekest. But seeing that thou 
art yet at the foot of the ladder, and the ascent is 
before thee; seeing that thy strength faileth and 
thou knowest the height to which thou must go, 
thou oughtest to reach up thine hand to thij Lord 

B 2 



4 The Spiritual Ascent 

Who doth lean upon the top of the ladder, and 
cry to Him: **Draw me near to Thee." So shalt 
thou be blessed, and shalt enjoy everlasting 
felicity. 

But all these things shall be set forth more 
clearly, one by one, in the words that do follow. 

% Chapter II. Concerning the place and state of 
natural and primitive worthiness in which God 
did set man in the beginning, and concerning the 
many gifts which He gave to him. 

IF then the Lord hath set in order in thine 
heart this upward way, and hath stirred thee 
to make the spiritual ascent, and if the desire of 
thy mind be this, namely, to hasten on thy way, 
before all things thou oughtest to be assured 
concerning thy descent or fall, that by this means 
thou mayest know that thou must climb upward 
again from the place to which (as thou seest) 
thou art fallen miserably; and perceive that thy 
task is to return from the valley of tears to that 
place in which God set thee, and for which He 
ordained thee. 

• Wherefore consider diligently that the Lord 
God Who created thee after I^is image and simili- 
tude placed thee of old on so lofty a height of 
worthiness and set thee upon so high a mountain 
of natural gifts and graces that scarce couldst 
thou have ascended higher unless thou hadst 
gone forward to the essential vision of God; 
thou wast placed indeed in a paradise of delight, 
filled without and within with all good things; 
without thou mightest have enjoyed a place of 
pleasantness and the delights of pleasure, and 
within thou wast filled with knowledge of things 
and with a quiet and peaceful concord of thine 
affe6lions: for the Lord most bountiful had given 



Natural and Primitive Worthiness 5 

to thee powers of understanding or recognition, 
namely, intelligence, reason and perception, and 
this to the end that through thine intelligence 
thou mightest know Goo, and apprehend things 
not material; through thy lower reason discern 
rightly between low6r things, and ascribe all to 
His glory: that through thine outward sense 
thou mightest discern the particulars and pre- 
sence before thee of things material and by thine 
inward sense call up to thy mind the images and 
similitude of such things, even when they are 
not present, through the help of reason. 

He gave thee, likewise, powers of appetite,! 
such as will, to the end that thou mightest love 
God above all, and other things for His sake; 
and that in loving them thou mightest ascribe 
them duly to Him. 

He gave thee, also, the power concupiscent,' 
that thou mightest seek every good thing, and. 
the Sovereign Good above all. In this power 
concupiscent I^e set desires and delectable affec- 
tions, namely, that of love, to the end that love 
itself of its own motion might urge and incline 
thee to the good; also that of joy, that thou 
mightest take thy chief delight in God, rejoicing 
in the perception of His benefits and in the con- 
templation of His works and wonders and so 
forth. 

He gave thee the power irascible, by the which 
thou mightest cleave closely to God, and cast 
off with indignation aught that might be able to 
divide thee from Him. In this also He included 
the delectable affedlions that are proper thereto, 
hope and courage, that thou mightest quit thee 
manfully in coming near to the good and mightest 
hope to attain thereto. See, then, how many good 
things He gave to thee, and on how lofty a 



6 The Spiritual Ascent 

mountain height He set thee. Man's understand- 
ing was illumined, so that our first parent per- 
ceived God through the pure perception of 
his mind and the power of contemplation that 
went forth therefrom, though, as we believe, he 
did not see Him in His very essence. He implanted 
in thee no passion or affection that was evil, 
that is to say none of those affections, such as 
hatred and sadness, whose aim is toward evil 
or lead diredlly thereto; and the purpose of this 
was that nothing might disturb thee inwardly. 
Nor were those powers, capacities and affections 
contrary the one to the other in such a manner 
that the law of the flesh warred against the law 
of the mind; for not yet was the body corrupted, 
wherefore it laid not a heavy burden upon the 
soul. 

But GrOD had ordained these powers in thee in 
most excellent wise, so that the lower obeyed 
the higher without contradi6lionand without any 
desire to go contrary thereto; for sense was sub- 
je6l to reason, and reason to mind, but the mind 
herself must have been subje6l to God only. The 
appetite of the senses, that is the powers con- 
cupiscent and irascible, rendered most ready 
obedience to the will and to the appetite of rea- 
son; thus in the inner man there was complete 
concord, and whatever the will herself did desire, 
in this did the other inferior powers and affec- 
. tions obey her. But the function of the will was 
to a6l upon the counsels of the understanding 
and the bidding of reason ; and the understand- 
ing fully discerned what must be done or left 
• undone as it were by natural illumination that 
'■ was freely given to it, because the light of the 
countenance of the Lord did shine over it: 
and the peaceful concord and harmonious obe- 



Natural and Primitive Worthiness 7 

dience of the powers and affections after this 
manner was called and named by the saints 
* * Original Justice. " 

Behold, O man, this was the place in which 
the Lord thy God set thee, this was the state of 
uprightness in which He created thee, and He 
hath ordained in thy heart a desire to ascend 
thereto. Consider this state of uprightness 
which thou dost represent still, as in a figure, 
by the upright posture of thy body, although in 
thy heart thou hast wandered very far away from 
it, as shall be said forthwith, and do thou say, 
with tears: "The feet of our affedlions were 
standing in thy courts j O Jerusalem." 

H Chapter HI. Concerning the valley of tears to 
the which mankind hath fallen through the lapse 
of the first man ; also of the minishing of the 
powers of the soul and the ill-adjustment thereof 
which man hath incurred; and how this is the first 
lapse from our aforesaid state of uprightness. 

THIS hast thou heard concerning the place 
in the which God set thee, and to which 
thou must ascend again ; now consider the valley 
of tears into which thou art gone down and fallen. 
Woe is me that our first created parent being 
raised aloft in so great glory and honour, though 
he was in that honourable state yet perceived it 
not, but transgressing the divine commandment 
turned him away from obedience to his Creator; 
wherefore he fell grievously, and we all in him. 
For we all were in him, by virtue of the force of 
parenthood, and the law of descent, wherefore 
we all are fallen, and, as saith Bernard, ** We are 
fallen together into the mire, and upon a heap 
of stones"; thus it is that we all are defiled 
together with original guilt and likewise dashed 



8 The Spiritual Ascent 

together, broken and grievously wounded in ali 
the powers and forces of a soul whose nature, as 
aforesaid, was once most excellently disposed. 
Moreover, original justice being lost by this very 
fall, and by thejust judgement of God, our powers 
and affe<5lions, having lapsed from their former 
state, are alike minisned and disordered; yet are 
they not wholly destroyed, but being impelled in 
a dire(5lion contrary to their former inclination, 
they do oppose and strive the one against the 
other in their motions and impulses. This very 
thing thou shalt find out every day, I might al- 
most say continuously, unless thou art altogether 
deprived of understanding, namely, that carnal 
affe6lions (that is the powers concupiscent and 
irascible) are rebellious against the will and con- 
trary thereto, whilst the will herself doth often 
a<5l against reason though she be not beyond it. 
From this it cometh that now these powe rs and 
affedlions are inclined in a diredlion far removed 
from that to which Cjod ordained them, being 
prone to evil and rushing headlong to the desire 
of that which is unlawful. Nay, moreover, reason 
herself having become blind, wandering and dull, 
doth often take falsehood for truth, and immesh 
herself in unprofitable and curious matters. The 
will i§ become crooked, doth often choose the 
worse part and loveth carnal things, making 
light of things spiritual and heavenly. The con- 
cupiscent power is disordered, and hath fallen 
through some impulse or other to the lusts of the 
flesh, the desire of the eyes and carnal pleasures, 
that is to gluttony, luxury and avarice. The iras- 
cible power is ill adjusted, and fallen to the pride 
of life and worldly glory. Hope doth not exercise 
herself upon God, but upon riches, or her own 
merits; or her trust is either greater or less than 



Of the Valley of Tears 9 

is right. We are sad at the loss of riches and at 
the contempt of the world; we rejoice over glut- 
tony and luxury; we are wroth with our brother. 
In a word, through the loss of original justice, 
all our affedlions are prone to evil from youth 
upward, nay from their very conception. This is 
because the soul herself doth contra6l from the 
flesh, which is born of concupiscence, this burn- 
ing flame and desire which is an inclination to 
evil. Verily Christ, by His most precious death, 
hath redeemed us from original guilt, so that 
this minishing of our powers and the law of the 
flesh are not now guilt, seeing that we cannot 
but partake thereof, so that there is no condem- 
nation to them that are in Christ Jesus; yet He 
hath by no means restored us to our original 
state of uprightness nor recast the powers of our 
soul, but hath left them to us to be recast through 
holy exercises that we should practise these and 
earn merit. 

See, this is the valley of tears, namely, the state 
of misery into which we are fallen and from which 
we must order in our heart an ascent whereby to 
rise therefrom, so as afterward to go up thereby. 

1 Chapter IV. How that mankind have not only 
departed from a state of uprightness through the 
fall of the first man, but also have gone very far 
to impurity of heart, being beguiled by their con- 
cupiscence; the nature of this impurity of heart, 
and how this is the second lapse. 

MIGHTY in truth and mighty above measure 
is the distance between the valley of tears 
wherein thou art now set and the mount on 
which of old the Lord placed thee, namely, the 
state of thine uprightness; wherefore a mighty 
ascent is needful to thee, and of a verity many 



lo The Spiritual Ascent 

efforts to go upward; likewise thou must toil 
mightily if thou wilt return thither. Would that 
thou mightest have continued here, and here 
made thine abiding place nor have fallen any 
further ; but, alas ! O son, who hast wasted thy 
substance upon divers harlots — that is to say, 
thou hast been drawn by the enticements of thy 
concupiscence to a place yet much further off; 
verily, as saith the Holy Gospel, thou art gone 
away into a very far country, led thither by thy 
lusts, and hast committed fornication with har- 
lots, that is with these same. For as often as we 
are concupiscent, so often (as saith Jerome) do 
we commit fornication ; and thus thou hast spent 
all thy wealth and that portion of natural and 
freely-given goods that had fallen to thee. So it 
IS that through the fall of the first man, as hath 
been said already, we have gotten a disposition 
in our desires toward the lowest things, and 
thus, except we resist them continually, we are 
constrained by their impulse to descend yet lower; 
but thou hast not only failed to resist them by 
inclining thyself thereto, but hast descended 
therewith and clung to lusts, to carnal affedlions 
and to earthly things, on which account what- 
ever disposition to good had heretofore remained 
to thee this hast thou lost, whether that disposition 
did proceed from natural or spiritual gifts. Fur- 
thermore, by cleaving in thy desires and affec- 
tions to things that are vile, after this fashion, 
thou art become as it were conformed to and of 
like nature with them ; and thus hast thou got- 
ten as it were a sort of filth and clinging defile- 
ment in thy desires and powers, being hampered 
by which as if by a viscous and slimy substance 
thou art held in yet lower place ; and by this is 
meant thine own impurity of heart. Now, in the 



Of the Fall of Man 1 1 

case of natural substances, things are called and 
become impure through being intermingled with 
baser matter: gold, for example, doth become 
impure if it be mixed with silver, or silver if it 
be mixed with lead ; and after this same manner ! 
thy reasonable soul, O man, which is worth more 
than all temporal creatures, doth gather impurity 
and uncleanness from this cause, namely, that 
through lust she is become subje6l to things, for 
the affedlions and desires, being set on these, 
have grown accustomed thereto, and are be- 
smeared thereby; wherefore, in like manner, the 
soul becometh defiled and unclean. And if by 
reason of the carnal affedlions the soul hath 
clung to things carnal, it doth gather that cer- 
tain defilement which is called carnality, through 
which man doth become carnal ; but if through 
worldly affedlion she hath clung to worldly 
things and to vanities, the defilement is called 
vanity, and by this doth man become worldly ; 
and so it is that Holy Scripture doth distinguish 
between men that are carnal and men that are 
worldly. 

Behold thou dost perceive what is impurity of 
heart, about which thou readest in the Scrip- 
ture, but perhaps thou dost not understand. This 
verily is that affection through which thou art 
inordinately inclined to the lowest things and 
cleavest thereto, and whether thou art drawn 
thereby to gluttony, or to luxury, to vainglory, 
or to pride, or to the praise of men, the affection 
is called impurity of heart. This impurity thou' 
hast gotten through the fall of the first man ; but 
by thine own continuance therein, by thine own 
affection and cleavingto it, thou hast added much 
more thereto, so that he that was foul at the first 
is now become yet fouler. 



1 2 The Spiritual Ascent 

Lo! this is thy second lapse, and the further 
thou hast fallen the greater need hast thou of 
moreupg-oings that thou mayest be able to return 
to the state of uprightness. 

H Chapter V. Qf the „third downfall of man, 
namely, by mortal sin, by the which he hath gone 
very far off to a land of estrangement. 

BUT not yet doth the prodigal son cease to go 
even further off and to perish yet more utterly; 
for the further one doth go away the more utterly 
doth he perish who departeth turning away from 
God. Why should I say more? When all his sub- 
stance hath been wasted upon harlots, he cometh 
to a land of estrangement where he doth hire him- 
self out to one of the citizens of that country who 
setteth him to feed his swine. That is, in a word, 
by mortal sin he doth subject himself to the devil 
and in all things indulgeth the impulses of his 
desires and lusts. 

See, O man, now art thou come to the land 
of estrangement wherein is not seen one trace of 
virtue. These be the three downfalls by the which 
thou hast descended very far into the land of 
estrangement from the state of uprightness. 

H Chapter VI. Of the three examinations; and 
how it is chiefly by the remembrance of sin that 
a man doth regain his senses to perceive that 
his last downgoing was through mortal sin. 

AFTER that thou hast seen thy downgoings, 
it is fitting that thou shouldest set in order 
the manner of thine uprisings; but inasmuch 
as blindness and insensibility do often bear sin 
company, so that one who is overweighed thereby 
doth not at the time perceive that he is a sin- 
ner, but is dull of understanding; and seeing 
also that the bold bearing of the harlot and 



Of the Remembrance of Sin 1 3 

hardness of heart are engendered in him so that 
he no longer feareth God nor regardeth men, 
therefore, before thou dost make thine ascent, 
thou oughtest diligently to arouse thyself, and ' 
in every way that is within thy reach to strive 
to recover thy sensibility, to the end that thou 
mayest perceive what thy downward course 
hath been, and bewail thy sins. Therefore, that > 
thou mayest know how great hath been thy 
grievous fall through this last step downwards 
— that is to say, through adlual mortal sin — and 
how thou art gone away from the place in which 
thou wast set when thou hadst a nature unpol- 
luted and not yet made evil, to this end, I say, 
thou oughtest diligently to arouse thyself and 
make strict examination, so that at length thou 
mayest open thine eyes, and be able to see 
whither thou hast fallen and where thou liest. 
Wherefore judge thyself stridlly and do this often | 
if not continually, first of all setting this before- 
thee and meditating thereon, namely, how; 
greatly each sin of thine is displeasing to God, , 
how greatly He doth abhor and detest it. In 
order that thou mayest be able the better to 
perceive this, ponder diligently, and until thou 
dost inwardly apprehend it earnestly consider 
that pride was so displeasing to God that He did 
not spare His creature whom once He made the 
noblest of all, but cast him (namely Lucifer) 
forth from Heaven; think, then, will He spare' 
thee because forsooth thou art better or nobler? 

Consider how for disobedience He cast Adam 
forth from Paradise, and despoiled all mankind 
of original justice. 

For luxury He overthrew Sodom and Gomor- 
rah, and in the Flood drowned almost all the- 
world; and many things like to these doth the 



14 The Spiritual Ascent 

Holy Scripture set before thee. Consider that 
sin was so displeasing to God, that He was 
willing to make satisfa6lion for it by His own 
death, and that He could not let it go unpunished 
by reason of His own law of justice. But if thou 
art so hard of heart that this consideration doth ; 

not yet make thee fear thy fall, set before thee ; 

this thought and deal earnestly therewith, 
namely, that Divine Justice cannot judge other- 
wise than as thy works deserve. For God is a 
principle of equity which may be understanded, 
a principle not to be turned aside nor altered, 
awarding punishment to evil not less surely than 
glory to good men. Wherefore be thou well 
assured that He shall recompense thee according 
to thy works, nor leave any evil in thee un- 
punished. So if thou dost consider the matter in 
thine heart after this fashion, I do not believe 
but that thou shalt be smitten with fear and 
overwhelmed with horror. 

' Then, in the third place, recolle6lion should 
come and bring forward into the midst all thy 
grievous sins of the past, and above all the 
chiefest of them. Consider how many sins thou 
hast committed; for on almost every day and in 
every hour before thy conversion thou didst err 
grievously. Who shall tell the tale of the sins 
thou didst commit in thy heart, with thy mouth 
and in thine a6ls? Then take each one severally, 
and see how grievous are those offences by the 
which thou hast offended God Almighty, the 
terrible Judge, the Father kind and bountiful, 
.Who hath done so great things for thee and hath 
sustained thee; and how in a manner that thou 
hast crucified Him afresh. After this, turn over in 
thy mind the thought how foul some of these 
sins are, and especially how greatly they have 



Of the Remembrance of Sin 1 5 

led thee to carnal things. But these oughtest 
thou 10 deal with more briefly, lest if thou linger 
over them some unclean delight creep in. More- 
over, although thou art now converted to the 
Lord, yet deal not lightly with this recoUedlion 
of thine offences, but add to the former task this 
that thou deal also in all diligence with those 
sins thou hast committed since thy conversion. 
Think of each vice with which thou art defiled' 
already, and in particular of thy pride, how high, 
it is; how greatly thou dost desire honour, lust- 
ing for praise, and aspiring to lofty station. Con-; 
sider in what lukewarm and unfruitful wise thou 
hast spent all these years in God's service, how 
that thou canst scarce discern any progress, and . 
how that it may be that God shall punish thee 
yet more grievously for those sins which thou 
hast done since thy conversion, seeing that in 
them thou hast been the more thankless. 

Then having made examination into those 
things in thy thoughts, next ponder diligently 
upon the little satisfaction thou hast given for all 
these sins, how slight hath been thy contrition, 
how few and unsatisfying thy deeds; for be well 
assured that either here or hereafter thou shalt 
pay all, yea, to the uttermost farthing. But here- 
after, according to Bernard, thou shalt pay an 
hundredfold, whilst here thou mightest pay once 
only. Wherefore, when the sinner shall have pon- 
dered in his thoughts these and such like things, 
and shall have perceived that he is smitten with 
fear and overwhelmed with inward grief, then*! 
let him humbly turn his heart that is filled with ; 
sorrow dire6lly to his God by making prayer tp j 
Him, imploring His goodness and mercy with I 
all yearning, promising to change his life and = 
amend his behaviour, and fulfilling that promise ' 



1 6 The Spiritual Ascent 

by the help of GrOD. Yet oughtest thou to direft 
this method of meditation, or one like to it, in 
such a manner that thou fall not into despair, 
but be set on fire to give satisfa6lion and make 
amendment, to the end that thou mayest become 
: ready for every toil, and to bear all infirmities. 

% Chapter VII. Of the second examination by the 
which a man doth bestir himself concerning his 
whole state, both inward and outward, and 
through which he cometh to this point that he 
doth perceive his first downward step, and the 
minishing of the powers of his soul. 

BUT in order that thou mayest the better ap- 
prehend the nature of thy first fall and down- 
ward step which was through Adam, and the 
minishing of the powers of thy soul ; and further 
in order that thou mayest perceive more clearly 
the nature of all vices and passions in general, 
thou oughtest sometimes and at fitting oppor- 
tunity to bestir thyself in another manner adso, 
and to make earnest examination concerning thy 
. whole state. Wherefore, in the first place, dili- 
gently examine thine inner man; see to what 
end the powers of thy soul incline thee, and 
how far that end is from what they ought to 
seek — or how near thereto — or whether they ful- 
fil the end for which, as thou hast heard before, 
they were given thee of God. Examine thy rea- 
son ; consider whether it be not astray in many 
things, whether it be not curious and occupied 
with vanities, leaving things that are wholesome; 
whether it be not deceived, trusting in its own 
determinations, not consenting to lowly things, 
and so becoming stubborn ; whether it be not 
proud, believing itself to be somewhat, though 
it be nothing, preferring itself above its betters, 



Of Examining One's State 1 7 

unwilling to be taught by others, intradlable, 
disobedient, incapable of good counsels. 

Next examine thy memory; see what manner 
of meditation hath been thine most often; for 
that which thou dost love or fear most, upon that 
dost thou most often ponder. ■ 

Then examine thine appetites ; consider by 
what thou art made sad, by what thou art dis- 
turbed, in what thou dost rejoice and take thy 
pleasure ; what thou dost hope and what thou 
hatest ; then shalt thou see clearly how far thou 
art fallen. 

See what manner of brute beasts are wont to 
have the mastery over thy powers concupiscent, 
whether they be those of gluttony, luxury or 
avarice ; what ravening creatures prowl about 
thy powers irascible, for perchance there is the 
lion of pride, the dogof wrath, the basilisk of envy. 

Next examine thine outward man, for the un- 
bridled inclinations of the outer point to an inner 
man that is disordered. Consider whether thou 
dost not often exceed in harsh words, in detrac- 
tion and flattery, in levity, vain talking and much 
speaking ; also and above all consider whether 
thou dost keep charity with all men, or whether 
thou dost sometimes do hurt to the conscience 
of others by giving scandal, by restlessness or 
by the presumptiUousness of strange behaviour. 

Consider alsgr whether thou art burning with 
zeal to admonish others in charitable wise and 
to chide them in humility ; also whether thou art 
earnest faithfully to fulfil the work committed to 
thee. Likewise examine thyself concerning read- 1 
ing, meditation, prayer, and so forth with other 
things, as to thy dispositions in regard to each 
one and the manner in which thou art wont to 
order them. 

C 



1 8 The Spiritual Ascent 

H Chapter VIII. Of the third_ examination, by 
which a man doth bestir himself out of his dail y 
excesses: for by this doth he learn discernment 
concerning purity of heart; and also of the dis- 
covery of the passions. 

BUT to the end that thou mayest be able to 
perceive thy second downward step, that 
namely by which thou hast gotten impurity of 
heart, beingled away by thine own concupiscence, 
thou oughtest to make yet a third examination 
into thy state. This should be done daily, and as 
Bernard doth advise, for the most part after Com- 
pline, for at that time on every day thou must 
diligently look backward and strictly consider how 
often thou hast been drawn to things unlawful 
through thine evil habits, and above all how often 
' that viscous and clinging impurity hath hampered 
thee during the day; as, for example, hast thou 
been led to contemplate things unlawful, to vain 
thoughts during thy prayers, to the utterance of 
idle or hurtful words, or on that day through 
negligence hast thou omitted holy meditation? 
or being overcome of thine own impurity, hast thou 
been without impulse to good? Likewise consider 
whether, being drawn by habit which hath grown 
up in thee, thou hast afforded to temptation a 
means of approach, and hast not rejected or re- 
sisted it. If thou art diligent in telling thy hoard 
in these three ways severally and dost pass 
sentence as a just judge, tearing away the veil of 
self-love and of partiality so as not to favour, 
wheedle, or corrupt thyself in aught, there is no 
doubt but that thou shalt make much progress 
in self-knowledge. 

But what man ever hated his own self? Love 
doth pervert judgement, and zeal knoweth not 
wisdom; wherefore, to the end that through the 



Of Examining One's State 1 9 

confirmation of others thou mayest the more 
firmly believe the accusations thou dost bring 
forward against thyself, do thou often take anxi- 
ous thought and provide for this, namely that thy 
vices maybe pointed out to thee by other men; for 
often the eye of another doth see us better than 
our own, and may be able to judge the better of 
us in proportion as that judgement is more free 
and without partiality. Therefore, after the afore- ' 
said examinations concerning thy temptations, 
thy passions, and thy vicious dispositions, thou 
oughtest often to confer with others, to consult 
them and to make thy plaint to them, that thou 
mayest be the better instructed by their counsels, 
the more humbled in that they know thee what thou 
art, and the^more pierced with compunction when 
thou dost hear from them that thoi^^t vile indeed, 
as thou hast found out througti the aforesaid 
examinations; and the while those who hear that 
thou art of this character shall be disposed as not 
to be corrupted by thy humiliation, but edified 
thereby. 

There is yet one thing more that thou oughtest 
to consider in regard to the aforesaid examina- 
tions, that is to say the second and third of them. 
Thou dost learn by bestirring thee after this 
fashion to recognize thine inward vices, to see 
thine inordinate affections and concupiscence and 
to ponder the disordered state of the powers of 
thy soul; but yet thou shalt never be able to see 
fully and perfectly how strong and deeply rooted 
such affections are, and how they have become 
transformed into thy nature, until thou dost set 
thy hand to them and striving earnestly with 
all thy might to extirpate them, that thus thou 
mayest make trial of their strength and their 
resisting power. 

C2 



20 The Spiritual Ascent 

% Chapter IX. How that before he doth make an 
upward step a man ought first of all to determine 
in his heart what his spiritual exercises should 
be, and to commune with some spiritually minded 
man as to the same ; and how that holy exercises 
are not to be changed lightly, but that one must 
persevere in them until he reach the end. 

HE halh ordered upgoings in his heart. 
But before thou dost begin thine upgo- 
, ing,that is, before thou beginncst to go forward 
in spiritual progress, thou oughtest to order in 
thine heart a means that is convenient to thee, 
by the which thou mayest come to thine end, 
namely purity of heart or charity. Bestir thyself 
and anxiously consider what means are conve- 
nient for thee and what the better fitted to thy 
I need. If thou canst not tell, ask others, and order 
thine ascent by others* counsel. Set before thee 
in thy heart, I say, some end to the which thou 
mayest direct all thine a6ts and exer<::ises ; then 
set before thee the steps, exercises, and some 
fixed scheme by which thou mayest reach that 
' end, and plant firmly in thine heart alike the end 
* and the means thereto. As it seemeth to me to 
! order one's ascent is this, namely to take firm 
i hold upon some means and exercises leading 
thereto which same are determined by discreet 
and diligent discourse between thyself and others, 
and to fix and imprint the same firmly in thine 
; heart ; from this shall come great profit to thee. 
Do these first things, and all the rest in due order 
after the manner upon which thou hast deter- 
mined in thine heart, not carelessly, like some 
who to-day exercise themselves in one way, to- 
morrow in another, catching at all manner of 
things in unstable and wandering wise, and 
making progress in none ; these try all ways, and 



Of Spiritual Exercises 2 1 

perfecSl themselves hi no one ; they do everything 
at adventure as chance may lead them, because 
they have in no wise set themselves in order in 
their heart, nor have determined certainly about 
aught. Do not thou thus, but do all things agree- 
ably to the manner which thou hast ordained in 
thine heart for thine upward way. Diredl all these 
a<5ls and exercises to this, that so thou mayest 
make progress and perfe(Si thyself after the pat- 
tern which thou hast set up in thine heart. The 
Lord said to Moses, ^'Do all things after the 
pattern which was shewn to thee on the mount"; 
but do thou be instant to do all according to the 
pattern which, after due thought, thou hast set 
up for thyself. If the builder set not up first in 
his heart the form and arrangement of the house 
that he is about to build, ere^Ung therein as 
it were a pattern house, he could never bring 
into being an adlual house in proper wise, or 
build it in proper fashion. So, too, it doth behove 
thee, if thou art to make thy upward way, to 
follow his pattern in all thine outward a<5ls, and 
first of all to set up for thyself a ladder. Thus it 
was that GrOD, the firstcauseof all things, brought 
into actual being those things themselves in 
fitting fashion and form, making nothing save 
in accordance with the essential and ideal pattern 
of all things. In the next place, by so arranging 
things beforehand, thou wilt be saved from 
deception; for they who set up beforehand no | 
model of preordained exercises and spiritual ' 
methods, take all that they see other men do as 
being counsels for themselves in their own exer- 
cises ; they trust every spirit, they are stable in 
nothing, nor determined on aught, but in every- 
thing they are wandering. For this cause ought- 
est thou to order these upgoings in thy heart by 



22 The Spiritual Ascent 

diligent examination beforehand, in order that 
in accordance therewith thou mayest be able to 
rule thy life to the end; praising the life and 
exercises of others, but not taking the same upon 
thee, as saith the Abbot Nestor. Likewise thou 
must order these exercises with discreet modera- 
tion, that thou mayest hold thyself stable by 
means of some alternation and refreshment and 
not continue too constantly in any one occu- 
pation, putting aside all others from thy thoughts, 
or leaving them as useless; for if thou do this, 
weariness or infirmity or something of the like 
nature may overcome thee, for an occupation 
that doth lack the rest that cometh of change 
shall produce no lasting good. Wherefore read 
for a season, that thou mayest be the stronger 
for prayer, and work for a while that these 
occupations may unite to serve thee; and all 
these things shall keep thee standing without 
weariness if so be that thou pass from one to the 
other. But let this ordering of thine upward way 
in thine heart be conformable to Holy Scripture, 
and approved after taking counsel with some 
spiritually-minded man. 

If Chapter X. How that a man ought to order this 
in his heart in one way as regardeth the end, but 
in another in regard to the means leading to 
that end. 

BUT thou must order this in one way in regard 
to the end, but in another in regard to the 
things that lead to that end. The end itself, 
f namely, purity and charity, thou must fix and 
imprint immovably in thine heart that thou 
depart not, either by any chance nor by the 
counsel, nor at the bidding of any, from inward 
a(Sls of virtue or from charity ; but thou oughtest 



Of Ordering One's Way 23 

to diredl all thy works and all thine exercises to 
this end, and to turn thine eye ever towards the 
same. For as sailors who have not before their 
eyes any haven whither they would steer do wan- 
der hither and thither, directing their course now 
to the east and now to the west, as the impulse 
of the wind doth carry them, and know not 
whether they be going away from land or coming 
near to it, so also he that doth good works but 
knoweth not the end, which is purity, but doth 
suffer vices to get the dominion over him, can- 
not tell what progress or backsliding he doth 
make in the true spiritual life. The things that 
lead to the end we ought to set before us and 
order in our heart in that manner in which they 
may best lead us to that end, namely, charity or 
purity, but when they hinder us from attaining 
to these virtues we must leave them readily. 
Thus we ought not to be so instant in reading 
or meditation that we cannot leave these occupa- 
tions, save with murmuring and sullenness, when 
charity doth call us, for thus we take on us the 
defilement of sullenness or some other vice. Now 
it was to extirpate these very things that holy 
reading and meditation were chosen. 

Nor ought we in the matter of such exercises 
to be so set upon them as upon the end; but 
when charity or obedience call us we must in 
humility leave these occupations for a while, but 
not for ever, because, as saith Bernard, the 
things that were ordained for Charity's sake 
must not strive against her. 



/> 



24 The Spiritual Ascent 

1" Chapter XI. Of the three upward steps which 
overcome the three falls afore mentioned, and 
do lead us back to a state of uprightness. After 
this it remaineth to speak in the discourse follow- 
ing* of the upward steps by which thou oughtest 
to ascend and return. 

THOU hast heard already that thou hast 
gone down by three descents, as it were by 
three long stages, from the place in which GrOD 
set thee, and so in like manner it is needful for 
thee to return thither by three ascents. 

But the first ascent is that by which thou dost 
climb upward again to thine own heart, for by 
sin thou hast gone far away out of it, nor canst 
thou make progress by spiritual exercises in 
thine heart unless thou return thereto. For this 
cause it is that the Prophet doth admonish us; 
** Return, ye transgressors, to the heart." 

The second ascent, when thou hast so returned, 
is that thou go up from a heart that is impure 
through concupiscence to one that is clean; this 
ascent, which is purity and charity, overcometh 
the second descent. 

The third is in the heart itself, being that by 
which thou dost go upward and overcome the in- 
ordinate afFeftions that were born in thee because 
of Adam, or have been implanted in thee by thine 
own a6l; and this upgomg thou canst order 
chiefly so as to overcome the first descent. 

if Chapter XII. Of the first ascent against mortal 
sin; the three steps of this ascent; and of contri- 
tion. 

NOW, therefore, arise and go upward; begin 
to return to thine heart; and this must be 
by three steps answering to the threefold descent 
by which thou hast fallen into the full iniquity 



Of Mortal Sin 25 

of mortal sin; for thou art turned away from 
thy Creator through pride, which is the formal 
reason of sin; thou art turned toward the crea- 
ture through lust of pleasure; and lastly, through 
thine a6lions that are contrary to the divine law, 
thou hadst transgressed the precepts of thy God. 
Wherefore thou must ascend by three steps in 
the opposite diredlion: first thou must turn thine 
heart from the creature and from sin; thou must 
have a fixed aversion thereto, and a firm purpose 
to serve thy God, and never to subject thyself to 
the creature through unlawful lust of pleasure 
even though thou die a thousand deaths. This 
must thou set before thee in general, not examin- 
ing thyself over each several matter; and thou 
wilt sorrow greatly that thou art gone away so 
far from thy God, that thou hast so grievously 
offended Him, and in a manner crucified Him 
afresh. Behold such an aversion from evil is in 
itself one upward step, and the name thereof is 
Contrition; by this is the hardness of thine heart 
in a manner broken up; for as in the natural 
world hard things are said to be broken {concert) 
when they are crushed into small portions and 
ground up, so, speaking in a metaphor, the 
heart is said to be ^^ broken" when it is softened 
of its hardness. Aforetime, being turned away 
from God, it was hard and stubborn in sin, 
yielded not to divine influence, nor received the 
inbreathing of the Holy Spirit, but turned a deaf 
ear so as not to hear. But, as said St Bernard 
(De Cons, i), by a **hard" heart is meant one 
which is not pierced by compun<5lion, nor sof- 
tened by piety, nor moved by prayer and the 
like. But it is contrite when it, is melted by com- 
punction and softened by piety. 



26 The Spiritual Ascent 

UChapter XIII. Of Confession, which is the 
second step of this ascent. 

FORASMUCH as in thy sins thou hast de- 
spised God through pride, it is needful that 
thou submit thyself humbly to some man that is 
/ 'His deputy, and hath the keys, as if he were in 
GoD*s stead, and that standing before him as if 
before the Lord Christ thy Judge, thou confess 
to him with humility, contrition and grief. That 
is, show thy humility by accusing thyself in each 
matter, and acknowledging thine own sins in 
behaviour, in deed, in the words thou hast uttered, 
in thine answers and all other matters severally, 
' standing before him as before thy Judge. Beware 
lest in confessing thy sins thou seek to be praised, 
as the manner of some is, for by so doing thou 
shalt earn reprobation of God; they who are wont 
to argue with subtlety in the schools make their 
confession after this wise, as also do others. 

Likewise abstain from excusing thy sins or 
their intention, but say simply and humbly what 
is gnawing at thy conscience. Thou must also 
confess with contrition and grief, exercising thy^ 
self before confession in compundlion after a 
fashion that shall be considered hereafter, that 
thou may est come toconfession contrite and grief- 
strickened. If thou do this well, thou wilt not tell 
thy sins as a mere story, as is the fashion of some, 
nor simply recount them without grief as if thou 
wert speaking of some other worldly matter; but 
if thou hast truly conceived the spirit of com- 
pundlion sometimes it shall be hard for thee to 
speak, and thou wilt not be able to restrain thy 
tears. Of this thou must be well assured that thy 
sins are forgiven thee through confession in pro- 
portion to thine intention to be contrite and thy 
humble lowliness. Likewise, if it be possible, thou 



of Confession 2 7 

oughtest to choose such a confessor as doth know 
how to remit or retain sins with discretion and 
prudence, for to such an one thou canst commit 
thy soul with confidence; to him thou canst safely 
reveal thy state, thy life, and all thine exercises, 
as to one from whom thou shalt receive counsel 
in each several matter. And when thou hast found 
such a confessor, do not lightly change him, for 
different physicians use different medicines, and 
medicine often changed doth not heal but doth 
disturb the sick man. Yet in all these things the 
right and obedience to the Church and thy supe- 
rior must ever be preserved. 

Also thou must know that good works enjoined 
upon thee by the priest do give manifold more 
satisfa6lion than those that are undertaken by 
thyself of thine own motion; and this is chiefly 
because of the power of the keys which the Church 
holdeth, and also because of the lowly obedience 
of the penitent. When thou dost uncover thy 
wounds to thy priest, and he, as he properly 
ought to be, iswishful to use the milder remedies, 
show thyself forward to bear these and, as occa- 
sion doth offer, even be somewhat importunate 
that he may not spare thee, but boldly enjoin 
upon thee those things which seem to him expe- 
dient to thy state and thine amendment. This is 
the second step of the first ascent, and is called 
Oral confession. 

H Chapter XIV. Of Satisfa<5lion, which is the 
third step of the first ascent. 

THE third step of the first ascent is this, 
^namely, that as thou hast given thy members 
to sin as instruments of iniquity by means of 
divers offences and evil deeds, so now thou make! 
them instruments of righteousness to sanctifica-: 



28 The Spiritual Ascent 

tion, to the end that thou mayest heal contraries 
;by contraries, that is, a6ting' in a manner con- 
trary to those evils which thou hast done; and, 
above all, by opposing those vices and passions 
by which thou art most often beset. This is done 
by fasting, by watching, by labour and other 
devout exercises, and these, as hath been said, 
are to be undertaken chiefly at the injun<5lion of 
thy confessor, because in this way they are the 
more meritorious in thee. 

This is the last step of the first ascent, and is 
called Satisfadlion. By these three steps is the 
first s^scent finished, and by these three parts of 
penitence dost thou return to thine heart, and 
art likewise reconciled to God. 

H Chapter XV. Here beginneth the second ascent, 
which overcometh the second descent, whereby 
a man doth return to purity; ^.nd how that un- 
cleanness of heart consisteth in three things, to 
overcome which three a man goeth upward also 
in this second ascent by three steps. 

SEE, O man, thou art made whole and recon- 
ciled to God; go forward and advance yet 
further and resolve to sin no more, but rather 
make progress from virtue to virtue, nor think 
that to be reconciled to God through penance is 
sufficient to ensure that thou art accepted into 
His friendship and into perfe6l charity. Knowest 
thou not that Absalom, although reconciled to 
his father, was not yet worthy to see his face 
until he had remained in his own house for a 
set time? 

' In like manner, if thou dost desire to look upon 

' the face of God with a pure heart, do not thou 

presume to do-this hastily, but first be zealous 

to ascend a little way, to exercise thyself for a 



Of the Second Ascent 29 

great while by this upgoing and to arrive at 
purity; prove thine heart thrice, cleanse it again 
seven times, purging and purging it thereby to 
the very bottom, until the dregs thereof and its 
uncleanness are wholly purged away. For, as 
we said above, when a man doth return to his 
heart, whence he had gone out after lusts, albeit 
he is reconciled and purged of guilt by grace, 
yet there abide still the lees and unclean dregs 
* in the soul of the sinner, that is to say, hurtful 
affections with unclean and clinging defilements 
that are gotten by sin and ingrained by habit; 
these thou must purge away and get thee gone 
from them, one by one, and go upward. This it 
is to go forward from an impure heart to purity 
thereof, and to ascend so as to overcome the 
second descent that hath been set forth above. 
But in order to overcome this descent it is need- 
ful to set in order three upgoings in thine heart, 
seeing that the impurity thereof and of thine 
affections seemeth to consist in three things; 
first, that through inordinate affection thou dost 
cleave too closely to the lowest things, or art 
above measure inclined thereto (say to vainglory, 
honour, praise, gluttony, luxury and the like), 
thereby loving things that are not worthy love; 
secondly, the impurity consisteth in this that thou 
lovest not things that are worthy, but thine affec- 
tions and appetites are so unclean, impure and 
infected with evil humours that things spiritual 
and heavenly have no savour for them, but, in a 
fashion, they sicken at the heavenly manna and 
are not moved by the thought of the kingdom 
of heaven and the like. This uncleanness may be 
called hatred of things that are not worthy hate, 
and it pertaineth to them that savour not the 
things they ought to savour. 



30 The Spiritual Ascent 

The third impurity of heart is a certain infirmity 
and sluggishness, by the which a man, though 
already purged in his affection, and even in some 
measure restored by hope, is yet made unprofit- 
able and insufficient to cleave to God with the 
fervent affections of a love made perfedl, because 
the full vigour of charity faileth him. To over- 
come these impurities of thine heart thou must 
make three ascents in succession, that is go 
forward by three steps of virtue. For to over- 
come the first impurity we ascend by means of 
the fear of the Lord, which, as it were, doth 
shake the heart violently and breaketh it away 
from hurtful affections for Ipwer things and from 
ills that cling thereto. To overcome the second 
impurity we ascend by hope, for this doth lighten 
our heart and revive therein the taste for heavenly 
things by giving it a desire to gain them. 

To overcome the third impurity we ascend by 
charity, by the which we are united to God and 
cleave to Him. But of these matters we must 
speak more fully one by one. 

ITChapter XVI. Of the first step of this ascent, 
which consisteth in fear; in this step our heart 
IS by fear withdrawn from hurtful affections and 
attachments* 

SINCE, therefore, thy heart lieth in the snares 
of concupiscence, becometh so fixed thereto and 
stamped therewith that scarce can it be torn 
away, and doth suck thence the honey of noxious 
delight and the milk of hurtful refreshment, 
therefore it doth become thee to sprinkle these 
with some bitter medicine, just as women who 
wean their babies do smear their breasts with 
some bitter matter, that having tasted this the 
child may turn away from his desire for the milk, 



Of Fear 31 

and after a while forget it altogether. Thus, too, 
it is fitting that the fear of the Lord should fill 
thine heart with things most bitter; for example, 
thou art full of worldly desires and carnal 
vices; with all thy heart thou dost yearn after 
high place and worldly glory; it is hard for thee 
to do without delicate meats; grievous to thee 
to be despised and lightly entreated. Therefore 
let the fear of the Lord come into thine heart and 
sprinkle all the sweetness of those things with 
divers bitter thoughts, setting before thee to thy 
terror, and showing thee how that the delights 
of the world do quickly pass away; how the 
penalty for any inordinate delight is great and be- 
yond telling ; how little thou shalt get therefrom, 
and how a just Judge shall come with severity 
and dread to punish thee for these things ; with 
these and suchlike thoughts ought thine heart 
to be embittered, smitten with fear and perturbed 
with dread, and so violently torn away from her 
delights till she forget them. Wherefore negledl 
not to make out of these and suchlike thoughts 
a deco6lion which, though it be bitter, yet hath 
wondrous virtue to purge evil humours, that is 
thy concupiscence ; with this thou canst besprin- 
kle and wash away every worldly delight which 
thou wilt easily reje6l and loathe, being affrighted 
by the bitterness with which thou hast besprin- 
kled it. But to the end that thou may est be able 
to make this kind of deco6lion as often as thou 
wilt — and the name thereof is Compun<Slion — 
see, I will describe the manner of preparing it. 



32 The Spiritual Ascent 

H Chapter Xyil. How Compunction which is born 
of fear maybe brought about in various and divers 
manners by exercises and by meditation. 

COMPUNCTION is born of fear in manifold 
ways. First of all when one doth bring his 
past sins to remembrance, and doth anxiously call 
to mind how greatly he hath offended God and 
how grievous a punishmenthe hath earned, andby 
reason of these thoughts doth weep most bitterly, 
in fear and trembling. 

Secondly, compunction cometh when he doth 
diligently consider his own defects, the passions 
of his soul and the noxious desires that are still 
in him, and even though they rule him not yet do 
shake and vex him; and when he doth remember, 
with cries and lamentation, how little is the pro-^ 
gress he hath made in casting out these evils. 

Thirdly, when a man doth remember the sins 
that he hath committed since his conversion (for 
though they be not high crimes yet let him not 
doubt that God is thereby offended every day), 
and when with mourning and fear he doth deplore 
the same. 

Of these three things we have spoken above 
in the chapter concerning the three methods of 
sifting and examination. 

Fourthly, when one doth consider that the 
judgements of God are inscrutable and a man 
fcnoweth not whether he be worthy hatred or 
love, and that albeit he knoweth himself peni- 
tent, yet he cannot tell whether he is smitten 
with fear only or whether he hath compunction 
and contrition through the grace that is infused 
into him; and when he is altogether smitten with 
dread through his ignorance and uncertainty 
what shall happen to him in time to come, whether 
he shall be damned or saved. 



Compunction is Profitable 33 

Fifthly, when he doth dilig^ently ponder the 
shortness of his life, and understandeth that he 
hath made so little progress hitherto, whence he 
is set afire by fear, and inwardly bedewed with 
compunction. 

Sixthly, when he doth remember the strict ex- 
amination and judgement tocome, when the Judge 
shall draw near to render to every man accord- 
ing to his works; then, since the man knoweth 
his own sins, he is adread at this thought. 

Seventhly, when one doth weigh the greatness 
and multitude of the pains of hell, and knoweth 
orthinketh himself worthy of them; then doth he 
begin to grieve and fear mightily, 

H Chapter XVIII. How that Compun<Slion is 
profitable ; and of the manner in which it doth 
purify the heart. 

IF thou dost earnestly ponder these things in 
thine heart, and dost often fill it with these 
thoughts or with some of them, all sweet things 
become bitter to thee; then shall the world and 
the desire thereof depart out of thine heart; yea 
also the desire of the flesh and the desire of the 
eyes do vanish by this means, and being in- 
wardly filled with this bitterness thou shalt feel 
none outwardly. Thus shall thine heart begin to 
reje6l all the sweetness of the world and its 
affeiSlions and clingings, whether it be to worldly 
glory or honour or the favour of the people, and 
inwardly to loathe gluttony and luxury. But to 
the end that thou mayest have at hand the means 
whereby to prepare this kind of Compundlion, 
let us now set down the method of colle(Sling the 
matters whereof it is composed, just as we have 
already described the manner of preparing it. 



34 The Spiritual Ascent 

% Chapter XIX. A general method to be used for 
shaping meditations about death. 

MEDITATE therefore upon this, and let 
the image thereof never depart from thine 
eyes, namely, that after a short sojourn here 
thou must depart from this life into another 
region that is unknown. All worldly things, the 
glory and honour and whatever else there be in 
which thou delightest in this world, these must 
. thou leave here. Every hour and every day thou 
dost come nearer to thine end and the last hour 
of thy life. Therefore examine thine afFe<5lions, 
and so far as thou canst transform them into 
those of a dying man whilst there is time, and 
form them within thee and in thy meditation as 
if thou wert to die forthwith, and as though that 
which without doubt shall come were already 
present with thee. Consider then, since thine 
affecSlions are such, how much thou dost grieve 
inwardly, how great is thy remorse of conscience 
and thine inward crying against thine evil lusts, 
and how greatly thou shalt grieve in that thou 
hast not amended thyself nor torn thyself from 
thy lusts, and in that thou hast transgressed the 
precepts of God; for in that hour thou shalt see 
what thou hast deserved and what thou hast 
done. Hitherto thou hast kept thy several lusts 
before thine eyes; see now each vice and passion 
wherein lately hath been thy sweet delight. Con- 
sider how bitter a thing it shall be to thee to be 
separated from thy desires, and how greatly thOu 
shalt grieve because in thy life thou wast not 
dead to concupiscence. Then think and fashion 
in thee such alFedlions after this manner, namely, 
by considering that if thy soul should depart 
straightway how gladly thou wouldest leave 
every lust and thankfully seize upon every toil 



Meditations about Death 35 

and penance if only thou couldest get life 
thereby. 

Next consider how short, in that hour, will 
seem all the time of thy life and thy delights. Then 
shalt thou see that all thy time hath gone by like 
a dream or like a shadow, and especially when 
thou dost ponder this, that eternity which hath 
no end is standing at the door. Also think how 
great shall be thy grief in that, for the sake of 
very small delight of but brief duration, thou 
hast lost joy, happiness and glory eternal; remem- 
ber that all these delights shall bring thee no- 
thing any more, save that they shall make a 
bitter death yet more bitter; for in what measure 
thou wast bound by inordinate desires to a mul- 
titude of things, in that measure it shall be the 
harder for thee to be severed therefrom, where- 
fore the wise man saith: "O death, how bitter 
is thy memory to a man that is whole and hath 
peace in his substance.'' But when thou dost 
perceive that this disposition of mind is formed 
within thee and graven on thine heart, then go 
further and think how that hour shall certainly 
come and thou mayest not avoid it; for all men 
die, and since the beginning of the world a 
thousand generations have passed, and thou in 
like manner must follow. But then consider this, 
that thou canst not know that hour of a cer- 
tainty, but it shall come unforeseen, perchance 
this year, perchance this month, perchance this 
very week, for as a thief so shall it come in the 
night when thou thinkest not of it, but dost set 
before thee to do many things. Sometimes also 
turn over in thy mind the manner in which thou 
shalt come to die, that by this means dread may 
the better torment and purge away thy desires; 
for verily most grievous weakness doth for the 

D2 



36 The Spiritual Ascefit 

most part go before death. Think, then, how 
great this weakness shall be, and how heavy 
the infirmity when thy heart shall be broken 
for overmuch sorrow. Bethink thee that then 
shalt thine heart be heavy as if the whole world 
were laid on it, and this cometh both from the 
heaviness of infirmity and because the heart hath 
horror past telling at the natural desire which 
doth assail it, and likewise from fear of one's 
fSins and judgement to come; and so, at length, 
death doth follow. Likewise sometimes set before 
thine eyes the sight of a dying man, and dili- 
gently consider the aspe6l, the manner and the 
order in which he cometh to death; all his body 
doth become livid, his limbs stiffen, his eyes 
turn, and so forth; and then bethink thee how 
devils shall come waiting like roaring lions ready 
for food, if so be they can find in the soul any- 
thing proper to them ; how unclean spirits shall 
meet the soul as she goeth forth, seeking to find 
in her their own works, that they may drag her 
down with them to the depths of hell. Then 
consider how the soul, having gone forth from 
the body, is set straightway before the Judge's 
seat, there and then to receive the sentence which 
shall not be changed thenceforth through the 
1 ages. Afterward follow the corpse to burial, and 
. see how the wretched flesh, for whose sake the 
man did so earnestly seek pleasure, is left to the 
earth, and made food for worms and given over 
to unending forgetful ness. From these and like 
things thou wilt well perceive that the joy and 
pleasure of this world are but a jot, they pass 
like a shadow, and that man is here but as the 
guest of a single night. 

On the other side, thou oughtest sometimes 
to turn thy thoughts to the death of a just man 



On the Last Judgement 37 

and one that is well prepared to die, thinking 
what manner of end his shall be who hath afore- 
time repented, hath purged him of his lusts, and 
loveth nothing here in evil fashion , and so forth 
in each several matter. 

T Chapter XX. General thoughts on the Last 
Judgement by which a man may strike terror 
into himself. 

NEXT turn the eye of thy mind to the Last 
Judgement, that through the most bitter 
thoughts thereof all sweet things may become 
bitter. Bethink thee, therefore, how great dread, ' 
how loud a cry and what wonderment shall be 
when the trump of the archangel shall sound; 
when lightnings shall flash in dreadful wise and 
thunders roar; when to the terror of sinners the 
sun shall be darkened and the moon shall not 
give her light. Think what manner of heart the 
sinner shall have in that day; how that all the 
dead shall arise, each bringing with him what 
he hath done, whether it be good or whether it 
be evil; and the good shall await their Judge with 
joy unspeakable, but the unjust shall look for 
His coming and His face with a terror that none 
may tell, saying: **Ye mountains, fall upon us 
and hide us from the face of the Judge," for 
Time is departed and gone, and there is no place 
whither they may get them and buy the oil of 
good deeds. Then come forth and in thy vision 
meet and behold the Judge coming with great 
might and with the elders of the people, all the 
angels and the saints bearing them company, 
and think upon that bitter division when He doth 
separate the sheep from the goats. Now are 
there two in one house and at one mill, then 
the one shall be taken and the other left, never 



38 The Spiritual Ascent 

more to be joined together. Put thyself in the 
place of them upon the left, to whom it shall 
be said: ** Depart, ye cursed, into the fire,** and so 
forth. Then shall they lament, saying: " Lo, these 
are they whom of old we held in derision**; how 
great shall be the suffering of these, and how 
great their grief. Then put thyself in place of 
them that are on the right hand; with how great 
gladness are they filled in that they have earned 
an eternal recompense in return for but small 
toil. Bethink thee that then shall an examination 
be holden stri6lly into deeds, words, thoughts 
and evil dispositions; then shall all things be 
naked and open, yea, even the things that were 
aforetimecloaked, for Jerusalem shall besearched 
with lanterns and there shall be found therein 
certain Babylonians who were reputed to be 
citizens of Zion. There shall be the devil as a 
witness who shall show us the sins we have 
committed, the time whereat and the place 
wherein we have done amiss, and he shall say: 
"Judge most just, give judgement upon this 
man, and for his fault's sake yield to me him who 
through his pride would not be Thine. ** Thine 
own conscience shall accuse thee, yea, and also 
the holy angels. There shall Christ show to thee 
the marks of His Passion, and from evil men 
shall take away the benefits of His Incarnation, 
for the cause that they have despised them and 
have been unthankful. Then doth the Judge pass 
sentence that is final, from which none may appeal, 
which none may contradi6l and none escape, nor 
shall any prevail to defend himself. Think what 
bitterness, what suffering, what horror, that sen- 
tence may contain: **Go, ye cursed **; what sweet- 
ness, what marvel, what joy the word: "Come, 
ye blessed.*' At times also think of thine own 



On the Pains of Hell 39 

judgement in particular, and fashion thy medita- 
tion each in his own way after the manner afore- 
said. 

f Chapter XXL How that a man, by remember- 
ing the pains of hell, doth get Dread and Com- 
pun6lion. 

THEN turn thine eyes toward the region of' 
the damned and the prison house of the 
wretched, diligently considering what things 
are done therein, the condition of them that so- 
journ there, and what manner of place it is. But 
forasmuch as our mind, for its blindness' sake, 
is better led by things visible and sensible to the 
understanding of the invisible, thou canst put 
before thee the images set forth by saints in the 
Holy Scriptures concerning this matter, so that 
thou mayest the better apprehend the pains 
that are there. Consider then the chaos of hell, 
a place most dread beneath the earth and very 
deep; all dark it is, a well that is without bot- 
tom and all afire. It is a furnace glowing and 
flaming in dreadful wise, and this vast region is 
dark and murky but all aglow and heated, and 
it is filled with a multitude of people unnum- 
bered, all crying aloud and uttering sounds of 
woe, calling out for pain and burning, and 
gnawing one another for very malice as though 
they were foul dogs held together in leash. Then 
consider the grievous nature of the punishment. 
There is an overwhelming heat, to which our 
heat here is in no wise comparable. There is 
cold that none may bear, to which no cold that 
is known in this earth can be made to bear like- 
ness even by comparing them. Think then of 
the exquisite nature and the torment of each 
pang, the numberless pains there are. It is a 



40 The Spiritual Ascent 

fire that never shall be quenched, an ardent heat 
that yet doth give no light. There is cold that 
cannot be borne with fetor must foul, darkness 
that may be felt and worms that die not; pains 
* ravage every sense and every limb. Thine eye 
shall see the spawn of hell that by the terror of 
their aspe6l do won^rously afflict them that 
look thereon; thine ears shall hear naught but 
lamentation and moaning and savage cries, 
with such words as: ''Alas, alas, ah woe is us 
that ever we were born, that ever we were 
created of God, and that we die not. Cursed be 
God, and cursed the Trinity that hath created 
us to this torment." Lo, this is the litany that 
there they sing, giving voice to their lamentation 
and woe. Think of that most wretched com- 
panionship of devils, and of the cruelty of the 
tormentors since they are without pity. They 
weary not in tormenting, they are not moved to 
compassion, but shall make worse the torture 
in every way they can. Yea, they themselves 
exult, saying: **Wh^re is now thy glory; where 
thy pleasure, thine honour, thy lofty station? 
Where thy boundless wealth, thy power, thine 
high place, thine authority? What profit hast 
thou now of all the things that have been? So 
short they were, so quickly did they pass!" 
Consider that every man shall be punished the 
more in those members wherein he hath offended, 
whether it be his tongue or his heart; and the 
more a man hath exalted himself, and hath lived 
in delights, so shall he be smitten there with more 
grievous pains. 

Think also of the inward pains, and chiefly of 
the privation of the Vision of God, which pain 
doth exceed all others; consider that the lost are 
for ever under the ban and cast forth from 



On the Pains of Hell 41 

Jerusalem, that celestial and glorious city, never 
to return thereto. Think on the worm of con-* 
science that never shall die, nor ceaseth; it doth 
cry out ag'ainst men and affli6l them because 
they have fallen to this punishment for a joy so 
small that it is but as a jot. Also think on the 
passions of the soul, the anger and malice with 
which they are afflicted; for wrath, malice, and 
so forth, do chiefly reign in the lost. Likewise 
diligently ponder the eternity of the punishment, 
for this eternity is more grievous affliction than 
all the sufferings; there is no end to these, nor 
any redemption therefrom. After a thousand times 
a thousand years yet is the end no nearer, for 
end there is none. 

By these and like meditations thou shalt con- 
ceive the fear of the Lord, and prepare an 
wholesome compun6lion, so that by such means 
thou mayest tear away thine affe<5lions from the 
lowest things; but it doth behove thee to con- 
tinue for a great while in these exercises and to 
purge the said affections by meditations after 
this wise, and by other virtuous acts, and speci- 
ally in the remedying of vices concerning which 
somewhat shall be said hereafter, for we cannot 
ascend further by any other means. The more 
we cast away our carnal and earthly affections 
the more do we add to ourselves spiritual affec- 
tions; if we do this but little, we add but little, 
but much if we do it much. Wherefore, as saith ' 
the Prdphet, by means of the fear of the Lord 
we must bring forth the spirit of salvation, for 
the fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, 
and therein must we earnestly exercise ourselves 
and purge our heart that we may attain to 
charity. Whence a wise man hath said: "They 
must be made to begin from fear, that they may 



>'-><., 



42 The Spiritual Ascent 

attain to their end, which is charity." Thou seest, 
therefore, how fittingly the Holy Scripture doth 
write down purity of heart next to faith, saying 
this: ** Purifying their hearts by faith;" because 
fear, which is the first effe6l of faith, doth tear 
the heart and rend it away from unclean affec- 
tions and vicious defilements. 

This, then, is the first step of the second ascent 
by which one reacheth out to purity of heart, 
namely faith, or fear which is the outcome 
thereof. 

H Chapter XXII. Of the second step of the second 
ascent, which is through Hope and yearning for 
things heavenly and spiritual, by which a man 
is purged and made whole of the second impurity 
of he art. 

AS .Faith doth make the contagion of vice 
to decrease, by means of fear of judgement 
to come and dread of punishment, making all 
our inward thoughts to quake as it were, and 
withdrawing them from corrupt affections and 
from cleaving to lower things, so doth hope 
coming after faith call away our mind from 
the present and raise it to the contemplation of 
higher things; for that mind is now torn away 
from the affections aforenamed, but it is not yet 
lifted up, yea it is even sunken beneath the weight 
of dread. But through an expectation of an 
heavenly recompense a man doth now despise all 
the pleasures of the fiesh and the vanities of the 
world; and beginning to sigh after things above, 
aspireth to that lofty gladness which hope hath 
set before his heart. Wherefore, if thou dost per- 
ceive that through fear thine heart is now with- 
drawn from the lowest things, yet be not content 
here to abide, nor think that thou hast the con- 



Of the Second Step 43 

elusion of the whole matter. If thou hast begun 
to stand still, thou hast already gone downward, 
for verily thine heart cannot be empty of all affec- 
tions. If, therefore, it be emptied of those that are 
evil, let it be filled with those that are heavenly 
and holy, otherwise it shall fall back again. 
Wherefore, even while thou dost purge thyself 
in fear, it is expedient for thee sometimes to 
breathe in hope. But he that hath purged his 
heart already by continuing a great while in fear, 
doth make his ascent to hope after a manner far 
different. Wherefore hope is the upward way to " 
overcome the second impurity of heart, which 
doth consist in this, that thine affections are so 
deeply tainted with concupiscence or lowered 
with the dregs thereof, and have become so weak, 
that they savour not heavenly things. For hope 
doth infuse into the affections the savour for 
things eternal, and doth restore them again to 
the love of that which is higher. Wherefore (as 
hath been said above) just as a man doth become 
impure bycleaving to lower things, intermingling 
therewith or inclining thereto, so by cleaving and 
inclining to the higher he becometh pure, and 
some measure of cleanness of heart is hereby 
acquired, that is to say, an affection toward hea- 
venly and spiritual things, and this cometh of 
hope. 

Therefore, O man, set before thee the image 
of a place all pure and clean that is above thee, 
and of another place beneath where all is unrest 
and turbulence, where is ceaseless change, where 
all is befouled and impure, and think that thou 
standest between these twain. Then in proportion 
as thou dost go downward into the place beneath, 
in that proportion art thou disquietedby thy lusts, 
made unstable by divers desires and impure by 



44 The Spiritual Ascent 

unclean affections and the admixture of things 
impure. But in proportion as thou goest upward 
by constant meditation, by continual affections 
and desires toward heavenly things, and by hope 
for the same and admixture therewith, in that 
proportion shalt thou be the more quiet and stable, 
longing for one thing only, that is to be in the 
halls of Jerusalem. So shalt thou be made the 
more pure through the intermixture in thee of 
better things. 

llChapter XXIII. Of Compun<5lion through love 
and how a man shall exercise himself therein. 

WHEN, trembling for dread, thou didst 
begin to ascend higher, being constrained 
thereto, we gave to thee a certain medicine to 
purge away those evil humours, by the which 
thou wast hindered from thine ascent. But for- 
asmuch as some infirmity hath still remained to 
thee by reason of such humours, and some cor- 
ruption of taste, so that thou art the less able to 
go upward because things spiritual have little 
savour to thee, therefore take for thine healing 
another medicine that doth come from hope of 
pardon, that is to say the compun6lion that is 
of love. For if through hope thou dost desire to 
go upward, thou must by all means exercise thy- 
self in this compun<5lion, which is chiefly pre- 
pared in two ways, albeit it may be prepared in 
many others. Firstly, when thou hast made an 
upward step, after being stirred up for a great 
while by dread and the horror thereof; when 
thou hast done many good works and periformed 
many devout exercises; when thou shalt have 
been cut off from hurtful lusts and, by the help 
of God, hast ascended so far as to reach hope, 
then standing in hope thou seest from afar off 



Of Compunction through Love 45 

Jerusalem that is in Heaven, the city of the 
vision of peace, which thing could not come to 
thee whites thou wast in dread. Then dost thou 
begin to look oft towards the city and to contem- 
plate her wondrous beauty, and drawn on by the 
fairness thereof to sigh, to groan and to lament 
in that thou art still so far off and dost desire to 
be released and to be with Christ, crying aloud: 
**Who shall deliver me from the body of this 
death?" And then, bethinking thee that thou art 
yet a sojourner too far off from that heavenly 
Jerusalem, thou dost begin to weep soft tears 
and often to mourn that thou canst not attain 
thereto. 

Secondly, this compun6lion cometh when thou 
dost ponder earnestly in thine heart and dost 
take count of the benefits of God which He hath 
given thee in so great number and with so 
mighty a love. Then dost thou begin to think 
on thine own thanklessness, and thy heart doth 
swell and expand with an inward yearning 
toward love for thy God Who hath done so 
great kindnesses for thee. This is the com- 
pun6lion of filial love springing from the fount 
of charity, and it hath wondrous power to over- 
come the second impurity of heart. But to the 
end that thou mayest have means whereby thou 
shalt be able the more readily to inflame thyself 
to this compun<5lion after the two methods afore- 
mentioned, here doth follow a way by which thou 
canst mould and stimulate thy meditations con- 
cerning the blessedness of Heaven. 



46 The Spiritual Ascent . 

T Chapter XXIV, A general method of moulding 
one's meditations concerning the Kingdom of 
Heaven, so as to have Compun6lion and a desire 
to reach that Kingdom. 

BUT thou canst set before thee the sensible 
image of that heavenly country, which was 
devised by saints to suit our understanding. The 
city, then, is of glorious extent and vast size, and 
is of the purest gold, being builded in wondrous 
wise of the most precious jewels, and each of 
her gates is of a single pearl. There is, likewise, 
a most glorious expanse decked with the beauty 
of all manner of flowers; there it is ever fair 
summer, there is the most fragrant sweetness of 
odours and an abundance of all deledlable things. 
.Consider, then, and with all thy might gather 
together thy thoughts to ponder this, that thou 
mayest see how great a joy it is to look upon 
God for ever in Very Essence, to gaze with the 
pure eyes of the heart upon the Most High and 
undivided Trinity, for therefrom doth shine forth 
the essential pattern of all beauty, all sweetness 
■and all goodness; in this Vision thou shalt see 
jail things and know all that thou wilt; by this 
ithou shalt be filled with all good, all gladness 
and all joy; in this blessed shalt thou be, and 
shalt enjoy the Most Supreme Blessedness which 
is God. 

j Bethink thee how great a joy it is to stand for 
iever beside the Lord Jesus and to behold His 
;Most Holy and Glorious humanity (for Peter, 
: seeing Him transfigured, desired to abide so con- 
tinually); to behold on high and glorious in His 
kingdom Him Who of old for our sakes came to 
this place of exile as an outcast and a stranger, 
and to take part in the High Council of Heaven. 
What happiness it is to behold the Queen of 



Of the Benefits of God 47 

Heaven, the Mother of God, in company with 
the other virgins; what happiness and exultation 
to company with the hosts of angels, to rejoice 
with patriarchs and prophets, apostles, martyrs 
and confessors. Consider the corporal gifts with ■ 
which thy body shall be blessed, namely, its 
immortality, immunity from suffering, wondrous 
mobility and most glorious beauty. Consider, 
also, the gifts spiritual wherewith, when made 
blessed, thy soul herself shall be filled, that is, 
fullness of knowledge as concerneth the rational 
powers ; as concerneth those concupiscent, full- 
ness of justice; as concerneth the power irascible, 
superabundance of joy. Think how from these 
principal endowments thou shalt gain many other 
mighty and unspeakable gifts, namely, safety, 
so that thou shalt no more fear to be cast out, 
nor be afraid lest thou be overcome of the flesh, 
the devil or the world. Likewise thou shalt have 
freedom to do whatsoever thou wilt, and joy most 
pure and pleasant in both body and soul, with 
friendships love, honour, peace and all perfefl 
charity. To put all together in a word, thou shalt 
have whatsoever thou wilt and nothing that thou 
wouldest not. 

f Chapter XXV. How that a man, by being mind- 
ful of the benefits that God hath done him, is 
inflamed in devotion and kindled to compun6lion. 

BUT to the end that thou mayest have more 
confidence to hope for, and to attain, future . 
glory, thou oughtest sometimes to turn over 
carefully in thy mind the tokens of love which 
the Lord hath shown thee, and to ponder yet 
more diligently upon the benefits that He hath- 
done, and by these thoughts to be stirred as by 
goads to love Him in return. 



48 The Spiritual Ascent 

Consider then, in the first place, how mighty is 
this token of the love of thy God, that although 
thou hast so often offended Him, so often turned 
thy back to Him, so often departed from Him, 
so often sinned most grievously, yet as often as 
thou wast willing to return He hath received 
thee, hath forgiven thy sins when thou didst 
grieve over them, and when thou wast amending 
and correcting them hath holpen thee. 

Tell the tale, if thou canst, of the natural gifts he 
hath conferred upon thee; He created thee and 
brought thee into beingfrom nothing, makingthy 
nature beautiful and fair, sensible and living and 
endowed with thy five senses. To thee gave He 
understandingbeyond that of the lower creatures, 
by the which thou mightest excel all other 
living things and be able to apprehend thy 
God and understand the very truth. Moreover, 
upon this understanding of thine He did pour 
out the light of His countenance, and conferred 
upon thee great clearness of natural light. Like- 
wise He endowed thee with the power of recol- 
le6lion, by the which thou mightest renew the 
images of things by recallingtheir likeness when- 
soever it might please thee to remember aught. 
In like manner gave He understanding of that 
which may come to pass, whereby thou mightest 
determine what kinds of things perceptible are 
like to recur again. He made thy soul to be of 
such dignity and nobility that nothing could fill 
it to the full, nor aughtsurpass its\inderstanding 
save the Holy and most Glorious Trinity, the one 
God in Whose image and similitude He created 
thee. Why should I say more? He gave thee the 
sun to light thee by day and the moon to shine 
on thee by night, and likewise made all the lower 
creatures for thy service and to minister to thee. 



Of the Benefits of God 49 

Next consider the gifts of grace conferred upon ' 
thee, for He gave thee contrition and sorrow for 
sin, and likewise recalled thee from iniquity, and 
endowed thee with righteousness which is the 
attribute of God only ; but this gift He denied to 
many. Also He gave and inspired thee with will 
by the which thou mightest desire to amend thy- 
self. He ordained the time at which, and the place 
in which, thou mightest be able so to amend, and 
all these things He hath withheld from others 
that are better than thou. 

Consider His gifts of supreme goodness, 
namely, that He gave thee His most Blessed 
Son; first, in the Incarnation — since for thee was 
He born, and for thee crucified; secondly, in the 
Sacrament of the altar in the Bread and Wine. 
He sent thee the Holy Spirit to signify thine 
acceptance, to confer the privileges of love upon 
thee and the ring of betrothal. 

But to the end that thou mayest lift thyself up ' 
yet further to love, to devotion and to the com- 
pun6lion of piety, think how much this mighty 
Lord hath wrought on behalf of thy salvation; 
verily He spake with the Fathers, made Himself 
manifest in figures, spake in the Prophets, led 
thee forth from Egypt and into the land of pro- 
mise, and likewise wrought endless marvels and 
wonders. And with what purpose did He all 
these things, save out of tenderness and love for 
thee, that thou mayest be enabled to gain the. 
Kingdom of Heaven and eternal blessedness, that 
He might illumine thine understanding by the 
knowledge of heavenly things, and purge thine 
affedlions from things that are beneath? Where- 
fore all this ought to lift up thy hope and thine 
affedlions to the love of thy God. But to the end 
that these aod suchlike meditations upon the 



50 The Spiritual Ascent 

goodness of God may move thee yet more, thou 
oug-htest to hold fast this manner of thinking and 
to diredt thine afFe6lions to this, namely, that thou 
inquire diligently into the vastness and might of 
Ithe Benefadtor who hath conferred all these 
.things upon thee. 

For He is most mighty, as thou mayest see in 
the creation. He is most wise, as is manifest in 
His governance and most provident ordering of 
things created: for this cause oughtest thou 
greatly to esteem every gift, however small, that 
He hath given. 

- Secondly, thou must think upon and ponder 
this, namely, with how great care and tenderness 
He conferred these benefits upon thee. From all 
eternity He determined to give these things to 
thee, from all eternity He predestined this; from 
all eternity, I say, in very deed and without cessa- 
tion, it was of thee that He thought and ordained 
.aforehand to work thee good. So was He, and 
so is He, busied on thy behalf, just as He is busied 
on behalf of a whole city or even the whole world, 
for He doth watch over thee as anxiously as if 
He had no other care beside. 

In the third place thou must take to thyself, 
, and to thyself apply, all the divine goodness that 
ihath been conferred upon mankind in general, 
!as though this had been conferred upon thee 
alone, and think: ''It was for my sake that He 
made all the world and all things that are therein; 
it was for me that He was crucified, "and so forth. 
This thought shall kindle thee in no small wise 
to Love, Charity and Thankfulness, and shall 
render thee yet more sensible of benefits so great. 

Likewise oughtest thou to give heed to thyself 
and wonder that to one so vile, so worthless, so 
lukewarm, so unthankful, He hath done so great 



Of the Third Step 51 

benefits with a yearning and a love so 
mighty. 

II Chapter XXVI. Here beginneth the treatise' 
concerning the third step of this ascent, which 
is in Charity and Purity of heart (for in these doth 
this ascent consist), and how a man may know, 
when he is come to this step of Purity and Charity. 

IN the ascents aforesaid and in the steps there- ' 
of is expended all the toil of them that begin 
and go forward, and hitherto they labour to reach 
the same with great strivings, with many pains, 
with watchings, with fasting, with reading, with 
meditation, with the labour of their hands and 
other devout exercises and works of piety. The ^ 
lukewarm, the negligent and the careless cannot 
ascend thither, neither can the coward or the 
slothful man. For verily it is no small toil in 
making this first ascent to put away one's past 
life, to mourn and repent and to bring forth 
fruits meet for repentance. But it is a yet greater, 
or at the least ayet longer, toil to overcome ancient 
habit that hath become inveterate; to leave inor- , 
dinate affection^ and inclinations to lower things; 
to purge uncleanness, impurity and the affe<5lions 
thereto that have been contrafled; to stifle the 
lust of gluttony; to put down luxury; to smother 
wrath; to fight down pride, and so forth, with 
other vicious affections, all which things pertain 
to the purgation of fear. But it is a yet more toil- 
some, or at the least a loftier, step then to lift up the 
whole soul and all the affections (so far as is 
possible in this step) to heavenly things, and to 
dwell in Heaven through Hope. 

Consider how vast and mighty an ascent lieth 
between stage and stage of the upward way, that 
is between fear and hope, in so far as the height 

E2 



5 2 The Spiritual Ascent 

of ^he ascent and the toil of traversing it per- 
tain to this present consideration. Yet he that 
hath done his journey well hitherto is come 
nearer already to purity and charity, albeit he 
must g-o up yet further by means of certain other 
steps: for he must exercise himself for a great 
while and daily in going up and down these two 
steps of fear and hope, striving to fight down 
noxious affections, pride, wrath, gluttony, and 
the like, transferring as it were into his nature 
humility, chastity, and the other virtues. But 
• there are two things which .cQn^titute progress 
in this third 3tep of purity and charity. The first 
is this, that a man hath already put on an affec- 
tion to virtue and in a manner transferred this 
into his nature, so that he doth virtuous deeds 
no longer through the constraint of fear, nor 
through the inducement of hope for reward, but 
because he doth take delight in the pure affection 
to good that dwelleth in him. Also through the 
same affedlion to purity and charity (that is to 
say, love of virtue, the yearning desire therefore 
that hath become his inward habit, and his heart- 
< felt delight therein) he doth abhor maliciousness 
and impurity for their very natures' sake. Now he 
doth virtuous deeds, not ad one striving against 
his desires but having in his heart an affedlion 
to virtue for her own sake; not only doth he refuse 
to harbour within him aught that may be con- 
trary to the said affeiSlion, but doth even detest it 
with the deepest loathing. 

This is he that doth good deeds for their own 
sake, because his delight is in an affection to the 
good; for he that doth enjoy the quietness of 
peace, having overcome the assaults of evil, and 
doth pass over to an affection to virtue herself, 
that man shall maintain continually in its place 



J 



Of the Third Step 53 

the good of which he is altogether a part, be- 
cause he doth believe that no loss is greater than 
that of inward purity; nor doth he judge aught 
to be more dear and precious than a^lual purity, 
for to him the noxious transgression of virtue is 
in itself a grievous punishment. The upright be- 
haviour of such an one will not be the greater by 
reason of the presence of other men and his 
reverence for them, nor will solitude diminish it. 
But in that he doth everywhere carry about with 
him and above him an arbiter to judge not his 
deeds only, but also his thoughts — and that 
arbiter is conscience-^therefore he doth take to 
him no defilement of mind. 

The second thing is that just as affe6lion to 
virtue hath become a habit in him after the 
manner aforesaid, so also, being thus disposed,' 
he must be united with God by ardent love, ever 
prepared to do the good pleasure of the Divine 
Will through his fervency of spirit, and continue, 
intent upon the contemplation of the Divine: for,! 
indeed, he doth cleave to God through fervent 
love, and by reason of the Vision of Him doth 
abhor vice and sin. By this love and this Vision 
he is ever kindled with zeal, doth earnestly love 
truth, is fired with the desire of wisdom and lov- 
eth holiness of life and discipline of chara6ler — 
for that chara6lerdoth hold boastfulnessashame, 
hateth detra6lion, knoweth not envy, detesteth 
pride,^ and not only fleeth from honour before 
men, but doth even abhor and despise it. Like- 
wise such a character doth most vehemently 
loathe and persecute all impurity of heart within 
itself, and as if by its very nature doth both rejeft 
all that is evil and embrace that which is good. 

This is the fruitful mountain, and whosoever 
shall ascend it may go in and out and find pas- 



54 The Spiritual Ascent 

ture. For going in, that is to say into his own 
heart, he shall find in his powers concupiscent 
joy in the Holy Spirit, great-heartedness, kind- 
liness, modesty and so forth; and in his powers 
irascible, courage, constancy, perseverance, 
patience and the like. By his understanding he 
doth often climb beyond himself to the appre- 
hension of the Vision of Gtod, albeit he doth 
apprehend this as in a glass darkly. But going 
out he is kindled to the Love of the Creator by 
the knowledge of the creature and its beauty. 

Compare then this state to that in which, as 
aforesaid, Adam was set, and see how far the one 
is from the other. This is the state of Perfe6lion, 
this is the mount of Purity, this the whole up- 
ward way thereto which is true Charity. 

He that can go up, let him go; he that can 

attain, let him attain; but let the sluggard that 

doth flee from toil depart. For all this state of 

perfeftion may be attained by no man except it 

be by the special grace of God, which grace is 

not given to sleepers, to the negligent nor to 

them that will not work together with Him, 

wherefore it is said: **Love is a kind of war; 

thence those who fear." But men may climb up 

: to this height step by step, and come near to it 

, by daily exercise. 

f Chapter XX VH. Of the three step3 of the 
ascent which overcome the third impurity; by 
these, each in his order, is a man so disposed as 
to be able to cleave more perfe6lly to God. 

NOW, it hath been said above that the third 
impurity of heart doth consist in a certain 
disability and unfitness for cleaving to GtOd and 
knowing Him. From this it cometh that though 
the affections be purged, and hope hath been 



Of the Three Steps 55 

recovered, yet perchance a man may not always 
be able and fit to cleave to (jOd, nor to abide 
quietly in Him through his affe6lions; and yet, 
as we have said, this is that in which alone the 
higher step of purity and charity doth consist. 
Wherefore one must set forth the manner in 
which, going up step by step in due order, a 
man may become fit for this, to the end that he 
who is occupied in casting out the third impurity 
may become more fully pure. 

For this purpose thou must order once more 
fresh ascents in thine heart, that thereby thou 
mayest learn and accustom thyself likewise to 
cleave to GrOD through charity. And for the 
ordering of these ascents thou must know this, 
namely, that Christ Jesus, who is GrOD and 
man and the Mediator between GrOD and men, 
is Himself the Way by the which thou oughtest 
to ascend to the knowledge of the Divine, and 
to Love, as saith Augustine in the seventh chap- 
ter of the Confessions. For chiefly to this end di JA 
Christ take flesh upon Him, that whereas we 
were unable spiritually to understand God, yet 
through Christ, the Word made flesh, we might 
ascend to the knowledge and spiritual love of 
Him. Wherefore order for thyself a threefold . 
ascent by devout exercises founded upon the life 
and death of Christ. Let the first ascent be this, 
that thou cleave to Him with loving inclination 
and the desire of thine heart, albeit that desire 
be somewhat carnal; accompany Him by pur- 
suing the thought of His life and death, and by | 
taking delight, throughout thine exercises, in ; 
His presence, and in the remembrance of Him. ^ 
In this first ascent, and in this first afFe<5lion of 
thy mind, thou mayest vary thine exercises in 
divers ways, just as during His lifetime many 



56 The Spiritual Ascent 

followed Him through divers motives and with 
divers intentions. For the Apostles followed Him 
in the first place only for their delight in His 
bodily presence and the refreshment of His talk, 
being drawn to Him by His sweetness and kind* 
liness. And do thou in like manner follow Christ 
at first in this fashion, and be in His company. 
Bethink thee how sweet is His presence and 
what His beauty and comeliness, for He is fair 

"of form beyond the sons of men. Consider His 

« pleasant words and most sweet dodlrine, and 
likewise the manner in which Christ bare Him 
in all things, with what kindliness and benignity 

• He uttered those honeyed words. Ponder also 
the manner in which He bare Himself inwardly, 

-for He was mild, kindly and gentle from within. 
Consider His reverend bearing. His fair as- 
|pe<5l; think on the fathomless wisdom that was 
!in the heart of Christ, the most beautiful elo- 
quence that proceeded out of His mouth, that 
most excellent disposition of chara6ler that was 
shown in His outward manner. After this fashion 

'"clid the Apostles follow Him, but others to the 
end that He might heal their infirmities; do thou 
also follow sometimes in this manner, and pros- 
tratingthyself humbly adore Him,saying: "Lord, 
if Thou wilt Thou canst make me clean," or, 
"Jesus, Thou Son of David, have mercy upon 



me. 



Some followed Him for the sake of His mir- 
acles, and do thou too marvel at His might 
therein, for He doth change nature, transmute 
the elements, putteth to flight devils and healeth 
every infirmity. From this learn that He is God 
Who at the first implanted in nature her law of 
effects, but held this law ever in subordination 
to Himself, that He might produce at will effects 



Of the Three Steps 57 

supernatural. In such-like ways mayest thou 
diversify thine exercises and thine afFeftions in 
this first ascent. 

But know thou that albeit such exercitation is 
profitableenough in spiritualniatters(as,for exam- 
ple, it is a profitable thing to occupy oneself 
upon the character and conduct of J esus Christ 
our Lord), yet for the purpose of ascending to 
His Love this is not sufficient ; yea, moreover, 
such exercise is of little profit in itself. What pro- 
fit was it to Pilate, to Herod or to the Pharisees, 
who saw indeed the character and bearing of 
Christ and His bodily presence, but desired not 
to imitate Him? Wherefore the end of this first 
ascent, as saith Bernard in his treatise on the ' 
Canticles, will be this to thee, namely, that just 
as the Apostles, being drawn by this affection, 
did leave all things, the riches of the world and 
so forth, so thou, too, must persevere in this 
step in order that this sweetness may take pos- ' 
session of all thine heart, and that it may free 
itself wholly from every lust of the flesh, and 
from carnal enticements. That is, in a word, that 
a man must, in performing these exercises, 
stretch forth in his heart to an affection towards, 
and a love for, the humanity of Christ in such a 
manner that every affection and appetite that is 
in him may have reference to the sweetness of 
that humanity. 

The second ascent, by the Life and Passion of 
Christ, is to go up yet somewhat higher and not 
only to exercise oneself upon His humanity, but 
also (as saith Bernard) to find God in the man 
Christ, that is to find not God only, nor man only 
in Him, but to understand Him as being alike God 
and man, to love Him as both; to love Him, 
I say, and likewise to adore. It doth bear much 



58 The Spiritual Ascent 

fruit in thine exercises upon the Life and Passion 
of Christ the Lord if, so often as thou dost read 
or meditate upon how He did or suffered this or 
that, thou canst form within thyself such a con- 
cept about Him as shall clearly represent Him 
to thee as being both God and man : that is to 
say, a concept which shall signify to thee one 
Person who is at the same time both God and 

j man ; so whatsoever a6l of His of the which thou 
dost read, or upon which thou dost meditate, 
whether it be in raising the dead or in the work- 
ing of miracles, doubt not that this was the acl 
of Christ the man ; and of whatsoever suffering 
of His thou dost read, be it the piercing of His 
hands, or the nailing of His feet, thou must 
believe without doubt that God bare it. This is 
because of His Unity of Person in the which the 
Godhead and the manhood did subsist without 
the confusion of their natures— and whosoever 

lis a true Christian doth believe this; but the 
more clearly a devout person doth apprehend it 
so much the more fully will his affedlions be set 
upon the life, the Passion and the miracles of 

I Christ. If thou dost think upon Him as man, 
from that thought shall come to th^e a sweet 
affe6lion towards Him and great confidence ; for 
He was a man most mild, most kindly, most 
noble, most gentle, altogether fair, gracious and 
comely, wherefore thou shalt have confidence in 
approaching and adoring Him, and shalt more 

^easily apprehend Him, and this because the 

iknowledgeofHis manhood is moreeasilyacquired, 
being a thing impressed upon the mind from 
which the knowledge of His Godhead is very 
far off. 

But if thou dost meditate upon Christ as God, 
from that concept of Him all His words, adls, 



Of the Three Steps 59 

miracles and deeds shall seem the more dread- • 
ful, terrible, awful and marvellous. 

So it is that if thou dost understand and con- 
ceive in thy mind that both natures were in 
Christ, there shall be born in thee great devo- 
tion, love and confidence, and, on the other hand, 
fear and reverence. 

The third ascent, then, is this, to rise to £[. 
spiritual affection, now by means of Christ's 
manhood, now by contemplating Him with the 
mind's eye as Very God, albeit in a glass darkly, 
and thus to come from His manhood to the know- , 
ledge and love of His Godhead. Through this- 
means chiefly is impurity of heart cast out by 
cleaving to God; moreover, by this perception . 
of the mind, this cleaving and this transforma- 
tion, a man doth begin to be in a certain manner 
one spirit with God, to pass outside himself, to 
perceive the Very Truth, and to be made to be 
united to God and to cleave to Him. For thi^ j 
cause, Augustine, in the seventh chapter of the 
Confessions y saith: **Now, being admonished to 
return to myself, I entered into mine inmost heart 
again taking Thee for my guide, and I was 
enabled because Thou wert become mine helper. 
And I saw, as it were with the eye of my soul, 
the unchangeable light of the Lord shining upon 
that same eye and upon my mind. It was not 
that light that is common and visible to all flesh, 
not, I say, of the same nature, though greater, 
nor even like the common light grown vastly 
more and yet more clear and occupying all space. 
Nay, this light of mine was not that, but diffe- 
rent, far different from it. He that knoweth the 
Truth, kno we th also this light. O Eternal Truth, 
True Love, Beloved Eternity, Thou art my God, 
for Thee I sigh night and day. " Lo, this is the 



6o The Spiritual Ascent 

last ascent in this pilgrimag-e until a man goeth ' 
upward to the essential Vision of GrOD. 

But let the brute beast beware that it touch 
not this mountain, let the unclean take heed that 
he come not nigh to it, for the beast that toucheth 
the mountain shall be stoned. 

Furthermore, that thou mayest have a means 
whereby to exercise thyself in the matter of these 
ascents, here also, as in the steps aforesaid, I 
have given heed to notify to thee a general method 
of meditation upon the Life and Passion of Christ. 

H Chapter XXVIII. Of the types and prophecies 
in the Scriptures concerning the Incarnation of 
Christ. 

THE matterof all Holy Scripture is concerned 
with the work of our Redemption, and all 
things in the Scriptures are referred thereto. The 
Old Testament doth foretell that this is to come, 
the New doth more fully show it as accomplished 
and fulfilled: consider, then, howmany things did 
precede the accomplishment of that work, in 
types, a<5ls, deeds, oracles and apparitions that 
are recorded by kings, prophets and priests, and 
from this understand the greatness of this work 
and what thankfulness it doth demand. Consider 
thine own unthankfulness and disaffe<5lion com- 
pared with the longing desire of men of old. 
Ponder over that desire and marvel over the 
lukewarm affe<5lion of thyself and many others 
toward this work. 

% Chapter XXIX. Concerning the Annunciation. 

BUT when the fullness of time was come that 
the aforesaid types should be fulfilled, and 
it pleased Christ to accomplish the desire of 
men of old, the angel Gabriel was sent to an- 



\ 



The Life of Christ 6i 

nounce to the Virgin that the Lord must be 
made flesh. 

At this rejoice in that the desire of the fathers, 
and the former oracles were now fulfilled. Think 
upon the reverence of the angel to Mary; marvel 
how God did humble Himself; consider how the 
Virgin was exalted; mark the humility, chastity 
and other virtues of Mary, the joy she then knew, 
her exultation and glad devotion; and forget 
not the ministry wherewith she ministered to 
Elizabeth. 

f Chapter XXX. The Life of Christ in brief, until 
the Supper. 

FORTHWITH the Son of God, of Whose 
greatness there is no end, was made a little 
child. Consider how this little one, that was CrOD, 
did weep and cry in the manger ; note well His 
poverty; mark His humility; marvel at the con- 
course of angels; turn thy thoughts to the shep- 
herds' watch and listen to the converse of the 
angels with them. Behold the amazement of 
Joseph, the jubilation of Mary; mark the face 
and manner of this most fair man child, but note 
likewise the inner greatness of the little one. 
Marvel at His wisdom, and in reverence kiss 
the manger. 

On the eighth day is He circumcised, and is 
called Jesus. 

Consider how, being without sin. He took 
upon Him the mark of the forgiveness of sins. 
Be pitiful in that a child so tender suffered hurt, 
and shed His blood for thy sake. Bethink thee 
that albeit He wept outwardly, yet inwardly He 
was shewing compassion to man. Think upon 
the sweet name Jesus, and take His circumcision 
as a pattern for thee to follow. 



62 The Spiritual Ascent 

Then a bright star appearing led the Magi to 
Christ. Consider the devotion of these wise men, 
follow thou them, and with them offer to Christ 
in all devotion whatsoever thou hast, that is to 
say, thy soul. Think in how great squalor and 
poverty the Magi found Him, yet did Christ 
not order Himself otherwise by reason of their 
coming. Mark here the threefold testimony to 
His birth: first, that of the star; secondly, that of 
the Magi; thirdly, that of the Jews who forbade 
their testimony. This do that thou waver not in 
the faith. 

Then did Mary present Christ in the Temple, 
and with the offering ordained for the poor did 
redeem Him as her firstborn. 

Think upon this train wherein were Mary, 
Anna, Simeon and Joseph; come devoutly to 
meet them and look upon them; mark their sweet 
converse and their great devotion, the humility 
alike of Christ and of Mary His Mother. 

Christ, while yet a Babe, is driven forth by 
Herod. 

Consider His patience and learn to suffer; 
follow the Holy Family upon their journey; listen 
as they talk together, and in all things learn the 
lesson of poverty and humility* 

From His twelfth year until His thirtieth He 
that was Himself the King of Glory abode 
hidden and in obscurity amongst the people. He 
taught not, neither wrought His wonders ; but 
though He kept so long silence, yet by that 
silence He taught most mightily, and by doing 
naught. He wrought a mighty work, teaching 
thee not to arise hastily to be a teacher, unless 
first thou hast sat still and borne thee humbly. 

But in His thirtieth year He was baptized of 
John. Think upon the reverence of John: how he 



The Life of Christ 63 

trembled to touch Christ; and of Christ's 
humility Who made Himself subje6l to John and 
fulfilled all righteousness, that is to say, perfedl 
humility, and mark how in this matter the whole 
Trinity of Persons is revealed, and how GrOD the 
Father sent forth Christ to preach, saying: 
** Hear ye Him." 

Then, fasting in the wilderness for forty days 
and forty nights. He was tempted of the devil. 
Consider the behaviour of Christ in the wilder- 
ness, what He did there, and His devout prayers 
and meditation; likewise observe His humility 
in that He was with the wild beasts, as saith 
Mark. Think upon His wondrous patience: He 
is taken up by the devil, and yet He beareth it. 
See with what wisdom He did resist Satan, and 
gave to thee an example of resistance; then 
marvel at His dignity, for angels ministered to 
Him. 

After this, choosing certain lowly fishers. He 
in their company took it upon Him to make all 
the world subjeft with the sword of His preaching. 

Mark His common life with the Apostles, and 
His sweet conversation ; think upon their private 
talk in the house and upon the way ; see how He 
is amongst them as one that serveth ; He doth 
eat with them from one table and from one dish; 
He hath no privilege over them, and so forth. 

From that time forth He was seen upon the 
earth, and did converse with men. 

Moreover, while He walked amongst men, 
and sowed everywhere the word of God, He 
wrought many miracles which could not be done 
save by God : to the blind restored He sight, to 
the deaf their hearing ; He cast out devils, }le 
cleansed lepers, and in a word, He healed all 
and did so many marvellous works that they can 



64 The Spiritual Ascent 

scarce be written. To them that besought Him 
forgave He their sins ; He preached everywhere, 
He spake mystic parables, in one of which He 
said that He, the Shepherd, was come to lead 
back the sheep that was lost. 

Now mark this, and consider how often a vast 
multitude followed Him even so far as the wil- 
derness, a multitude that numbered sometimes 
four or five thousand. Do thou likewise follow 
and be near Jesus; look upon His face, and the 
faces of the Apostles, hear His word3 and see 
His miracles. 

But since His will was to offer the sacrifice for 
the which He was come, that He might show 
Himself the true Paschal Lamb, on the fifth day 
before the Passover, He, the Lord of heaven 
and earth, rode upon the ass that was brought 
Him by His disciples and entered into Jerusalem, 
the Holy City, in triumph, and with proclama- 
tion of praise, while the sons of the Hebrews 
shouted, **Hosanna in the Highest." 

Mark here the deep humility of Christ the 
King ; the fashion in which He sate, the adorn- 
ments which He bare, and what manner of royal 
troop was with Him. Behold Jesus weeping and 
lamenting when He came near to Jerusalem and 
looked upon her, yet mourneth He more over the 
soul that sinneth. 

U Chapter XXXL Of the Lord's Supper. 

BUT when the time of His Passion was at hand, 
He that had ever loved His own loved them 
to the end; and so it was that being about to pass 
,from this world He made a great Supper and a 
marvellous, filled with mysteries and pregnant 
with sacraments, and to this He called the 
Apostles. ** With desire," saith He, **have I de- 



Of the Lord^s Supper 6$ 

sired to eat this Passover with you"; and in this 
Supper He did many marvellous things, yea verily, 
and did institute a memorial and as it were a sum- 
mary of all His wondrous works, giving meat to 
them that feared Him to remind them of His 
marvels, and saying: ''Do this in remembrance' 
of Me." As Jerome saith, this last memorial He 
left us, just as one that goeth on a far journey may 
give some pledge to him that he loveth to the 
end that so often as this last shall see the gift 
he may be enabled to call to mind the kindness 
and love of the giver; nor can he that hath loved 
perfectly see the same without yearning and 
tears. So, too, the Saviour did hand down to us 
this Sacrament, that we might ever remember how 
He died for us. Wherefore, when we receive this 
from the priest, let us be mindful that it is His 
Body and Blood, that we may not be thankless 
for so great benefits. 

But there are many things that thou must turn ' 
over in thy mind with all devotion and reverence in 
this Sacrament, and that thou must cherish with 
all piety. Think, therefore, how that in this Supper' 
the Lord Himself, who is mighty and laudable 
in exceeding measure, did wash the feet of His 
disciples, and moreover of him that did betray 
Him, stooping even to the ground and girding 
Himself with a napkin, which thing was done to 
instrudl us by the example of His humility. Con- 
sider the manner in which Christ barehim during, 
this ablution, both outwardly and inwardly.! 
Outwardly He did wash their feet with humility 
and great diligence; inwardly He did accomplish 
His work with the deepest lowliness and devotion. 

Look backward, andseethatmostlovingMaster 
and Lord sitting at one table and eating from one 
dish with His disciples. Think how abundantly in 

F 



66 The Spiritual Ascent 

this Supper He did refresh their hearts pouring 
into them streams of do6lrine. And at the last 
He held converse with them, and each word there- 
of burned with fire as though His discourse were 
flaming with brands of love. But John the 
Evangelist alone hath set forth a full account 
thereof: for he saw more clearly than the rest and 
soared higher than they. Think how he eat the 
lamb that was His type, and signified to thee in 
a figure that thou must partake of the True Lamb 
and the Sacrament of the Eucharist. But above 
all these things thou oughtest ever to turn with 
thy mind's eye, and with thy most fervent desires, 
to the thought of that most excellent of all Sacra- 
ments which He did there institute, and to bring 
back thine heart to the same; marvel at that most 
bountiful munificence of Christ, and the bound- 
less worth of the said Sacrament; but when thou 
dost call the same to remembrance, let all that 
Christ did for thee in the flesh come into thy mind, 
for this is what He said: ''So often as ye shall do 
this, do it in remembrance of Me," that is, in re- 
membrance of what I did for thee in the flesh, 
namely, that for thy sake I was made man, for 
thy sake I suffered many most bitter pains, and 
.. at last for thy sake was I crucified. 
' But forasmuch as thou art going up an ascent 
so steep and difficult, and a great part of thy 
journey, yea and a mighty climb are yet before 
thee, here is a food most needful to sustain thee 
in the way by which thou goest up, and for this 
cause it hath obtained this name and is called 
.Viaticum. As saith Bernard: "The Body of Christ 
is to the sick a medicine, to sojourners their sus- 
tenance; it doth strengthen the weak and rejoice 
the strong; healeth languor, preserveth health, 
maketh a man more gentle to reproof, more pa- 



Of the Lord's Supper 67 

tient of toil, more ardent in love, more prudent 
in precaution, in obedience more prompt, in 
giving of thanks more devout. For this cause it 
is needful for thee often to prepare thyself to holy 
participation in this Sacrament, because just as 
this Food, well and worthily received, doth confer 
upon the soul a mighty and abundant grace, so 
doth It bring the greater guilt to them that are 
ill ordered to receive It, and death also, not 
through any fault in the Sacrament Itself but 
through the ill disposition of him that doth re- 
ceive It. For ofttimes the effe^l of Sacraments is 
such as to work good or hurt in accordance with 
the disposition of those that do receive them. 

But to the end that thou mayest be able to ' 
receive worthily, thou must exercise thyself in 
three things that are needful to a worthy recep- 
tion; and the three things are these: purity of 
body, cleanness of conscience^ an effedlual de- 
votion. Purity of body sometimes cometh of 
congruity, but at other times it must needs be 
sought, and this is because impurity of body is 
of divers kinds, and each hath a different cause 
and origin. 

Cleanness of conscience is a thing that is chiefly 
and above all else needful to thee: for which cause 
before receiving this revered Sacrament thou 
oughtest by all means to test thyself after the 
manner aforesaid, and in accordance with the 
first and second examinations, and so to exercise 
thyself in contrition, and inflame thine heart to 
compunction that thou mayest grieve over the 
sins thou hast committed in thought, word and 
deed, and likewise over those things that thou 
hast left undone. 

Then approach thy confessor after the manner 
aforesaid and confess thy sins, especially the 

F3 



68 The Spiritual Ascent 

more grievous: yet thou wilt be able, also, to 
confess all thy sins, both those that are notable, 
such as do commonly beset thee, and such as 
are venial. 

In the third place, thou oughtest to exercise 
thyself so as to attain effectual devotion, which 
doth seem to consist in two things, namely, that 
thou shouldest have fear and reverence for the 
reception of this Sacrament, and, further, that 
thou mayest be moved by efFe6lual love and 
longing for union with Christ. Let fear, then, 
induce reverence in thee, by bringing- forward to 
thine inward sight the most profound worthiness, 
the most worthy and dread profundity of this 
Sacrament; and to the end that thou mayest 
understand the reverence due thereto, and the 
worthiness thereof, and mayest not come near 
to tt lightly through lack of fear, do thou con- 
sider diligently Who is He of Whom thou dost 
partake, and who thou art that partakest. For 
thou dost partakeof Him Whom John the Baptist 
trembled to touch. Whom Peter, the chief of the 
Apostles, put away from him for dread, and, not 
daring to come near Him, said: "Depart from 
[ me, O Lord, for I am a man and sinner." Domi- 
nations adore and powers tremble at Him of 
Whom thou art about to partake. He it is Who 
shall be thy Judge, and thou shalt stand for 
sentence before His judgement seat. He it is into 
Whose hands thy soul shall come^ when she shall 
have gone forth hence, to be by Him received 
according to her deserving. See, then, with how 
great reverence thou must come near to Him, 
and look well to this, namely, that naught doth 
offend God so much as presumptuous daring and 
the irreverence that knoweth not shame. Next, 
bethink thee who thou art: in v^ry truth a man 



Of the Lord's Supper 69 

that is lukewarm, negligent, full of vices. Recall 
to thy mind what manner of man thou art shown 
to be by the three examinations aforesaid, and 
afterward consider that although thou shouldest 
prepare thyself for a thousand years, yet couldest 
thou not be thoroughly sufficient to receive this 
Sacrament right worthily, nay, not if thou wert 
dowered with every merit of all saints, and didst 
blossom with all the purity that may be attained 
by men and angels. How then canst thou dare 
to approach without fear or without reverence, 
seeing that thou dost order thyself in thine heart 
to make preparation but for a short while? Pear 
lest it be said: ''Behold, the hand of a traitor is 
with Me at the table," that is to say, if (as saith 
Bernard) thou dost betray Christ, Whom thou 
hast received, by the vices of pride, envy and so 
forth. 

Fear to receive unworthily, lest thou eat and j 
drink judgement upon thyself; yet let not this fear 
be so great as to shut out desire from thine heart 
and to take away devotion ; for that Bread (as 
saith Augustine) doth demand the hunger of the 
inner man; wherefore, also, it is needful that 
thou have desire and love. But there be many 
ways by which thou mayest inflame thy desire 
for receiving this revered Sacrament. 

Sometimes love of union with Christ ought ** 
to set thine affection afire, so that thou mayest 
be able to embrace Him Who cometh often to 
thee, with the affection of thy mind and the 
inmost desire of thine heart. Sometimes the^ 
yearning for spiritual health ought to draw thine 
affection, so that, since thou seest thyself to be 
filled with concupiscence and passions, that thine 
own strength faileth thee, and that thou hast no 
power to make progress, thou mayest bring to 



70 The Spiritual Ascent 

'thee the Lord Jesus, that most Holy Physician; 
for His name is called '* Jesus," that is, "The 
Saviour"; or sometimes, again, the knowledge 
of the things thou hast done amiss ought to 
kindle thy desire; for when thou dost perceive 
how by thy grievous sins thou hast offended God 
and dost read that Christ did institute this Sac- 
rament for the remission of sin, it is no marvel 
if thereby thou art kindled with desire to receive 
It. Sometimes love and compassion fpr thy neigh- 
bour ought to draw thine afFe6lion, when thou 
dost consider how that through this Sacrifice 
thou canst succour the quick and the dead and 
' so forth with many like thoughts. But to the end 
■ that thou mayest enkindle a yet greater desire 
I and exercise thyself therein, thou mayest turn 
over in thy mind things that happened in the 
life of Christ; how that He bare the griefs and 
i infirmities of all them that desire Him, that adore 
Him, that believe in Him. Yea, He carried all 
their weakness ; so it was that the woman who 
came behind Him and humbly, yet with faith 
also, touched the hem of His garment, was made 
whole. She that was a sinner but kissed His feet 
and was made clean; the Canaanite who followed 
Him with importunity and the lepers that came 
near to Him were healed; demoniacs, paralytics, 
and all deformities of nature, when they drew 
nigh and believed Him did gain deliverance: for 
virtue went out of Him and healed them all. Pub- 
licans and sinners, coming to Him, gained par- 
don, nor did He disdain to eat with them. 

Wherefore, when thou hast done what in thee 
iieth,draw near with reverence and fear, but with 
yearning also and with love, hoping in the infi- 
nite goodness of God. Likewise, when thou dost 
order thyself to receive the Sacrament, thou 



Of the Lord's Supper 7 1 

oughtest to exercise thyself yet more diligently 
by calling to mind the Lord's Passion. Let thy 
mind ebb and flow between these two points, 
namely, the aforesaid feelings of fear and love 
on the one hand, and on the other the exercises 
of devout souls. Some, indeed, sigh more deeply 
with ardent desire to receive this Sacrament, 
and come near more often ; others, smitten with 
fear at the dread and reverence due thereto, 
considering the worthiness thereof together with 
their own worthlessness, and the peril to them 
that receive unworthily, do rather withdraw them- 
selves, and for dread desire to get them away 
from receiving. Yet the disposition of both is to 
be commended, and it is a laudable thing some- 
times to come near being moved by the yearning, 
and sometimes to put that desire aside through 
reverence, just as the opportunities of time and 
place may serve. And (as saith Augustine) what 
seemeth good to do must be left to the con- 
science of each several man. But without doubt' 
one thing is a safe rule for all of us, namely, that 
we must not shut out our yearning nor our hope 
for reverence; nor, again, may we abandon that 
reverence and that dread for our hope and yearn- 
ing, but let us ebb and flow between these two 
dispositions, having at one time more of the one, ^ 
at another time more of the other ; for the blessed 
Gregory said: ** Naught is safer for us than con- ' 
tinual fear tempered by hope." Thy disposition 
to love is of itself, and speaking absolutely, the 
•more excellent thing ; but what is of itself the 
more excellent may become relatively (and to cer- 
tain persons doth become) the more perilous and 
the more to be feared. 



72 The Spiritual Ascent 

T Chapter XXXII. Concerning the Lord's Pas- 
sion and of the three ways in which a man ought 
to exercise himself thereon. 

1WILL go to the mountain of Myrrh. And 
thou, too, O man, if of thy devotion thou 
wilt attain that mountain (which is the bitter- 
ness of Penance) through the mortification of 
the flesh; and if thou wilt, through hope and 
fear ascend the said mount and the upward way 
of purity, if I say thou wilt do so, nothing is 
more profitable to thee than this, namely, that 
thou be earnest to colledl thy first gathering 
of myrrh by meditating upon the death of the 
Saviour. For thence shall come to thee the bitter 
myrrh of fear that doth preserve thee from the 
corruption of vicious delights when thou seest 
that thy Lord ascended this same mountain, that 
is He bare the pains of Calvary and the measure- 
less burden of punishment for thy sins. And on 
the other hand, from this source also shall flow 
to thee by turns hope and devotion, and those 
most precious unguents that are compounded of 
fear, love, thankfulness, compassion and the like. 
So to the end that the toil may not make thee 
afraid, nor the bitterness deter thee; that hope 
may draw thee and devotion lead the^ on; that 
thankfulness, love and compunction may con- 
strain thee to ascend the mount of Purity; first 
go to Christ as thou dost spy out the way; for 
He may be called, and not unfittingly, the Moun- 
tain of Myrrh, by reason of the bitterness of His 
most grievous Passion. To Him must thou go 
first of all, coUedting eagerly, and impressing 
upon thine heart devout thoughts of His Passion, 
to be as it were thy first gathering of myrrh. 
And this thou doest when thou dost meditate 
upon that Passion with circumspection, with 



Of the Lord's Passion 73 

gravity and with devotion, diligently searching 
out the story of the same, word by word, or 
meditating upon the purport thereof. 

Secondly, thou must go to Christ's Passion 
as a store of myrrh, and take thence somewhat 
that shall be useful to thee, either as a medicine 
against the wounds of passion, or an ensample 
of virtue. 

Thirdly, thou must go to Christ Himself, and 
with that first gathering of myrrh anoint thy 
mind to devbtion, and enkindle thy love, and 
make thyself ready to bear all tribulations. But 
in order that thou mayest be able to peruse 
Christ's Passion word by word with devotion, 
and to diredl thy thoughts circumspectly, thou' - 
oughtest to know this, namely, that such medi-' 
tation doth chiefly induce compassion, and 
through that compassion devotion to Christ. 
Now to meditate simply word by word is this: 
to consider in simple fashion the acts, the bear- 
ing, and the sufferings of Christ in His Passion. 
But in order that thou mayest the better draw 
out thy compassion and devotion by means of 
this kind of meditation, thou oughtest to give 
most careful heed to what \^as said aforetime,, 
namely, that thou must always form as clear a 
concept as thou canst of Christ as one Person, 
nothing doubting that He both was and is God 
and man. 

Therefore when thou readest that Christ bare 
such and such a pain, made such an answer, or 
haply kept silence, always think in such fashion, 
and in thy mind form such an idea, that the 
name of Jesus may represent to thee both God 
and man, for by this means thou dost look upon 
Christ with more devotion and with the greater 
reverence, and shalt have yet fuller compassion, • 



74 The Spiritual Ascent 

For if by reason of thine human affedlions thou 
hast compassion upon a brute beast that doth 
suffer grievous torment, how much the more 
shalt thou have pity for Christ if thou hast 
.formed such a concept of Him as this, that He 
I was both a man most good, most sweet, most 
gentle, most noble and most loving, gracious 
moreover, and fair; and dost also see Him with 
thy mind's eye as God Almighty Whose meed 
is fear, reverence and adoration, thy Creator and 
thy Judge. 

Secondly, that thou mayest have the more 
compassion upon Him, and that His sufferings 
may pierce through thine inward soul with the 
sword of sorrow, thou oughtest not only to look 
upon Christ as He bare some particular pain, 
as one that was afflicted outwardly with most 
grievous suffering, but also to mark this most 
closely and earnestly, that within He was filled 
with every sorrow, and had drunken to the full 
of the wormwood of the bitterness of all creation. 
First, then, so often as thou readest that any 
suffering or insult was laid upon Christ, do not 
supjpose that He suffered or bare it as any other 
man might bare or suffer the like; but under- 
stand that to Him such a thing was unspeakably 
different and greater than it could be to any 
other, and the causes of this difference thou 
must diligently gather together in thine heart, 
for they are very mighty to move and lead us to 
Compassion. 

It is known then that any one of the senses is 
tortured and afflicted by a particularpain in exa6l 
proportion to its knowledge that such pain is 
contrary to its nature; and again there is no 
doubt but that the senses of each man in pro- 
portion as they are more vivacious, do feel pain 



Of the Lord's Passion 75 

to the greater extent and the more quickly, and 
likewise are the more tortured thereby. Now by 
His nature Christ was most full of life, and 
through the dignity of His natural disposition 
He was pre-eminent for nobility. Wherefore He 
endured most grievous suffering, beyond that 
which any other man could know; wherefore 
behold whether there be any sorrow like unto 
His sorrow. 

For this cause consider that if to thee, or to 
any other man of tender frame, it were pain 
beyond endurance to have his head pierced with 
thorns, and his whole body most cruelly 
scourged, how much more must that pain have 
been most grievous to Jesus Christ, who was 
God and man, seeing tha,t His nature was so 
noble and delicately wrought. 

In the second place, Christ did jsuffer to an 
extent that He Himself chose: for according to 
the Evangelist it was Jesus that did distress 
Himself, not the suffering that distressed Him; 
nay, He did it His very self, and in like manner 
He was offered up through His own will. Now 
Christ took upon Him this Passion to make 
satisfadlion for original guilt, which was so great 
as to despoil the whole human race of original 
justice, to infect nature herself, and to deprive 
her of eternal felicity. Wherefore He undertook to 
suffer and to die that He might be a sacrifice 
sufficient for all men; and seeing that the a6ls of 
God are perfedl, it is altogether evident that the 
death Christ took upon Him was most bitter, 
wherefore, said Jeremy: * * All ye who pass by, look 
whether there be any sorrow like unto My sor- 
row," and this as though he said: ^' Ye shall look 
in vain for the like." Yea, verily, the Do<Slors 
say that His sorrow and suffering were so ex- 



76 The Spiritual Ascent 

ceeding bitter and grievous as to surpass the 
sorrows that all mankind have suffered since the 
beginning of the world or shall suffer in time to 
come. 

Furthermore, in the third place, this didincrease 
the sorrow of Christ in no small measure that 
He bare this suffering at the hands of a people 
upon whom He had conferred so many benefits, 
and to them might He justly say: "Oh, my 
people, for I am your God, what could I do for 
you and I have hot done it? and how could ye 
worse repay Me than by this that ye have visited 
a most bitter death upon Me?" and so for these 
things' sake, and because He had compassion 
upon this people, He prayed: "If it be possible, 
let this cup pass from Me," that is: " Let not this 
people administer it to Me," for so some of the 
saintswould have us interpret. Furthermore, the 
Passion of Christ affected every member and 
every sense: His gracious Hands were pierced. 
His Head was wounded by thorns. His whole 
Body was scourged, and in like manner thou 
canst make scrutiny of every suffenng consider- 
ing yet more carefully each several one. 

Likewise His Passion was marked by many 
a6ls of most shameful derision, by riot, by scan- 
dal, by spitting, by the covering of Ffis Head, 
so that thou hast never read the like: and this 
because of the great envy of the Pharisees. And 
to the end that thou mayest the better under- 
stand the bitterness of Christ's Passion make 
this thy rule, that whenever the Evangelist doth 
recount, without a qualifying word, any suffer- 
ing that was inflicted on Him, do thou add in 
thine heart: "It was very great," or "most 
mighty," or "most grievous"; for example, 
when thou readest: "The servant of the High 



Of th€ Lord's Passion 77 

Priest smote Him," think, '*he smote Him most 
grievously/' as beyond doubt was the case, al- 
though thou canst not know the exact force of 
the blow, nor of the suffering it caused. 

Now also consider and diligently put together 
in thine heart the causes of the inward sufferings 
and sorrows of Christ, which haply surpassed 
His sensible pain. This inward suffering arose 
in the first place from His fervent zeal for the 
salvation of the human race, and He then saw 
that to the more part His Passion should be fruit- 
less and unprofitable: for though it was sufficient 
and superabundant for all, yet through the mali- 
ciousness of many it could not be all efficient. 

Secondly, He had most mighty compassion 
upon His Blessed Mother whose heart was filled 
with every bitterness^ 

Thirdly, His inward pain was made the greater 
by His pity for the Jews. 

Fourthly, by His sorrow for the disciples, and 
chiefly for the sin of Judas. 

Fifthly, by our blindness and ingratitude, for 
which cause He wept over Jerusalem, saying: 
"If thou hadst known even thou" and so forth. . 
Behold now and look with a loving eye upon ' 
Christ set in the midst of His suffering. Read 
the story of the Passion and consider Him not ' 
only as affiidled in the body but as One both 
within and without all sorrowful, all suffering, 
all filled with griefs most bitter. It were passing 
strange if thou couldest look on Him that was 
God and man so afflidled and encompassed with 
so great tribulation, and yet wert not moved 
by the spirit of compassioq. 

Now as concerned the second point, namely,! 
how thou oughtest to take the Passion of Christ. 
in a manner profitable to thee, so as to bear: 



78 The Spiritual Ascent 

' fruit and work thee good, that is to say make 
thee to imitate virtues and flee from vices. With 
al] thy might thou must dire<5l thine inclinations 
and understanding to this, namely, to be able to 
comprehend how Christ bare Him both inwardly 
and outwardly in all His a6ls, words and answers 

. of the which thou dost read in the story of His 
Passion, and in like manner the inward and out- 
ward bearing, according to their time and place, 
of the Jews, Pilate and Herod, of Mary the 
Lord's Mother, and of Mary Magdalene. So 
shaltthou find, in Christ Who suffered, an abun- 
dant store of all virtues, and medicine most 

' effe<5lual to heal all vice. For example, when 
thou readest:** Jesus stood before Pontius Pilate 
the Governor," then think first of the outward 
bearing of Christ as He stood; for it was with 

, head bowed and with eyes turned to the ground 
and so forth with other lowly gestures. In like 
manner ponder His answers and the fashion in 
which He uttered the words, in what lowly wise, 
> howgently and lovingly He uttered them. Consider 
the manner in which He bare Himself inwardly 
in all these things, and thou shalt find Him free 
from rancour, from envy, from impatience, lowly 
and meek of heart. In like manner think of the 
outward bearing of the Jews, how they brought 
horrible and perverse accusations against Him 
with loud clamour and most cruel voices, crying 
out:** He is guilty of death; crucify Him, crucify 
Him. If He were not a malefa<5lor we would not 
have delivered Him up to thee," and so forth 
with each several matter. Think likewise upon 
their inward bearing, and thou shalt find that it 
was for envy that they gnashed upon Him with 
their teeth, yea, for mighty envy and wrath that 
they were stirred up against Him. 



Of the Lord's Passion 79 

In like manner think upon the Most Blessed 
Virgin Mary, and the Magdalene, how they bare 
them in their outward conduct, how sorrowfully 
yet not with extravagant nor uncontrolled ges- 
tures; and this is true in a special sense of the 
Mother of God who neither then, nor at any time, 
committed even venial sin throug'h anv ill-ordered 
behaviour; also think of their inward bearing, 
aiid thou shalt find sorrow most profound, grief 
most deep. If thou shalt deal well with these 
matters, thou shalt find in Christ, the Sum of 
all virtues, matter for thy Compassion, and the 
proper medicine to heal all vices. 

As concerneth the third point, how with this 
Myrrh of the Lord's Passion thou canst anoint 
thy mind as with a rich unguent of devotion, 
and how kindle thine affe(Slions to charity. To* 
this end thou must think how that thou thyself, 
O man, art the cause of so great sorrow and 
bitterness; wherefore, as is aforesaid, take this 
benefit as a thing done for thee, as if it were for 
thee alone Christ suffered, for from this thought 
doth thankfulness arise in thee. He suffered to 
effedl thine illumination, thy redemption, thy 
justification, thy glorification. To effect thine 
illumination I say, because He intended that 
thou shouldst follow His example and so have 
thine understanding enlightened in the know- 
ledge of the Truth, for which cause take all that 
thou readest that Christ did as done for thee 
alone, and always think of each thing as it 
Christ were saying,** This I did that thou might- 
est follow Me to effedl thy redemption : because 
through original guilt thou wast damned for 
ever. "Think, therefore, how grievous was thy sin 
seeing that for its expiation so mighty a medi- 
cament is needed, and so great a price, for from 



8o The Spiritual Ascent 

this thought there is born in thee fear and horror 
of sinning, and so forth with other matters also. 

To effedt thy justification; from this thought 
doth arise thsuikfulness in that He was willing 
to suffer so much that thou mightest be held 
worthy of justification before God. 

To efjfedt thy glorification: from this chiefly 
shall love arise in thee, seeing that He had no 
need of thee, nor did require thy goods, yet 
was willing to bear so much to gain thee glory. 

But since, O man, thou canst not gather this 
mountain of myrrh (that is, the vast extent of the 
bitterness) all at one time in thine heart, nor 
hold it, it is necessary that thou collect it by 
little and little through divers exercises, and 
store it up continually. Wherefore, to make these 
exercises the easier, here have we appended the 
story of Christ's Passion, divided into brief por- 
tions that are gathered from the Grospel, and this 
have we done to make profitable thy meditations, 
and to be as it were a prop to thine exercises. 

U Chapter XXXIII. The Passion of Christ set 
forth in brief, and divided into portions. 
The First Portion. 

SO when that solemn and royal Supper had 
been celebrated, Christ, both God and man, 
arose, and together with His disciples began 
to hasten to the death that was to meet Him 
^t the hands of His enemies. But upon the 
way with sweet converse did He instrufl and 
strengthen aforehand His disciples concerning 
His Passion, saying that when the shepherd 
had been smitten the sheep of the flock should 
be scattered abroad. He did strengthen Peter 
aforehand, and foretold th^t he should deny 
Him. Take these things in their literal 3ense, 



Of the Passion of Christ 8 1 

and making devout meditations thereon, do thou 
above all things worship with reverence and 
holy sweetness the Person of Christ as being 
both God and man; for which cause whatsoever 
He spake and said do thou hear this diligently 
with reverence, wonder and pious love. Then for 
thine own profit and the instru<5lion of thy cha- 
racter earnestly consider with what sweetness 
He uttered those words; in what kindly wise He 
bare Him ; with what sweet converse He admo- 
nished His hearers. Think also how that from 
the very heart He was sorrowful and sad by rea- 
son of the death which hung over Him, and so 
forth. Next, and in the third place, bethink thee 
that it was for thy redemption that He now be- 
gan to go forward to His death, for thee was He 
sacrificed, and so pierce thine heart to devotion 
and tears. Ponder these and like things, whenso- 
ever thou mayest, after the three fashions afore- 
said, for this I say to spare repetition. 

After this He left His other disciples, and taking 
only the three chiefest amongst them. He spake 
saying: ** My soul is sorrowful, even unto death. " 
But then leaving them also He went alone to 
the mountain to pray, and then after His third 
prayer, so mighty and measureless an horror 
and dread came over Him, that for the |^reat- 
ness of that horror His sweat was blood railing 
down to the ground, a thing that one doth not 
read of any other man howsoever grievously 
afflidled. And behold an angel did comfort his 
Lord. 

But going forward without wavering, albeit 
He dreaded the suffering in wondrous wise. He 
met His enemies and with a single word laid 
them prostrate upon the earth; with all patience 
did the Lord receive a kiss from Judas, and 

G 



82 The Spiritual Ascent 

afterwards was cruelly seized by the Jews, bound 
and dragged along by them. Then all His disci- 
ples forsook Him and fled. First He was led to 
the house of Annas, where He was grievously 
smitten on the cheek by a worthless servant. 
If thou wilt thou canst here exercise thyself yet 
more diligently by considering who He was that 
was hated and led along with such contumely, 
and bethink thee as aforesaid that He was a 
man most kindly, most meek, most gentle and 
so forth, but likewise bethink thee who He was 
as concerning His Godhead, that thou mayest 
subdue thyself to Him through the assent of thy 
reason. Wherefore believe and consider that He 
in very truth was the Son of God, the Beginning 
of all things, the Saviour of all men. He that 
rendereth their reward to all. Let this then be the 
first portion of thy gathering of the myrrh of the 
bitterness of the Lord. 

T Chapter XXXIV. The Passion of Christ. 
The Second Portion. He was led to the house of 
Caiaphas, where the scribes and priests were 
waiting for Him. 

CONSIDER the manner in which they led 
Him, how unkindly and harshly, and with 
what greediness the Pharisees awaited Him, for 
they were filled with envy. But when He was 
adjured by the Chief Priest, and had confessed 
the truth. He was smitten with heavy blows as 
a blasphemer as though He had falsely claimed 
for Himself the name of a prophet; He was 
buffeted when His face was covered; He was 
spit upon and mocked; moreover, they sought 
false witness against Him, but none was found 
ready to hand. He was denied by Peter, who 
was more hardy than the rest of the Apostles; 



Of the Passion of Christ 83 

and he, being admonished by the look which 
Christ turned upon him, did deplore his sin 
most bitterly. 

But when morning was come, He was taken 
through the street to the judge, as if He were a 
robber, to be condemned to die. 

But Judas, seeing that Jesus was being pur- 
sued to the death, had so deep grief in that he 
had betrayed his Master who was so gentle, that 
for very bitterness and sorrow he hanged him- 
self with a rope. Moreover, he took back the 
thirty pieces of silver, wherewith a field was 
bought, as the prophet Jeremy had foretold. 

Then the whole multitude of the people ran 
together, and with much clamour and false accu- 
sations He was charged before Pilate. 

He was set forth and led through the streets 
to Herod, and mocked by him as a fool. 

Here do thou consider diligently who He is 
that sufFereth; depi<5l Him to thyself that thou 
mayest have compassion upon One most inno- 
cent, most meek, most noble and most loving. 



Q2 



84 The Spiritual Ascent 

f Chapter XXXV. The Passion of Christ. 
The Third Portion. But as Jesus stood in most 
lowly fashion before Pilate the Governor, a great 
tumult and mighty clamour roared around Him, 
as the Jews themselves cried out: ** Crucify Him, 
crucify Him; we have a law, and by our law He 
ought to die," and so forth. Then did Pilate 
order Him to be most cruelly scourged over His 
whole body; and as if He had unlawfully called 
Himself a king, He was mocked with much 
derision being clothed in kingly garb and wear- 
ing a royal cloak; His head was crowned with 
thorns, and grievously smitten with a reed; in 
mockery He was adored upon bended knees, as 
though He were a king. 

HERE do thou earnestly consider the man- 
ner in which Christ bare Him, how that 
Pilate, sitting upon his throne as though he were 
the lord of the Lord Christ and His judge, said: 
^'Knowest thou not that I have power to let 
Thee go?" 

Mark also the manner in which the Jews bare 
themselves, and look to the cause for which 
Christ suffered all these things, that it was but 
for thy redemption; how the Jews came in and 
cried yet the more: * * If thou let this man go, thou 
art not Caesar's friend; crupify Him, crucify 
Him. " Then did Pilate, being overcome by fear 
of Caesar, render Him up to be crucified; and 
as He went forth He Himself bare that upon 
which He should suffer. To the women who fol- 
lowed Him He said: **Weep not for Me," and 
other words. Here do thou bethink thee how 
great and glorious was He, the King of Heaven 
and Earth and the Lord of Sabaoth, Who was 
thus set at naught with the mockery of kingship, 
for thus shalt thou be able to go forth to Him 



Of the Passion of Christ 85 

showing the outward signs of wonderment. He 
is matchless in might, in beauty, in felicity, in 
eternity; wherefore marvel how that majesty 
was made as naught, how that beauty was dis- 
figured, how that felicity was turned to torment, 
how that Eternal did die. 

f Chapter XXXVI. The Passion of Christ. 

The Fourth Portion. When He had been led 
to the Mount of Calvary, the lictors began to 
set themselves to crucify Him, to strip Him of 
His vesture, and so forth with each several 
matter. 

DO thou consider most diligently the manner : 
of this crucifixion, for if they first set up 
the cross, and Christ then went up thereto, 
think of Him hanging there with one arm nailed 
and the other not yet; think also of the patience 
of Christ and the manner of His bearing. But , 
if they that set the cross in order did nail Him 
hereon, and afterward did set it upright, in 
such case think how Christ lay upon the cross, 
and stretched forth His own Hands, and so 
was set up. Turn thine eyes upon Him as He 
doth weep on the cross; there is He athirst;- 
He prayeth for them that crucified Him ; He is 
blasphemed of them that pass by, by the Phari- 
sees, by the thief; a title most true, that may not 
be wiped away, is written over Him: ** Jesus of 
Nazareth, the King of the Jews." 

The Blessed Virgin, the glorious Mother of 
Christ, standeth beneath His cross, filled with 
sorrows, for the more fervent her love, so much 
the more sorrow did she know. 

After a while Christ did commit His Mother 
to John, and then there was darkness over the 
whole world; and crying: **Eli, Eli," He signi- 



86 The Spiritual Ascent 

fied how great was His suffering' and how that 
in some manner His human nature was forsaken 
of the Grodhead. This was because there was 
no superabundance of the higher powers which 
He enjoyed over the lower powers wherein He 
suffered. 

So when He had received the vinegar, and 
because nothing remained to be done or to be 
fulfilled, He cried with a loud voice and gave up 
the ghost, showing that so long as He willed 
He did retain His powers, and that none could 
take His life from Him unless He Himself should 
lay it down. This was the chief cause that the 
centurion, moved by this cry, said: "Truly, this 
^man was the Son of God." 

Here do thou consider under what form Christ 
did suffer, that thou mayest study to imitate 
Him. For He suffered as the true Lamb, show- 
ing to His neighbour measureless generosity, to 
Himself the utmost severity, to God the Father 
the fullest obedience, to the adversary the great- 
.est prudence. 

Do thou, therefore, conform Thy conduct to the 
pattern of the imitation of Christ, that is a 
pattern of kindliness, of severity, of lowliness 
. and foresight. 



Of the Passion of Christ 8 7 

U Chapter XXXVII. The Passion of Christ. 
The Fifth Portion. They break the bones and 
the legs of the thieves, but not a bone of Christ 
was broken, that prophecy might be throughly 
fulfilled. But one of the soldiers pierced His side, 
whence came forth blood and water and conse- 
crated the sacraments of the Church. The veil 
of the Temple was rent, the graves of the dead 
were opened, that on the day of the Resurrec- 
tion they might rise thence with Christ. 

HERE do thou bethink thee how great things 
Christ did suffer onthy behalf and by means 
of all that is aforesaid, make thy way up the 
mountain of myrrh, that is to say turn over in 
thy mind all the Passion of Christ and the bitter- 
ness and gall thereof, for He suffered insult, 
evil entreatment, mockery and punishment. So 
do thou too, by imitating Christ's Passion, em- 
brace for His sake all suffering that is full of 
injury, evil treatment, mockery and punishment. 

II Chapter XXXVIII. Of the manner in which 
the devout man, in makmg his ascents, ought 
to dire<5l his thoughts to the Passion of Christ, 
so that he may go up by means of fear, make 
progress by means of hope, cleave to God by 
means of charity, and have his understanding 
enlightened. 

BUT if thou wilt know more fully how that 
Christ's Passion doth beget sorrow and thus 
doth help progress in the first ascent: how that it 
doth inspire fear, and so doth help in the first 
step of the second; if thou wilt know how that 
it doth raise hope, doth increase charity, doth 
illumine the understanding and mould the affec- 
tions, then thou must diligently make inquiry 
in the Passion and death of Christ, and seek 



8 8 The Spiritual Ascent 

out the seven illuminations of truth, the know- 
ledge of which was, before His Passion, partly 
hidden; but by that Passion the veil hath been 
rent and the truth opened, so that one may apply 
thereto that text in the Apocalypse, ''The seven 
seals thereof were opened." 

If then thou wilt exercise thyself to fear, and 
wilt lift thyself up to hope, look upon the first 
seal that was opened in Christ's Passion, which 
seal is The Marvellous God, of Whom it was 
shown in the Passion that He is Supreme Wis- 
dom Who did so prudently outwit the devil; yet 
would He not use His supreme power to do him 
violent oppression. 

In the second place it hath been shown in the 
Passion that He is Supreme Justice, insomuch 
that He demanded the price of Redemption. 

Thirdly, it hath been shown that He is Supreme 
Pity, in that for our sakes He gave up His only 
begotten Son. 

If then thou wilt exercise thyself to fear^what 
is more fearful than the thought that God is 
Supreme justice Whp chose rather to undergo 
death than that His justice should leave original 
sin unavenged. If again thou wilt exercise thy- 
self in Christ's Passion, so as to gain fear, hope 
and charity, diligently read the second seal that 
hath been opened which is the Spirit of Under- 
standing and hath been shown by Christ's Pas- 
sion to be a thing of the greatest kindliness. 
Note this in the matter of the angels, who per- 
mitted their Lord to be crucified. 

Secondly, it hath been shown to be a thing of 
the greatest worth. Note this in the matter of 
men for whose sake Christ was crucified. 

Thirdly, it hath been shown to be a thing of 
the greatest cruelty. Note this in the matter of 



Of Meditation on the Passion 89 

the demons who did crucify Him. If then thou 
wilt strike fear into thine heart, bethink thee that 
thine enemies are so cruel that they did not spare 
even Christ the Lord, but tempted Him and 
procured that He should be crucified. Wherefore 
they shall not spare thee, but shall continue 
tempting thee here, and, if thou deserve it, 
punishing thee in the world to come. 

If thou wilt lift up thine hope, think how that 
those angelic spirits are endowed with the great- 
est kindliness; gladly will they carry thine orisons 
to Heaven, and will pray to the Lord for thee. 
If thou wilt be enkindled to Love, bethink thee 
that Christ so esteemed and loved thee that He 
was willing to be crucified for thy redemption. 
If now thou begin to ascend from thy lusts, and 
yet this present worthless world delight thee, 
do thou read the third seal that hath been opened, 
which is This world of sense. In Christ's death 
this was proved to be a place of darkness wherein 
blindness reigneth, because it knew not the true 
light. Therein barrenness reigneth because it 
held Christ to be unfruitful. Impiety reigneth 
there, because it did condemn Christ the inno- 
cent. By pondering after this manner, thy mind 
is torn away from love of the world. But if thou 
wilt withdraw thine heart yet more fully from 
the delights of the world in which perchance it 
is still held fast, do thou read the fourth seal 
that hath been opened, and this is Hell which 
hath been shown by Christ's death to be filled 
with all want, vileness and poverty, for if Christ 
did bear all these things so as to do away sin, 
much more must the damned bear them as the 
just retribution of their deeds. 

Likewise if thou wilt gain full compundlion 
for thy sins through fear, so that by such com- 



90 The Spiritual Ascent 

pundlton thou mayest be freed from concupis- 
cence, do thou read the fifth seal that was opened 
in the Passion, that is to say The state of guilt 
of which thou art indidled. How wondrously 
detestable to God that state must be is proved 
by this, namely, that for the remission of such 
guilt so great a price was required, an expiation 
so mighty, a medicine so hard to attain. 

Likewise if thou wilt lift up thine heart by 
hope (for it hath now been severed in some 
small measure from love of the world), do thou 
read the sixth seal that hath been opened. This 
is the Paradise of our yearning vfhicli is open by 
virtue of the Passion, and hath been shown to 
be a place filled with glory, with joy and with 
riches, and that because Christ was made vile, 
wretched and poor in order to restore it. 

Likewise, if thou wilt enkindle thee to purity 
of heart, do thou read the seventh seal that hath 
been opened. This is Laudable virtue^ and thou 
shalt find in the death of Christ how precious, 
how fair and how fruitful a thing is that virtue; 
precious in that Christ chose rather to lose tem- 
poral life than to do aught that was contrary to 
virtue; fair because it shone forth in the midst 
of contumely; fruitful because one perfefl act of 
virtue did despoil Hell, did open Heaven and 
restore that which was lost. 

U Chapter XXXIX. Of the Resurrection of the 
Lord. 

BUT upon the third day Christ the conqueror 
of death did rise again, and showed that we 
should rise also. If, therefore, thou wast moved 
with compassion when Christ did suffer, do thou 
rejoice with Him now that He is risen. 
Think devoutly how that His soul descended 



Of the Resurrection of the Lord 9 1 

into hell; think upon what He did there, and 
upon the joy of the holy fathers and the grief of 
the devils. 

Consider the watch that was kept by angels 
round His sepulchre. In one place it is said that 
there was but one angel sitting there ; in another 
place it is said that he was standing ; one Gospel 
saith, **Sitting on the stone," another, **in the 
sepulchre." Again we read of two angels, yet 
are the accounts diverse and this diversity show- 
eth the multitude of angels that were round the 
sepulchre, and that the women paid divers visita- 
tions thereto. Bethink thee that love and yearn- 
ing did constrain Magdalene and the other wo- 
men to hasten off thither and visit the sepulchre 
of the Lord. Think also of the divers appear- 
ances of Christ, of His sweet converse with the 
disciples ; for what cause desired He to appear in 
Galilee save to show thee that thou must cross 
over from sin? Whence this name Passover, that 
is **acrossing"? Moreover, they were to pass over 
to Galilee, which doth signify that by the trans- 
migration and changing of our bodies — namely, 
in the kingdom of heaven — ^we shall see the Lord 
after the general Resurrection. 

II Chapter XL. Of the glorious Ascension of 
Christ. 

FORTY days after the ResurreiSlion Christ 
ascending into heaven led captive the capti- 
vity of the holy fathers. Think upon the glorious 
train of them that did ascend with Him, for the 
saints did follow and angels came to meet Him. 
Then did they fashion amongst themselves those 
questions of which Esaias speaketh: '* Who is 
He that ascendeth," and so forth. Think upon 
the sadness of the Apostles, and of their joy 



92 The Spiritual Ascent 

also; of the ang«ls who did return and comfort 
them, and learn thou also to ascend to Christ, 
that is by the upgoing afDre mentioned, that 
thou mayest leave thy vices here, for no vice 
doth ascend with the Saviour, as saith Augustine. 

% Chapter XLI. Of the mission of the Holy 
Spirit. 

THEN the Lord from heaven did send the 
Holy Spirit in tongues of fire. See how the 
Apostles then were comforted, and founded in 
charity. Ponder the reason for which the Holy 
Spirit came in this form of fire, why in the form 
of tongues, why in both forms together, why 
under other creature forms? And study to hold 
fast in thee the inner meaning of such things ; 
think upon the effedls and the gifts of the Holy 
Spirit, and many like things concerning His 
mission. 

5^ Chapter XLH. How that in this life we can- 
not accomplish perfe<5Uy any of the three steps 
aforesaid. 

BY these three steps we ascend to purity of 
heart and charity; for in the first stage we 
seek God, yet we find Him not, that is we find 
Him not by the way of fervent love. 

In the second stage, as we go about the streets 
of the Heavenly Jerusalem, and in the Tabernacle 
thereof do offer the sacrifices of loud cries and 
mighty yearning, the watchmen who keep the 
city find us, that is to say the Holy Angels, upon 
whom we look through hope and yearning love. 

Yet must we not abide there at rest, but go 
up yet higher. **When I had traversed them," 
saith one, **I found Him Whom my soul loveth," 
that is to say when I had ascended to the third 
step. So in the first step one doth leave the lust 



Perfection is not in this Life 93 

of the world; in the second, the mind is uplifted 
yet higher; in the third, she doth rest quiet in 
God. But think not that we can go up any one' 
of these steps to reach the Highest and Perfe<5l 
Good in this life, neither in this life can we purge 
out all our lusts, for even Paul himself found 
that he could not do this altogether, that is to say 
reach perfedlion, which, as saith Augustine, 
lieth in having no concupiscence. 

Neither, so long as we live can we lift up all 
our affedlions, so that none may still abide upon 
the earth. The body, which is corrupt, doth 
weigh down the soul, and to dwell upon the earth 
doth depress the sense which taketh thought 
upon many things. Much less can we become so 
pure and seemly that we can cleave altogether 
to CjOD, for so long as we are in the body we 
are aliens from Him; but this is the perfect state, 
and these are the steps whereby our frailty should 
order its upward way, and make progress by 
little and little going up so far as it can. 

% Chapter XLIII. Of the three things by which 
the spiritual ascent is maintained and moved 
forward, that is to say, reading, meditation and 
prayer. 

BUT it is not within the power of human 
frailty always to be instant in climbing these 
upward steps of the heart, in forming spiritual 
affedlions and doing spiritual exercises; and it 
is hard for one that goeth upward never to slip 
down, unless he hath a place wherein to rest 
when he is wearied, and likewise food whereby 
to be sustained upon the way. 

And verily, just as in the matter of the three 
downward stages afore described, we set forth 
a discussion thereof under three headings, so as 



94 The Spiritual Ascent 

to bring those downward stages into fuller pro- 
minence, so too, now that the ladder of the 
ascents hath been set up, let us describe the 
three things that shall hold thee up, enabling 
thee to take rest when thou art wearied and giv- 
ing wherewithal to restore thee when thou failest 
by the way. 

Now the three things are these, reading, medi- 
tation and prayer; in these three doth every 
spiritual exercise have its beginning and its 
progress; these are as it were food by the way, 
for as God hath given for every man's body 
bread, wine and so forth to sustain it, so also 
hath He given for the soul during her sojourn here 
these three things for her refreshment, as saith 
Augustine. 

But reading doth chiefly belong to the first 
steps of the ascent wherein one goeth forward 
by means of fear. For reading, as saith Hugo, 
is for them that are beginners, for verily in the 
first step they do conceive by means of fear, 
and give birth to the spirit of salvation. 

Meditation doth rather belong to the second 
step, that is to them that are going further for- 
ward, for these being already instru(Sled by read- 
ing do know how to walk with themselves in 
their own hearts. 

But prayer, although it doth belong to all the 
steps of the spiritual ascent, is suitable chiefly, 
and of its own proper nature, to them that, being 
on the third step of the ascent, do begin to cleave 
to God. For prayer is an affe<5lion of man as he 
doth cleave to God, a familiar and a loving 
converse with Him. 

But let us see how that these three things do 
move us onward in the ascents aforesaid, help* 



Of Holy Reading 95 

ing and sustaining us if they be diredled aright 
and undertaken with discretion. 

H Chapter XLIV. The manner in which holy read- 
ing doth help and sustain them that are upon 
the upward way, and how it must be ordered and 
dire6ied towards spiritual progress. 

THEREFORE, being smitten ot fear, 
weighed down of compun6lion and being 
likewise inflamed with affedlion and desire for 
the upward way, do thou undertake thy reading 
for thy further progress, that is to say, that it 
may admonish thee to go up and exhort thee to 
go forward, so that whatsoever thou readest may 
do thee profit on the upward path of purity and 
charity, either by showing thee the way of the 
ascent by means of pious a,6ts and exercises, or 
by inflaming thine affe6iion to make the ascent; 
by inspiring fear or by uplifting hope. And so as 
one saith: **To the Christian philosopher, read- 
ing should be for an admonishment, not an 
occupation." 

This shall easily be brought about if, accord- 
ing to the teaching of Augustine, when thou 
dost desire to read, the beginning of that desire 
is the fear of the Lord; that is to say, if fear 
doth rule thine intention and thine inclination, 
so that thou seek naught save spiritual progress 
leading to purity of heart, and like that Saint 
Antony of whom Gregory maketh mention in the 
fourth chapter of the Dialogue, dost not seek 
knowledge of the words, but dost search after 
the tears of compun6lion, so that thy mind being 
stirred thereby may grow ardent, and leaving 
things below may reach out to the good things 
of heaven. 



96 The Spiritual Ascent 

But verily in order that thy reading* may be of 
profit to thee for making the spiritual ascent, 
there are many things to which thou must give 
heed, namely, what thou readest, when thou 
readest, the manner and the purpose of thy read- 
ing. Thou must give heed to what thou readest, 
for books, even though they be useful, are not 
all alike profitable to him that maketh his upward 
way. Wherefore thou oughtest to relyupon those 
writings which do the more inflame thine incli- 
nation to make spiritual progress and to climb 
the ascent, rather than upon those that do en- 
lighten the understanding in difficult and curious 
matters and whet curiosity, as, for example, those 
that deal with debateable matters. 

Likewise the reading of writings hard to 
understand doth not refresh a mind that is yet 
tender, and may sometimes break down the 
intention thereof; but thou oughtest to read 
those books chiefly which instrufl thee either 
concerning virtue, or the extirpation and nature 
of vice ; or promote pious exercises and spiritual 
progress ; or else such as increase devotion in 
thee, and inflame thy inclination toward Christ 
and things heavenly; and if by times thou dost 
read others for any cause that may arise, thou 
oughtest straightway to return to those that 
tend to devotion. For whatever be the kind ot 
writing which thou dost study continually, such 
also will be the kind of affedlion thou dost form 
within thee, such thy feelings, and on such shalt 
thou often meditate. 

Secondly, thou must give heed to the times 
at which thou readest, for reading, if it is to be 
fruitful, ought not to be undertaken upon impulse, 
or upon any chance occasion, but at a proper sea- 
son, and that a fixed one. Above all things a man 



Of Holy Reading 97 

ought to refresh his mind with holy reading to 
this end that in his exercises he may have matter 
wherewith his memory may be occupied when 
no better task doth call him. For this cause 
reading ought not to keep us occupied upon it 
as an end in itself, but point us further to devout 
meditation and spiritual progress, and these by 
their sweetness and the inclinations they give 
should dire<5l us further yet to deeds, and pre- 
serve us by their dele£table operation. 

Thirdly, thou must consider the manner of 
thy reading, for there are some who run through 
a whole book before they begin to read, others 
study the beginning of one volume and forthwith 
go to the middle or end of another, and so they 
run through all at haphazard. But, as one hath 
said, it is the mark of a picksome stomach to 
taste of many dishes, and when these are varied 
and different the one from the other they defile 
and nourish not. But do thou choose a book which 
as a whole may suit thy purpose, inform thy 
manners and increase thy devotion. This ought- 
est thou to study in the fear of the Lord and let 
seemly devotion and due reverence go before 
thee from the beginning to the end. 

In the fourth place thou must consider to what 
end, or for what purpose thou readest aught; 
and verily thy chief intention in this, as in all 
these exercises, ought to be purity of heart and 
not vanity; not so much to gain knowledge, still 
less to gain reputation, but to the end that thou 
mayest gain profit for thyself and for others in 
what degree thou canst. 

Therefore, to the end that thou mayest diredl 
thy reading more immediately to the gaining of 
purity, thou oughtest always to extraA there- 
from something that may suit thy purpose, some- 

H 



98 The Spiritual Ascent 

thing that may occupy thy memoryyand admonish 
thee to make progress that thou mayest be like 
some clean creature whose use is to chew the 
cud. Yet mayest thou seek other fruits also in 
thy reading; as, for example, by now reading, 
nowpraying, now working; thus canst thou diver- 
sify thine exercises avoiding weariness of mind 
and by this means keeping thyself stable. Strive 
therefore in all things wherewith thou art wont 
to exercise thyself to find some delight, for such 
delight doth help the toiler in his work. In all 
things be afraid of weariness of mind, and this 
must be to thee the one end in all things, namely, 
that thou keep on persevering in thy works and 
exercises with some feeling of delight therein. 

Likewise, to the end that thou mayest direcSl 
thy reading immediately to purity, let there be 
therein frequent intervals of prayer, that through 
thy reading thou mayest mould thine inclinations, 
and through these inclinations rise to prayer. 
In the matter of reading let this suffice. 

H Chapter XLV. Of the manner of meditation. 

BY meditation is meant the process whereby 
thou dost diligently turn over in thine heart 
whatsoever thou hast read or heard, earnestly 
ruminating the same and thereby enkindling 
thine affedtions in some particular matter, or 
enlightening thine understanding. So as thou 
art ascending, and now making progress in 
hope, do thou often ruminate in thine heart, 
turning over especially those things which help 
thee to progress in purity, which strike terror 
or increase love in thee. 

But to the end that thy meditations may be 
fruitful to thee, and that thou mayest become 
accustomed easily to those that are good, thou 



Of the Manner of Meditation 99 

must diligently consider two things. The first is 
that thou make provision of useful matters for 
thy mind, dwelling upon which it may make 
progress and be occupied profitably. For indeed, 
as say the saints, thy soul is as a mill which 
grindeth whatsoever is put into it; but if nothing 
be put therein it doth waste itself away, and is 
occupied with things vain and idle. 

But if thou set not up beforehand for thyself 
some fixed and determined matter to which thou 
canst have recourse when no more profitable 
duty doth call thee, then needs must thou afford 
access to any chance thought that thou mayest 
meet, since the heart doth readily cleave to such 
chance thoughts, if so be that it is not fixed in- 
tently upon any special matter. Again, unless 
thou have somewhat to which to have recourse 
it shall often happen that though thou intend to 
meditate devoutly, yet or ever matter for thy me- 
ditation come to mind, the purpose perisheth, the 
determination is negle<5ted, and it falleth again 
to aimlessness. But thou hast heard above con- 
cerning these matters which are more useful for 
meditation and profit thee for thine ascent: these 
are remembrance of thy sins, of death, of the last 
judgement, of the pains of hell, and again remem- 
brance of the glory of Heaven, of the benefits of 
God, of the Lord's Passion and anything of like 
nature. 

Likewise thou canst diversify these medita- 
tions according to the season, by choosing such 
as may be suitable thereto, and do subserve de- 
votion the better for that reason, as, for example, 
when the memory of the Lord's Passion is dealt 
with and called to mind in Church, do thou con- 
form thyself to the Church by shaping for thyself 
meditations about the bitterness and Passion of 



100 The Spiritual Ascent 

Christ. And do in like manner also upon the 
other chief feasts, so that thine exercises may 
turn upon the matter with which the festival 
is concerned, for such is the council of the bles« 
sed Bernard. 

The second point is this, that although a man 
ought to strive at all seasons and every hour, so 
far as his frailty will permit, to fill his mind with 
holy meditations, and with spiritual and devout 
! affedlions, yet (as the blessed Jerome doth advise) 
he ought to appoint for himself certain special 
hours at which he may exercise himself in a more 
particular manner, as it were sweeping up the 
hearth of his soul, and heating it to spiritual love. 

But for this purpose, as saith Jerome, a morn- 
ing hour is most convenient, because at such a 
time a man is more grave and better disposed 
toward spiritual exercises, not yet being involved 
in the turmoil of worldly things. At this hour, 
therefore, ought he chiefly to strive to stir him- 
self to some devotion, seeing that it doth often 
happen that a man abideth throughout the day 
with just such desires as those to whiqh he stirred 
himself in the morning. 

At this time, therefore, let a man study with 
all his might to seek a devout spirit from the 
Lord; or else through devout exercises to pro- 
duce the same in himself, being occupied with 
holy meditations, and preparing himself to recite 
or chant matins. 

Let him do the like in the evening before he 
goeth to sleep, for at that time, when the dread 
of visions of the night is upon him and when 
sleep is wont to take hold on other men, he ought 
to strive yet more earnestly to listen for the soft 
sounds of the divine whisper, praying to the 
Lord (after the daily eicamination which he 



Prayer, and Manner of Praying loi 

should make at this hour) to forgive him for what 
he hath done amiss and returning thanks for any- 
thing that he hath fulfilled in laudable wise. 

Moreover, at this hour, by means of pure 
affeAions and devout prayers, a man will get 
him keener weapons to arm him against the ter- 
rors of the night. If at this time thou readest 
Holy Scripture, let the passages be chiefly such 
as deal with some matter of devotion and not 
the historical part of the Old Testament, for this 
is the counsel of the blessed Benedi6l. 

But as to what hath been said about medita- 
tions, namely, that exercise therein should be 
undertaken especially at fixed hours, this same 
rule is most expedient also in the case of all exer- 
cises, to the end that thou mayest know when 
thou shouldest busy thyself with some particular 
one, and when thou shouldest turn to another; 
and have set times for prayer, for reading and 
so forth, that all be done orderly. For which 
cause the blessed Augustine hath said: ''The 
best mc^ans of governance is that all things be 
done in order, each being assigned to his season, 
lest the sequence of duties being turned upside 
down confuse a man's mind by being thrown into 
riotous disorder." 

% Chapter XLVI. Concerning prayer, and the 
manner of praying. 

AS concerneth prayer, thou must take this with 
thee whithersoever thou goest and where- 
soever thou mayest be, either in the house or in 
the field; ever take refuge therein, ever have 
recourse thereto. 

But in this matter of prayer thou must give 
heed to four things; first, thine affection thereto, 
that is to say, what affection thou oughtest to 



I02 The Spiritual Ascent 

put on and what manner of prayer thou shouldest 
adopt. Secondly, the character of thy prayers, 
whether thou shouldest recite long* or short ones; 
thirdly, the things for which thou oughtest to 
pray; fourthly, thy bearing and attention of mind 
as thou prayest. In the first matter, thou must 
know that the strength and virtue of prayer doth 
arise from the affe6lion of him th^t prayeth, for 
God heareth the desire of the heart rather than 
the sound of the lips, wherefore always put on 
and take to thee an affe<5lion and desire that are 
in accordance with the exercise or meditation with 
which thou art occupied at the time, so that thy 
prayer may ever come forth from the root of the 
heart, not only from the lips of the mouth; but 
let it come always from the affedlion that thou 
dost feel, whether it be of fear, of grief, of love, 
of wonder, of thankfulness and the like. Do thou, 
therefore, dispose thyself in accordance with the 
feeling, whatever it be, as aforesaid. If, in thy 
first examination, thou hast sifted thyself and 
found that thy sins are more in number than the 
sands of the sea, form within thee the affe6iion 
of lowliness or grief and present thyself as a slave 
who hath offended his lord, and being thus in- 
clined from thy prayer, say: ** According to the 
multitudeof Thy mercies do away mine offences." 
But if, when thou siftest thyself in the second 
or third examination, thou dost find thy heart full 
of evil concupiscence and A^icious desires, again 
form in thee the aife6Hon of humility and pre- 
sent thyself as one that is sick and calleth for 
the physician, saying: **Lord, heal my soul for 
I have sinned against Thee"; likewise: "There 
is no health in my fiesh, by reason of the face of 
Thy displeasure; ^here is no rest in my bones, 
for mine iniquities are gone over my head, " and 



Prayer, and Manner of Praying 103 

so forth. But if in the second ascent, that is by 
fear, thou dost exercise thyself by means of medi- 
tations about death or the judgement or hell, take 
to thee the afFe6lion of fear and the charadler of 
a criminal standing before the judge in fear and 
trembling, as if thou wert already found guilty, 
and plead against the things that should justly 
be brought against thee, saying: ** Condemn me 
not: enter not into judgement with thy servant: 
not in wrath, O Lord," and so forth. 

But if thou dost exercise thyself in hope by 
calling to mind the Kingdom of Heaven, take 
upon thee the affection of love and pray in fer- 
vency of spfrit, saying: "One thing have I sought 
of the Lord, this will I require, that I dwell in 
the house of the Lord," and again: ** Like as the 
hart desireth the water brooks, so longeth my 
soul after thee, O God." And so, also, in regard 
to the other affedlions which thou canst form by 
these same means, for these thou oughtest to 
put on as thine exercises do compel thee and the 
power of thy meditation doth demand. 

In the second place, thou must know that thou 
oughtest to make some of thy prayers fuller and 
others shorter. 

By the fuller prayers we mean the canonical 
hours or other like offices, those, namely, which 
are of obligation upon thee or which thou dost 
undertake of thine own will. 

But before thou dost begin these prayers, thou 
oughtest always to do as the prophet doth advise, 
saying: **I examined my spirit," and so forth; 
this do until thy spirit is aglow from devout 
meditation and doth conceive the properafFe6iion 
and desire, either by means of fear, or sorrow 
or love, and so forth with each particular motive. 

This oughtest thou to do especially before 



I04 The Spiritual Ascent 

Matins and Vespers, betaking thee to meditations 
about the last judgement, thy sins, the hour of 
death, the pains of hell, the goodness of God or 
the Passion of Christ, choosing the subject that 
is convenient to thee at the time. 

But short prayers are different, being those 
which the blessed Augustine, in his Epistle to 
Probas, doth call ejaculatory prayers. Theseought 
we to have in good store continually, according 
to the wont of the Holy Fathers, and to put forth 
the same with desire that is ever enkindled, 
moulding our affedlions by what we read, and 
saying: "May the declaration of thy speech give 
understanding," and so forth. 

In like manner let prayer break into thy medi- 
tation and into thy work, but in this matter not 
so great preparation of mind should be made, 
for this doth suffice, namely, that by the devout 
meditation wherewith thou art occupied at the 
time thou lift up thy mind to the Lord. 

But in the third place thou must know, that 
albeit whatsoever is necessary to the body, this 
must be sought from God, yet much more often, 
and more fully must we pray for divine grace, 
for remission of our sins and for the attainment 
of the Kingdom of Heaven; and also for the 
purging away of vices and the gaining of virtues. 

But above all things, and as it were always, 
let there be set before our eyes that special vice 
against which we dp chiefly strive, as shall be 
set forth below, for whose extirpation we ought 
to pray with burning desire; yet thou oughtest 
not to pray for thyself alone, but according to 
the pattern of the Catholic Church, thou must 
pray by times for the d^ad in purgatory, and for 
thy friends if they be tempted, if they be in tribu- 
lation, if they be sick or sojourners abroad. 



Prayer, and Manner of Praying 105 

Concerning the fourth matter thou must know 
that in the shorter prayers which thou shait use, 
very often it is rather expedient that whatever 
affedlion thou hast conceived or whatever medi- 
tation thou hast formed thou continue therein 
during thy prayer as if thou wert speaking to 
God who is present with thee, praying to Him 
for some particular grace or deliverance from 
temptation, shaping the words from thine own 
heart just as the affeflion may suggest, or 
adopting such words already shaped and set 
forth as may he congruous with that affedlion. 
But in fuller prayers to continue in this method 
is more difficult, and it is a hard thing, espe- 
cially for the mind; wherefore it is fitting that 
thou attend devoutly to what thou dost recite, 
and that in so praying thou form thine afFe£lion 
and devotion hy means of the purport of thy 
recitation, keeping thy mind from wandering. 
When thy conscience doth oppress thee as thou 
prayest, and being smitten with fear thou art 
afraid to adore Christ with faith, do thou, 
according to the counsel of the blessed Job, turn 
to some one of the saints and beseech him to pray 
for thee (now this kind pf prayer is called ** Postu- 
lation"), crying: "Holy Mary, pray for me," and 
so forth. 

But for thy short and long prayers alike have 
set times, yet oughtest thou to have recourse to 
short prayers most chiefly when temptation doth 
assail thee, lest it cast thee down. 

Also when thou goest out or homeward pray 
thus that the Lord keep thy coming in and thy 
going out, for this did the Holy Fathers, as 
saith Jerome. 

And do the like so often as sin is made mani- 
fest to thee, either through the admonition of 



io6 The Spiritual Ascent 

another, or by thine own examination of thyself, 
and so forth, with other matters. 

'f Chapter XLVII. Here beginneth the third 
I ascent by which, through fighting down vices, 
we go upward from virtue to virtue, and form 
again those powers of our soul which had aban- 
doned it; and especially of two things which do 
hinder them that go up the spiritual ascent. 

WELL doth the prophet describe the heart 
of man, that it is high, and one may not 
reach the summit and topmost peak thereof save 
by means of so many upward stages. Nor is it 
any marvel if that same heart is called a lofty 
thing when the higher part thereof, being well 
ordered, doth reach immediately to God, and is 
subject to Him only. So that if thou didst stand 
upon the topmost peak of thy mind, thou 
wouldest look forth from a place so lofty that 
thou couldest see God Himself, albeit not in 
Very Essence because of thine own insufficiency 
and the impurity and weakness which still dim 
thy vision. 

Wherefore the mind of man is a lofty moun- 
tain to the which we order an ascent in our 
heart. Would that the toil of reaching it lay 
only in the loftiness thereof, and that in 
other regards the way were safe from foes, 
smooth and straight for walking in it ! But these 
two things there are which do very greatly injure 
and drag thee back from the upward way, 
namely, a multitude of foes that beset the ascent, 
and also ignorance of the path. 

For verily strait is the way that leadeth to 
life, encompassed on the right hand and on the 
left by foes who do grievously wound them that 
go up thereby, discharging fiery arrows at them. 



Of the Third Ascent 1 07 

For these foes besetting the path do bend their 
bows so as to pierce him that striveth to attain 
a heart unspotted and purity therein. Likewise 
they do cast impediments at their feet (that is to 
say, lu^tsfor lower things), to the end that by these 
snares they may drag them down below, or else 
hurl them from the King's way to the right or 
to the left, so that thou shalt see a thousand to 
fajl on the left of that path and ten thousand on 
the right thereof. For this cause the enemies 
have conspired together to hide these snares, 
and have so concealed the same that one would 
say: "Who shall see them?" 

Furthermore, the way itself hath many turn- 
ings, for on every side are there many bypaths 
on the right and on the left close to the road, 
and these do seem to be good, but the end thereof 
leadeth to hell. Yet oftentimes the enemies do 
strive to deceive by the allurements of these by- 
paths, rather than to overcome by violent temp- 
tation. Often do vices put on the splendour and 
beauty of virtues, and join themselves to those 
that go upon the upward path, pretending to 
have come from elsewhere and not from the ene- 
mies' side, just as the Gibeonites did deceive the 
people of God. 

IT Chapter XLVIII. How vices do attack the 
powers of the soul, and hinder him that goeth 
upward on the spiritual way. 

BUT, as we have said above, the powers and 
might of a soul (that is the powers concupi- 
scent and irascible) and the affections thereof 
were given of God to man ; so that as often as 
one desireth to ascend upward or descend down- 
ward, the said powers ought to lead him gently 
on whether be goeth up or down, without toil 



io8 The Spiritual Ascent 

or fear of the enemy. But in the fall of the first 
man these powers, being thrown into disorder, 
were made contrary the one to the other, and 
our enemies have pitched their camp therein. 
Pride, who is the queen of unrighteousness, the 
first-born daughter of Satan, now herself doth 
dwell in the very citadel of these powei:s ; also in 
the higher parts of the mind and the other affeo- 
tions, powbrs and appetites, which are by the 
side of the way by which thou must ascend, she 
hath set seven guides to guard the way and to 
watch the footsteps of him that goeth up, that 
is to say the seven chief sins. 

So as is evident from what hath been said 
above, seeing that the way of thy steps doth 
lead straightpastthecampof the powers concupi- 
scent and irascible, which camp is as it were held 
by the enemy (that is gluttony, luxury and so 
forth) by reason of the fall of the first man, 
therefore thou oughtest to do battle against 
these vices one by one, that is the vices which 
now dwell in the powers aforesaid, and con- 
tinually to strive against the lusts which, owing 
to the first descent, rise up within us. Thus the 
third ascent, whose steps we are now setting in 
order, is as it were ordained to overcome the 
first descent that was in Adam. Yet doth not 
this ascent rise to a greater height than those of 
which we spake before, nay, rather it is colla- 
teral with these, or in very truth this upward 
way is one and the same with those afore men- 
tioned, but the point from which we look thereat 
is different, and the ways in which we exercise 
ourselves therein are diverse. But this ascent is 
that which doth urge us on and aid us in the up- 
ward steps aforementioned, making straight the 
way and preparing it, and without this no 



Of the Origin of Affection 109 

man can walk in the ascents already set 
forth. 

% Chapter XLIX. How some do leave their vices 
and get them to divers spiritual exercises ; and 
of the origin of affedlion. 

SOME then have erred, and have not found 
the straight path which leadeth to the city of 
their habitation; these having put away the 
vices which reigned within them, did begin 
forthwith to make the upward way through 
great devotion and lofty and austere exercises ; 
and they erred because, at an hour when they 
thought not, they were tkken in the snare of the 
enemy and in the hunter's toils ; and too late did 
they find out that it is no safe thing to dwell 
with the serpents of concupiscence and with incli- 
nations that are habituated to vice. Indeed, as 
saith the blessed Gregory: **Some being igno- 
rant of the due order of the battle, negledt to 
tame their gluttony, and yet they rise up to under- 
go spiritual exercises, and often do many things 
which call for great courage ; but yet afterward 
all that they have done so bravely they lose 
through the enticements of the flesh ;. and when 
the belly is not restrained, all virtues are over- 
thrown together by the lust of the flesh." So, 
too, must one say of other vices also ; but this is 
the safest path, this the most secure devotion, 
this the sweetest and pure afFe<5lion, namely, 
that which cometh when inordinate desire hath 
been thrust out of the soul and we take 
delight in inward a<5ls of virtue ; for to have true 
joy in the Lord is this, to rejoice in charity, 
chastity and humility, but other devout inclina- 
tions may sometimes be deceitful. And verily to 
the end that thou mayest have sound discretion 



1 1 o The Spiritual Ascent 

in this matter, so far as sufficeth th^ present 
purpose, thou must know that devotion doth 
mean a sweet afFeAion, or a leaning of the affec- 
tions towards good, or an incitement which 
draweth them in pleasant wise. 

But such delight or affe6lion may be twofold, 
or may arise from two causes ; for sometimes 
such an affe6lion is one that suddenly cometh 
and quickly goeth, although it may by times 
shake the mind vehemently: and this doth 
seem to arise from a desire for some objedl of 
appetite or love ; for example, when there is set 
before a man something that is delightful, com- 
ing either from without by means of hearing, or 
from within by suggestions; then straightway 
the affeAion of love is drawn thereto, and after- 
ward followeth the impulse to pursue this thing, 
which is called desire, or else the contrary 
impulse to thrust the thing aside, and this is 
called hate. Thus they who begin often have a 
devout inclination to seek good, or avoid evil, 
and a sweet leaning thereto, and this may come 
through the gift of God, which is often poured 
down from on high ; yet, indeed, it is often so 
that men most worldly and they who are in 
mortal sin have like affe(Slions, especially women 
and men that are effeminate; these are lightly 
moved whithersoever their appetite may lead 
them, and driven whither their desire would 
have them go. Very often when such persons hear 
of the Kingdom of Heaven they are moved by 
desire thereof, longing to be released, and to be 
with Christ. But often vainglory doth vehe- 
mently inspire such yearning which is sweet and 
smeared as it were with poisoned honey. In this 
way foolish men are affedled when they hear the 
story of some brave warrior, and their love hath 



of the Origin of Affection 1 1 1 

leaned toward him for the bravery of which 
they have heard. Wherefore afterward, when 
they hear that such an one was overcome or 
slain, they are moved with compassion, and 
sometimes weep most idle tears. And just as 
many men out of an easy disposition do some- 
times conceive an affe<5lion to some good thing* 
that cometh in a moment and suddenly, so also 
the contrary is true, and they as suddenly get an 
affecSlion towards the world, or to gluttony or 
luxury. 

Wherefore, many men are deceived since they 
extol in divers ways such affecSlions in certain 
people as if they were great instances of devotion. 
Yea, more, even if such an affe<£lion were toward 
the glorious Body of Christ, one ought by no 
means to think that the merit of charity and true 
devotion lay therein, but rather that such an 
inclination is good and a thing to reach after in 
so far as by means thereof we root out or ex- 
tinguish inordinate affections or vicious passions, 
as was indicated above. 

Yet ought not such inclin ation to be put away but 
to be held and used as an admonishment to charity 
and a help against various desires, but the merit of 
charity and true devotion is not to be attributed or 
assigned thereto. For this cause Hugo saith in 
his book on Love: "Nor think thou that a man's 
love of God may be reckoned by his momentary 
inclinations, but rather by the abiding quality or 
inclination of the affectionis." Yet as thou mayest 
understand from the cause and origin that have 
been set forth, this desire of the affections, or 
this sweet inclination thereof, even though they 
be concerned with the Body of Christ or anjrthing 
of like nature, do sometimes tend the more to 
make a man less diligent and less perfect. For 



112 The Spiritual Ascent 

the measure of each man's love is not the extent 
to which he doth feel this desire or the extent to 
which he seemeth to himself to be in that dis- 
position of mind, but rather to the extent to which 
he is founded in virtues (that is humility, patience, 
, charity, and the rest) and found faithful in keep- 
ing that which is committed to him. For this 
sweet affection toward God is sometimes even 
a carnal and fallacious thing, and is of humanity 
rather than of grace, of the heart rather than of 
the spirit, of the sensual rather than of the ra- 
tional, so that it enkindleth mah more to what 
is less good, and less to what is the greater; and 
also to that which he savoureth rather than to 
that which is expedient. But there is a devotion 
otherthanthis, when, forexample, after long strife 
and many exercises and with the co-operation of 
the grace of God, a man hath already made vice 
itself subject to the rule of reason, is clad as it 
were with a natural affection toward what is 
good, taketh sweet pleasure in it and doth rest 
therein. This is not a devotion that passeth away, 
but hath soaked as it were into the very marrow 
of the soul, is rooted therein through habits of 
virtue, and is ever ready to fulfil the good plea- 
sure of God whether it be any work or suffering. 
If this disposition be accompanied by sweet 
affection and delight, it is true devotion, and a 
constant and abiding quality of the will, and by 
the measure of this ought we to reckon Love. In 
proportion as thou dost quench vice and make 
progress in virtue, in that proportion dost thou 
go forward in this devotion unless it be taken 
from thee by God through His dispensing power. 



Of the three things needful 1 1 3 

IT Chapter L. Of the three things needful to them 
that would strive in lawful wise against vices, 
namely, strenuousness, staid gravity and benig- 
nity. 

THEREFORE deceive not thyself, nor think 
that thou canst ascend unless thou study 
to root out vices. For thou dost not find aught 
that is good in thyself, that is in thy flesh, but 
vices themselves that are in thee have pitched 
their camp against thee, in thy powers Concupi- 
scent and irascible, and will only is with thee. 
For the power to will lieth with thee, wherefore 
it is needful that the will herself be armed against 
all kinds of vice. It must be armed on the right 
hand and on the left, and these be the weapons 
thereof: strenuousness, staid gravity and benig- 
nity. Now, according to Bonaventura, the first 
of these is defined to be a vigour of mind that 
doth shake off all negligence, and disposeth the 
spirit to do good works with vigilance, confidence 
and carefulness. Staid gravity is a vigour of 
mind that restraineth all concupiscence, doth 
make the mind apt and render it fervent to love 
austerity, poverty and things profitable. But 
benignity is a sweetness of mind that doth shut 
out all vileness, and maketh the mind apt to 
benevolence, to tolerance, to inward joy. 

These three things are thine armour, namely, 
to be strenuous in putting away negligence and 
strenuous to get thee to work though it be hard 
and toilsome. 

Secondly, be thou staid, and so when thou 
shalt have undertaken the fight against vice, and 
dost by thine experience perceive the might 
thereof in thee (and thou canst not but feel it), 
yield not nor get thee to flight, but continue in 
manly wise the task thou hast begun, pursuing 

I 



1 14 The Spiritual Ascent 

thy lusts most sternly even to the death, yea 
until they perish utterly. 

In the third place be thou benign, and thoug^h 
thou be oft wounded and oft cast down, fall not 
into perturbation of spirit, to the sadness which 
is evil, nor to dejecSlion or despondency. If thou 
hast these three arms, care not that the number 
be small to fight against the lusts of vice, for 
vi(5lory cometh from heaven and it is as easy to 
the Lord to conquer by few as by many. Think 
how Jonathan, son of Saul, with his armour- 
bearer only, slew very many; how Judas Machae- 
beus, and his brothers Jonathan and Simon, 
Gideon also and other brave warriors, did slay 
many with the help of few, because they trusted 
not in themselves but in the Lord. 

% Chapter LI. How that it is expedient or neces- 
sary for a man who is going forward in spiritual 
exercises to have for guide a man that is spiritual. 

BUT since there be many ways (as thou dost 
hear in the matter of the ascents afore de- 
scribed) and amongst them that way that leadeth 
to life is hard to be known, go not up without 
a guide nor go forward save with one who know- 
eth the way and is not ignorant of the wiles of 
the enemy. 

Often God doth use to instru(5l a man by means 
of other men, and so to admonish him that he 
take the right ascent and the true paths. Woe 
to him who trusteth in himself and goeth for- 
ward alone, without a guide, for easily he falleth 
into the snares of the hunter, and having fallen 
therein he hath none to lift him up. Therefore 
it is God's will that we follow a guide for our 
humiliation, for it was thus that He lead the 
whole people of Israel to the promised land by 



Of fighting against Capital Vices 1 1 5 

means of Moses their guide, by whose counsel 
did the people do all things, to whose admonition 
did they all assent. In like planner was Lot con- 
strained to go forth from Sodom, and to go up 
the ascent of the mountain, not of his own 
guidance, but having a leader that is an angel. 
So Christ instru6led not Cornelius Himself, but 
sent him to Peter to be instrudled, and so He 
dire6led Paul to Ananias. This, moreover, was 
the word of that devout eunuch who read Esias 
in the chariot: **How," saith he, ** shall I under- 
stand except some man shall teach me?" And in 
the Scriptures thou shalt find numberless things 
of this sort. Wherefore, when thou dost set in 
order in thine heart ascents, as being about to 
climb up to Heaven, choose thee a guide, a man 
spiritually minded, and be earnest to perform 
all thine exercises and fulfil them led by his learn- 
ing, admonishment and examination. This is the 
safest do6lrine and is approved by the opinion 
of the Holy Fathers of old time. 

H Chapter LH. How that he who fighteth against 
the eight capital vices, doth in a manner strive 
against all inordinate affedlions. 

IF, then, thou hast gotten thine armour and 
hast found a guide to go before thee with 
counsel and diredlion, it is time to get to the 
fight, and so thou must strive against all inordi- 
nate affe6lions which do arise chiefly because of 
that disorder of the powers of thy soul which 
hath been brought about through thy first 
descent from original justice. 

But although there be very many vicious 
affections which drag thee back from the up- 
ward way, yet one is the queen, and there are 
seven chiefs beside her; from this do all other 

u 



1 1 6 The Spiritual Ascent 

vicious passions arise, and when these are over- 
come and the virtues that are contrary thereto 
are brought in, in their place, all inordinate 
desires sink to rest; through strife against these 
eight the powers are as it were restored, whilst 
the noxious inclinations are curbed with the 
bridle of reason. These are the eight which are 
sometimes called the *' chief "vices, being as it 
were the chiefs whom the rest do follow ; and 
sometimes they are called ''capital," because it 
is of their nature that the others come from them 
as their head; moreover, these others, whose 
nature it is to proceed therefrom, are called their 
daughters. 

Sometimes they are called ''mortal," because 
they slay us with the death of guilt and sepa- 
rate us from the life of grace and from God, Who 
is the true life. Yet are the eight not always 
mortal, nor even are they so of their nature, and 
they are these: Pride, Vainglory, Sloth, Envy, 
Wrath, Covetousness, Luxury and Gluttony, 

f Chapter LIII. Of the manner of fighting 
against vices, and how that a man ought not 
to fight against all at one time, but against 
some one chief vice. 

BUT thou oughtest not to strive against all 
these at one time, just as thou canst not 
make all the aforesaid ascents at one time. 
"Not in one year," saith the Lord, "will I cast 
them out from before thy face, but by little and 
little, lest the land become desolate. " Wherefore, 
following the tradition of the Holy Fathers, do 
thou keep this order when thou art about to 
enter upon the struggle against these vices. 

But in the first place and before all things do 
thou diligently sift thyself, and seek out, after 



Of the Maimer of Fighting 1 1 7 

the form of examination already given thee, 
what manner of vices there be in thee, either! 
patent or hidden; next what vices are the 
stronger, and which do most beset thee. Next 
what remedies are chiefly efficacious against 
each several vice, and having done this hasten 
to fight against that one which is hostile to thee 
above the rest. 

Therefore, I say, hasten to fight against this' 
one chief vice, with all thy might strive to root 
it out, and toward that end chiefly turn all thy 
toil and care. Ever pray to God against it,' and 
as thou pfayest let this be continually before 
thine eyes ; shed tears without ceasing for the 
quenching thereof, uttering groans and sighs to 
God with a devout spirit. 

Yet oughtest thou not to fight against this 
one thing in such fashion that thou neglect to 
strive against other vices, but so fight against 
this in particular as to feel a general anxiety 
and horror towards all vice ; yea, verily the more 
boldly and wisely thou strivest against one, the 
more shalt thou feel horror for vice in general. 
Moreover, it is expedient that thou know that as 
in nature the different natural complexions that 
men have are caused by this, that the four 
humour^ (the sanguine, the choleric, the phleg- 
matic and the melancholic) are intermingled in dif- 
ferent proportions ; so, too, indifferent men there 
are different moral dispositions or inclinations, 
and divers leanings toward vice or even towards 
virtue ; and this difference doth depend upon the 
inner man and is caused by different intermixture 
of the affections, and by the corruption of the 
powers through the fostering of evil. Thus it is 
that one is more inclined to luxury and another 
to wrath, and it is often so that a man hath some 



1 1 8 The Spiritual Ascent 

particular inclination which is as it were a store 
whence all his other vices, or the more part of 
them, do come. So perchance it may not be 
absurd if this be called his moral complexion. 
Thus, one is sad, another doubtful, a third con- 
fused of mind, a fourth full of scruples, a fifth 
querulous, to a sixth his exercises are irksome, 
a seventh is overbusied. Now all these things, as 
it should seem, proceed from some ill disposition 
within, either of the soul or of the organs, and 
in their own fashion are not unlike to melan- 
cholic affedlions of the body. 

But another man will be given to hilarity, to 
wandering, to cheerfulness, to loose living and 
so forth. And each man ought diligently to 
inquire into his inward state after the manner 
above set forth, and in accordance J;herewith to 
order in his heart his ascents to virtue; in his 
exercises to ordain remedies against vice, always 
to be suspicious concerning that vicious inclina- 
tion which is in him; and in every way to bridle 
it that it obey reason. 

But when by devout exercises and manful 
striving thou shalt have fought down that one 
vice of which we have spoken above, so that it 
obey reason and presume not to contradict her, 
and so that if even it rise up again it is straight- 
way bridled of reason without a struggle, then 
with like diligence thou must seek for another 
vice which doth especially beset thee, and fight 
against it in like manner. But think not that 
thou canst so tear out every root of any vice 
which is in thee that from that time forward 
there shall be no need to strive against it even 
with general solicitude and horror ; for, as saith 
Bernard, vices, though they be lopped, do sprout 
again; though put to flight they do return; 



How one must Fight 1 19 

though quenched they blaze up afresh ; and put 
to sleep they rouse them anew. 

U Chapter LI V. How that one must fight against 
vices in different ways corresponding to the 
diversity of their nature; and of that in which 
this diversity doth consist. 

FURTHERMORE, it is expedient that thou 
know the proper manner of fighting against 
vices, and that the one must not fight against 
the eight aforementioned, nor against those vices 
which proceed from them in such a way as to 
use the same method in every case, but just as 
the nature of these is diverse so, too, the methods 
of fighting against them must be different. 

In the matter of carnal vices, thou dost over- 
come these better by avoiding every occasion 
thereof and by taking away the sustenance 
whereby they live in thee; but for spiritual vices, 
thou wilt better cast them out by seizing the 
occasions upon which they are stirred up, and 
boldly resisting them. 

In the next place do thou further consider 
another diversity, and the varied nature of vices, 
for there be some which always arise out of 
others, and come not of themselves but with 
another vice to lead them, such, for example, is 
envy. 

Do not thou then strive against this secondary 
vice so much as against that from which it doth 
take its origin. 

In the third place consider another diversity, 
and the nature of temptations, for there be some 
vices which do lead evidently to evil, and the 
intent of these is to overwhelm the soul by their 
onslaught (such are luxury or wrath), and these 
oughtest thou to resist with toil and suffering. 
But there be others which do not assail dire£Uy 



1 20 The Spiritual Ascent 

by their own assault, but by seducing the soul 
do deceive it Now vices of this kind are very 
often even contrary to the appetites, as, for ex- 
ample, the temptation to excess in watching, 
fasting and the like, and here there is need rather 
of discretion than of fortitude, wherefore, as saith 
Bernard: ''In this particular to have known is 
to have conquered, and faith is victory." 

But there be other vices besides, which assail 
both by their own onslaught and by wearing the 
appearance of goodness, as, for example, an inor- 
dinate afFedlion to preaching, which doth seduce 
by wearing the cloak of a zeal for souls, and 
urgeth one on through the lust of praise and the 
desire of reputation. Now this is a most perilous 
temptation, wherefore in this matter one must 
in the first place know and believe that it is a 
temptation, yet to know or to have known this 
is not to have conquered, but one must also bridle 
the attack thereof by toils and exercises. 

11 Chapter LV. How there be three ascents to 
overcome each vice, that is three ways of going 
forward to the opposite virtue. 

HAVING premised this for thy caution as 
concerning the strife against vice in general, 
let us now come down to the particular struggles 
against each vice severally. 

In the first place, thou must know that what- 
ever evil thou dost choose to fight down, against 
this shouldest thou ordain ascents in thine heart, 
and certain steps by which to go forward, to the 
end that thou mayest know how far thou art 
going up to virtue, or how far going downward 
to vice. 

So then thou mayest distinguish between three 
steps whereby any vice is overcome; of these the 



Of Overcoming Gluttony 1 2 1 

first doth belong* to them that are begfinners, 
and pertaineth to the first step of the upgoing 
towards purity of heart, and this lieth in fear. 

The second doth belong to them that are mak- 
ing progress, and pertaineth to the second stage 
of the second upgoing, and this lieth in hope. 

The third step doth belong to them that are 
finishing their course, and pertaineth to the last 
step of the upgoing towards purity. 

% Chapter LVI. "Of the upgoing which over- 
cometh the first vice which is gluttony. 

BUT the first struggle is against the vice of 
gluttony. Ip the beginning it was by this 
that the devil tempted and overcame the first 
man, this was his first temptation to the Second 
Man and therein the tempter failed. Moreover, 
this vice lieth as it were at the very threshold of 
nature. If then we cannot overcome this, how 
may we overcome the spiritual vice^ which war 
against us, seeing that these last are beyond the 
confines of our carnal nature? 

Now against this vice we go up by means of 
the virtue of sobriety, through the which we or- 
dain ascents in our hearts to overcome this glut- 
tony which must be vanquished. 

By sobriety is meant that virtue by which the 
sustenance for our body is given thereto with 
proper moderation, and thou oughtest to set in 
order these steps, that is a threefold ascent, in 
thine heart to overcome the vice of gluttony so 
as to be able to bridle the appetite thereto, and 
(so far as this is concerned) to reform the powers 
concupiscent. But the first ascent against glut- 
tony, that is the first step to the virtue of sobriety, 
is patiently to endure when thou canst not have 
savoury food and drink, and not to be sad if 



122 The Spiritual Ascent 

sometimes thou mayest not have thy desire to 
the full. But in this step the gluttonous man doth 
suffer much strife and many darts of this vice, 
wherefore he hath need to stand some while, and 
to fight and overcome his gluttony. Know there- 
fore that the nature of gluttony is such that it 
doth cause an inordinate appetite for meat and 
drink in the power concupiscent whereby a man 
is hindered from the upward way; and this inor- 
dinate affedlion or appetite doth constrain some 
to eat before it be time, and others to eat extra- 
vagantly, that is, to expend too great desire and 
to be prodigal in their eating; others, again, it 
doth constrain to seek inordinately for delicate 
meats, and driveth some to exceed in quantity. 
But that thou mayest recognize the whole 
family of this vice, and know that against which 
thou oughtest to fight, consider this that the 
most notable daughters of gluttony, according 
to Gregory, are scurrilous speech, overmuch 
talking, detradlion, vituperation, foolish jesting, 
lascivious thoughts and carnal impurity. But 
to the end that thou mayest be able to cleanse 
and purge away this affe6lion to impurity whereby 
through our inclination we lean to a vicious 
desire for food, thou must give thy mind generally 
to the expurgation of all carnal vices, consider- 
ing this that there are in the soul three influences 
that move one corporally, namely, the natural 
force, which is the motive power of the humours, 
and from this gluttony and luxury do often take 
their origin; secondly, vital force, by the which 
a man doth exercise his vital motions; thirdly, 
the mental force by which he doth exercise his 
imagination, thought and so forth. Now the more 
that the mental force is relaxed and the less a 
man doth exercise it, so much the more is the 



Of Overcoming Gluttony 1 2 3 

natural force extended and increased. Thus it 
is that men given to accidie, lukewarm persons, 
and such as have no inward delight in meditation 
or in spiritual desires, are chiefly in peril of fall- 
ing into carnal vice, whence Solomon saith that 
every idle man is filled with desire; and, accord- 
ing to Cassianus, it is for this reason that the 
glutton knoweth not how to think of aught save 
meat and drink and the things that concern the 
belly. And again Chrysostom saith that it is for 
this reason that women are chiefly tempted to 
carnal sins, because they are inwardly less occu- 
pied than men; wherefore the same saint saith 
of luxury that it is a passion which belongeth to 
an empty mind. 

But on the other hand, in proportion as the 
mental power is extended, so is the natural power 
relaxed, as is seen in the case of studious persons; 
and it is for this cause that the blessed Jerome 
saith to Rusticus: ** Love^ know the Scriptures 
and thou wilt not love the vices of the flesh. " 

So the more a man is intent upon some inward 
and outward employment or care, taking delight 
therein, so much the more will he overcome car- 
nal vices; wherefore the remedy against gluttony 
and likewise against luxury is care in all things 
and an outward affedlion towards God, for ex- 
ample, compun6lion which is very mighty to 
overcome both these sins. In like manner devotion 
is useful, or holy reading, or any outward occu- 
pation, so that they be accompanied by inward 
affe6lion; with these and like remedies must thou 
strive against gluttony, till at length thou dost 
rise to a higher stage, which consisteth in this 
that thou go forward so far that not only dost 
thou determine with a ready will, but also art 
able, with no opposition from thine appetites, to 



1 24 The Spiritual Ascent 

abstain from such pleasant meats as thou couldest 
obtain, and to be content with simple and com- 
mon viAuals, keeping away from such as be 
delicate, say from wine and so forth. Upon this 
stage thou dost stand more safely, but yet thou 
art not altogether free from assaults, though 
they be weaker. 

In order that going forward from this point 
thou mayest come to the third ascent, thy lust 
must be trodden underfoot by aid of the reme- 
dies aforesaid, by fasting, by watching, by read- 
ii^if) by frequent compun(Slion of heart; groan 
over those desires by the which perchance 
thou dost remember that thou wast deceived or 
conquered; be enkindled now with horror of vicCi 
now with desire for perfection and integrity, and 
so at last thy mind, being alike occupied and 
held by cares and meditations of this kind, may 
perceive that the refreshment of vidlual is not a 
thing permitted for her enjoyment, so much as 
a duty added to the burden of life, understand- 
ing that such refreshment is rather needful to 
the body than to be desired for the soul. Then 
dost thou touch the third ascent, namely, when 
thou shalt have put on this afFedlion. But the 
third step and ascent is that which is made when 
a man hath so tamed his gluttony, and so re- 
formed his power concupiscent that he can abstain 
without any difficulty from the pleasant meats 
that are within his reach, and can be content 
both in the quality and quantity of his food with 
what is needful, and the simpler his vidlual the 
more is he content. 

But when thou hast overcome gluttony, set 
in place thereof sobriety, which may keep diligent 
watch over thy vidlual in the matters of its kind 
and amount. As to kind, let thy sobriety see to 



Of Fighting the Vice of Luxury 125 

it that thou seek not delicate nor unwonted meats; 
as to amount, that thou exceed not due measure; 
for though the capacity of each man doth differ, 
yet for all there is one bound of moderation, 
namely, that whatever his capacity may be it 
must not be burdened by greediness. Especially 
let sobriety look to this, that regular ^nd moderate 
fast be kept. 

IT Chapter LVII. Of the upgoings whereby one 
must fight down the vice of luxury. 

IN the second place thou must set in order 
upgoings against luxury, that thou mayest 
prevail to overcome it, and verily this vice set- 
ting her throne in the power concupiscent doth 
not suffer any of whom she hath full hold to make 
his ascent, but causeth him like a brute to wal- 
low in his own filth. 

But against this vice we go up and conquer 
through the virtue of chastity, who is the daughter 
of that sobriety which did overcome gluttony; 
for by sobriety chiefly is she nurtured and made 
to grow. But this same chastity is a heavenly 
thing of mighty origin ; this have the Holy Angels 
learned from the Lord Himself, the very fount 
and origin of all things; this did Christ bring 
down to earth from heaven, and for the imita- 
tion of all He set forth His Mother, the glorious 
Virgin, for she was the very disciple of chastity. 

Now we go up against luxury, and utterly 
overthrow it, by means of a threefold ascent or 
three steps of progress. The first is continence 
restraining us from carnal a<5ls, giving us the 
intention to be constant, and refusing assent to 
any unlawful impulse. 

While making this ascent, a man is yet in the 
toil of battle, and is not far from his enemieSi 



1 26 The Spiritual Ascent 

since his will alone doth choose chastity, and his 
affe(5lions do fight against it. Wherefore it is 
expedient that, being set on this step, thou arm 
thyself manfully to fight; for to overcome this 
vice, a long and fierce battle must be fought 
against other vices, yea, a battle all day long. 
But to the end that thou mayest know how to 
fight against luxury, thou oughtest diligently 
to consider the nature of the vice and the man- 
ner in which it doth assail thee. Now it hath a 
twofold nature, the one on the side of the fiesh, 
the other on the side of the spirit; in the former 
regard it hath the nature of an impulse in the 
flesh and power to stir the same and rouse it, 
but on the side which looketh to the soul, it doth 
engender an inclination towards women and a 
leaning to them, bringing in thoughts of them, 
familiarity with them, and so forth. 

According to Gregory, luxury hath seven 
daughters: blindness of mind, carelessness of 
death and hell, inconsistency of thought and 
desire, love of self, headlong inclination to sin, 
hatred of God, love of this present world, and 
despair of the world to come. But that thou may- 
est conquer these motions and affedlions, thou 
must diligently consider that this vice (as saith 
Chrysostom) is the passion of an empty mind, 
that is of a mind that is without exercises or 
desire thereof. Wherefore, the more thou dost 
fill thine heart with fear, solicitude and com- 
pun6lion, the less wilt thou be tempted, and it 
is for this reason that in sleep, when the powers 
of the mind are bedrouzed, this brute beast doth 
the more assail. 

Then as to particular remedies, note this that 
sometimes the vice doth shew herself more on the 
fleshly side, at other times more on the spiritual; 



Of Fighting the Vice of Luxury 127 

and when it is upon the fleshly, it doth stir up 
affedlions in the spirit, and conversely, when it is 
in the spirit, it doth straightway move the flesh. 
Yet there are certain remedies which are mighty 
to heal this vice, when it is in the flesh, namely, 
fasting, which is the chief remedy, and likewise 
the labour of the hands, watching, toil, tribula- 
tion, and so forth; but when it is in the soul the 
remedies are these: contrition of spirit, devout 
prayer, frequent and holy meditation, solicitude 
of mind, spiritual exercises, earnest and absorb- 
ing occupation both of mind and body; likewise 
to keep watch over the senses when thou art in 
the street, or in the house and so forth, to have 
control over thine inward thoughts, to have no 
familiar intercourse with women, to avoid speak- 
ing with them alone, or in private (for this is 
Jerome'scounsel), and toabstain from frequenting 
their houses. Also humility and gentleness are 
of great avail, wherefore the wise man said: 
**When I knew I could not otherwise be con- 
tinent, I went to the Lord and besought Him.'' 

Although no triumph over any vice can ever 
be gained without humility, yet in this particular 
case we have special need of divine grace, where- 
fore pra(5lising thyself in these and like exercises, 
thou dost at last ascend higher, namely, to the 
second step of chastity, and the second stage 
forward that doth overcome the vice of luxury. 
But this second step is reached wjhen by the 
maceration of the flesh, and the other exercises 
aforesaid, thine affection is made clean, and the 
flesh so subjugated to the spirit, that it is less 
often tempted, and temptation when it cometh 
doth yield with but slight toil, so as to obey a 
word rather than cease after a struggle. 

Yet above this there is a third and an higher 



128 The Spiritual Ascent 

step, which is reached when after long-continued 
exercises and much labour, and also through the 
co-operation of the Grace of God, thou hast so 
tamed the lusts of the flesh that they are felt but 
very seldom and very lightly, and hast so put on 
the affection to and the love of chastity, as to be 
filled with horror and detestation of all the 
motions of the fleshy and to be as it were sickened 
thereby. 

% Chapter LVIII. Of the upgoihgs that over- 
come avarice. 

IN the third place thou must set in order up- 
gotngs to overcome avarice, doing this by 
means of contempt of riches, and the virtue of 
poverty; and as in the ascents afore set forth, 
there be three steps upward; the first is not to 
desire to have aught that is unjustly gained, 
to do alms of such things as be gained justly, and 
not to abuse one's own possessions for vicious 
ends. But if thou wilt tear out this vice of avar- 
ice by the very roots, then having victual, cloth- 
ing, and a roof to cover thee, therewith be thou 
content. Yet verily this is the chief remedy, 
namely, to leave all for Christ's sake, and to 
spend one's life under the charge and oversight 
of another, and not to claim ownership in any- 
thing even to the least extent. Another remedy 
also is trust in God who doth not desert them 
that hope in Him. 

The second step is not only to be content 
with what is justly ours, but to be satisfied with 
bare necessities, to desire no superfluities in food, 
vesture, or lodging, and so on in each several 
matter. 

The third step is to possess nothing in this 
world, nor to desire aught therein, and often to 



The Ascents to overcome Wrath 1 29 

endure penury even in the hings that are 
needful. 

Now the daughters of avarice are six: treach- 
ery, fraud, wandering, perjury, restlessness, and 
an heart that is obdurate against pity. 

IF Chapter LIX. The ascents to overcome wrath, 

WHEN these three vices are overcome, being 
the chief affections to concupiscence, do 
thou next go up to overcome the power irascible, 
and to purge it; and in the first place there doth 
meet thee the task to set in order thine ascents to 
overcome the vice of wrath, for one may go up 
against this by a threefold ascent or progress 
through the virtue of gentleness. 

The first step is that a man learn to overcome 
the impulses to wrath by striving against them 
and so to repress them that they break not out 
through unlawful words or acts* 

Now the nature and impulses of wrath are 
threefold according to Gregory; for some it 
doth move suddenly and quickly fadeth away^ 
others it doth move more slowly, and when they 
are stirred wrath doth not quickly leave them; 
others, again, it doth movequickly andleave more 
slowly. Now the daughters of wrath are these: 
strife, riot of mind, contumely, clamour, indigna- 
tion and blasphemy. 

Wherefore, when we are set upon this first step, 
let us repress ourselves, so that when we feel the 
motions of wrath we break not out. But to the 
end that we may do this the better, we ought 
continually to consider beforehand how to deal 
with those hindrances which may meet us and be 
the occasion of wrath, so that or ever they come 
we may be forearmed with the shield of patience. 
Likewise for this purpose it doth profit us to 

K 



1 30 The Spiritual Ascent 

spend toil upon repressing and smothering in 
our hearts the flame that is there enkindled, and 
it is good that a man turn to other business so 
as to forget his perturbation. Furthermore, it 
would be a mighty remedy if a man were to be 
so composed of mind as to be able to take coun- 
sel concerning the many ills that do follow 
wrath. This vice doth hurt the conscience, 
throweth into confusion purity of heart, driveth 
away pity, causeth scandal to one's neighbours, 
doth overthrow good report. 

Likewise compun6lion is apoison to wrath, for, 
as saith Climacus: ''As water doth put out fire, 
so the flowing of the tears of true grief hath such 
a nature as to slay and put out all the fire of rage"; 
and earnest meditation about death likewise doth 
curb wrath. 

By these, and by like exercises, doth a man go 
forward, until he touch the second step of gentle- 
ness or patience, which is reached when one being 
taught by use and the habit of bearing things 
contrary to his desire, and of curbing his impa- 
tience, hath learned not to be afraid nor disturbed 
by opposition, but doth look upon the enemy 
standing round, himself unshaken as one that is 
in a strong tower. 

But the third ascent is to rejoice in tribulations, 
to glory when these are present with him, and 
when they are absent to desire them. 

H Chapter LX. The ascents that lead to love of 
one's neighbour and to the overcoming of envy. 

THE ascents that lead to the overcoming of 
envy are these, namely, further progress, 
and the steps of the love of one's neighbour. 
Now the first of these is this, to hate no man 
nor to desire ill to any, not to desire to hinder 



The Ascents to overcome Envy 131 

the good of any, not to withdraw from one's 
neighbour help and aid in his need, and in a word 
not to let one's will consent to the doing or desir- 
ing of evil to any man; and further, let each 
choose his neighbour's good, doing as he would 
be done by if he himself were in need. But charity, 
as hath been said before, being the virtue to 
which we go up chiefly by love for one's neigh- 
bour, is herself the end of our ascents. Wherefore, 
just as nothing is to be higher esteemed than 
love of God and of one's neighbour, so naught 
is to be more condemned than envy. Wherefore, 
before all things, we must keep unity and peace, 
for in this lieth the bond of perfe6lion. There is 
nothing in which the Holy Angels do so much 
rejoice, there is nothing whereby we may so fully 
pi6lure the similitude of the New Jerusalem than 
that we keep charity and unity of heart, saying 
the same words, feeling the same motions, being 
careful not to hurt the consciences of others by 
any stumbling-block, by singularity, by strange 
pradlices, or by the presumption of unaccustomed 
behaviour. For this cause was it that Christ, 
when about to depart from us, did so often repeat 
the same commandment, that He might impress 
it the more deeply. ** In this," said He, "all men 
shall know that ye are My disciples if ye have 
love one to another." 

Wherefore let us above all things drive out 
this vice of envy, a thing that is fitly ascribed 
to demons, for it was through the envy of the 
devil that death entered into the world, following 
Satan who was on the side of death. 

But the chief remedy against envy is to love 
none of those things that the world Ibveth, 
namely, honour, riches, or pleasure, for in propor- 
tion as we love anything that is earthly, in that 

Ka 



132 The Spiritual Ascent 

degree are we stirred to envy, if we be hindered 
from it by any. But note this, that the impulse to 
displeasure at the good of another is not in all 
cases properly called envy, for sometimes we are 
displeased at the good hap of another in so far 
as it doth tend to our own hurt, or that of other 
men, as, for instance, I may look jealously on a 
man because of his master who is a tyrant and 
doth oppress others unjustly. This impulse doth 
always concern some temporal advantage, and 
is sometimes good and at other times vicious. 

Sometimes, also, I may have an impulse to 
displeasure at another's good hap, or be sad- 
dened thereby, not because he hath it, but because 
I see that I am in lack of that good thing, and 
this is sometimes an wholesome zeal; thus it is 
that Jerome would have us envy one another's 
virtues and strive who should be the humbler and 
the more obedient. 

Thirdly, my displeasure at another's good may 
have reference to the degree in which such good 
doth diminish mine own glory or honour, and 
this is in the strictest sense envy. This doth not 
subsist between persons whose condition is far 
apart, because the glory and honour of a man 
who is far removed and high above me doth not 
diminish mine own; just so the clown envieth not 
the king his glory, and yet it may be that the 
king's brother, who might himself be chosen to 
be king, doth envy it; so Esau hated Jacob, and 
so Absalom did envy Solomon. 

But the daughters of envy who proceed from 
her, are hatred, theft, detradlion, triumph in a 
neighbour's adversity, and afflidlion at his pros- 
perity. 

The second remedy is for a man well to weigh 
this consideration, that even if another did lack 



The Ascents to overcome Accidie 133 

this good thing for whose sake he is envious, 
yet he himself would not have it; also to fear the 
vengeance of God, Who doth not forgive a man 
his offences, unless the offender doth forgive his 
neighbour; and again this is a remedy, that one 
study to be more serviceable, affable, and kindly 
to that person whom he doth hate. 

But the second ascent to overcome envy, and 
the step forward to love of one's neighbour is 
this, so to rejoice in another's progress, and to 
love that other's good as if it were our own; 
so to have compassion on his adversity as if we 
suffered it; and through the affe6lion of brotherly 
love to count another's gain as ours. 

But the third step upward is to be so disposed 
as to love our enemies and to be influenced by 
the same sweetness toward them that hate and 
persecute us as if they were such as were spe- 
cially beloved; and to be ready to give not tem- 
poral goods only, but even to offer our very body 
for the brethren. 

H Chapter LXI. The ascents whereby we over- 
come and cast out accidie (sloth). 

JUST as love for our neighbour doth cast out 
and destroy envy, so by ascending to the love 
of God we do overcome accidie, and the sadness 
which is evil. For the love of God is fervent in 
operation, and if it be love it worketh mightily, 
but if it refuse to work, it is not love. In like 
manner the outcome of charity is joy in the Holy 
Ghost, which overcometh sadness, but the first 
step toward the love of God is to love what is 
given thee, and to use it in such a manner that 
unlawful things are avoided; and when thou art 
set upon this step, thou doest only the things 
necessary to salvation, taking heed lest accidie 



1 34 The Spiritual Ascent 

so cast thee down that thou neglect the things 
needful to be done, or ordained upon thee by 
precept. But this step is a low one, and it is not 
good to abide long thereon. For this cause it is 
needful that by continual exercise in good works 
thou break thyself down, resisting thine accidie, 
and inflaming thine affections by those good 
deeds and by holy exercises; and the purpose ot 
this is that at length thou mayest gain delight 
in, and an affection towards, such holy exercises 
and good works; so now thou doest not only 
things necessary to salvation, but being enkin- 
dled to a fuller and more fervent affection, thou 
dost begin to do all the things that are of God 
(thine accidie being in part vanquished), and to 
be zealous in doing them, yea, and moreover, 
in following counsel to the full. 

Herein thou goest up the second step of the 
love of GrOD, and overcomest accidie of mind. 
But so long as thou art assailed by this vice, 
and hast not yet reached that step, know thou 
that the chief remedy against accidie is never to 
yield, but always manfully to resist. 

To the end that thou mayest know the nature 
of this brute beast, consider that the influence 
and tendency of the vice lead chiefly to two things, 
namely, that thou change thy place and vary 
thine exercises. It doth bring about thine change 
of place in the manner following: first of all it 
doth weigh down and depress thy mind with 
weariness and taketh away all delight in things 
spiritual; but the soul cannot bear to be without 
delight, wherefore she doth straightway turn her 
to sighing after carnal refreshment, and to a 
desire to leave that place in which she hath no 
pleasure; so this doth cause in thee an horror ot 
the said place, a distaste for thy cell, and for 



The Ascents to overcome Accidie 135 

every good thing, especially such as be spiritual. 
Sometimes, moreover, the mind doth snatch 
eagerly at carnal delights, that she may be less 
occupied with those of the spirit; and then at 
the last a man doth begin to praise places that 
are further off, and to call the brothers who dwell 
there blessed, and also to conceive a kind of con- 
tempt toward them that dwell where he is as 
though they were less spiritual. So it doth come 
about that his mind being inclined to weariness 
and finding no comfort, he doth straightway 
desert his post or falleth into somnolence or dis- 
solute manners; and seeking solace from time to 
time, he changeth his exercises thus, albeit he 
hideth his motives beneath some cloak. For when 
the mind is weighed down by such exercises, it 
doth devise for itself others that are lighter, ex- 
tolling these more highly and deeming them more 
meritorious, as, for example, visiting the sick, 
or building a monastery, in the which he that 
was a worthless and indolent disciple may become 
a yet worse master and redlor. 

So if thou wilt overcome accidie in lawful wise, 
above all things, change not thy place, for the 
more thou dost so change the more shall thy 
mind be unstable in things external, and the 
more given to accidie in things spiritual, for which 
cause Bernard saith: * * It is impossible for a man's 
mind faithfully to attach itself to any one thing, 
unless first he shall have attached his body in 
constancy of purpose to some one place; and he 
that doth strive to avoid a sick mind by fleeing 
from place to place, is as one that fleeth from 
the shadow of his body." 

Moreover, as to the greatness of the ills which 
come when a man doth lightly change his exer- 
cises, of this we have spoken above. 



1 36 The Spiritual Ascent 

Now the daughters of accidie are six, accord- 
ing to Gregory, namely, malice (that is, a desire to 
devise evil things), despair, pusillanimity, ran- 
cour (that is, inveterate hate), sluggishness con- 
cerning the precepts of God, and a mind that 
wandereth among things unlawful. 

Compundtion would have mighty virtue 
against this disease, if so be that a man given 
to accidie could acquire it, for as saith Climacus: 
**He that sorroweth over himself knoweth not 
accidie," and he saith again, '^Let this tyrant 
be bound with the fetter of the memory of our 
offences and sins, let him be beaten as with rods 
by the labour of our hands, and dragged away 
by intent and close meditation concerning the 
good things to come." 

Likewise, variety of occupation hath great vir- 
tue to overcome weariness of heart, as that a 
man pray for a while and then read for a while, 
until he gain some desirable affedlion, and so 
constrain himself to continue in those a£ts where- 
by he is most chiefly wearied. 

But if a man be strenuous, stridl and cheerful 
in his devout exercises and holy a6ls, and if he 
bestir himself in such for a great while and with 
perseverance, at length he doth begin to hope, 
to make wider his affe6lion to love, and after a 
fashion to yearn toward God, as being unable 
to live without Him, being constrained by the 
desire to be released and to be with Christ. And 
this is the third step of the love of God which 
doth overcome accidie. But evil sadness hath a 
double meaning, for sometimes the word is used 
generally, just as we speak of all passion in 
general terms, and in such case the origin thereof 
is difficult to comprehend; but under another 
aspect it is a torpor and a wearisome heaviness 



The Aseents against Vainglory 137 

in spiritual things, and in such case it may be 
comprehended under accidie, and we go up to 
overcome it by the steps of the love of God, for 
the outcome of that love is joy. 

Now the remedy against the sadness that 
Cometh of despair is the remembrance of the 
kindness and mercy of God and the perception 
of His benefits. Secondly, let a man have access 
freely to good company, where men speak of 
God and the things of the Spirit. Thirdly, that 
He remember the counsel of James, that if any 
be afflidled, let him pray with a calm mind and 
sing psalms. 

But as concerning the sadness that is good, 
this hath been made plain enough in what hath 
been said about compun6lion. 

Chapter LXH. How we go upward against vain- 
glory to put it out. 

THERE is no virtue that is the opposite of 
vainglory, wherefore there is none where- 
by we may go up so as to overcome it, or set in 
order steps to vanquish it ; nay, rather this vice 
herself is begotten of virtue and strengthened 
by good works; her motions first do show in 
carnal things, fair vesture, high lineage and so 
forth, and yet though a man may not overcome 
her direcSlly by virtue, he doth supplant her by 
means of humility. Whithersoever thou dost 
throw this caltrop, it doth stand with a spike 
ere<Sl; whatsoever thou doest, howsoever thou 
dost behave thee, this spike doth penetrate and 
goad thine heart to vainglory. 

But her daughters are seven, namely, diso- 
bedience, sullenness, boasting, hypocrisy, obsti- 
nacy, strife, thepresumption of strange behaviour 
and the invention thereof. 



138 The Spiritual Ascent 

So albeit we have not any one particular virtue 
whereby we may fight down vainglory, yet are 
upgoings to overcome it most needful ; and let 
the first step and ascent against it be this, that a 
man strive with all his might not to begin any- 
thing with an intention to vainglory: that he keep 
guard over his mouth that he speak not aught 
so as to gain praise, especially with the inten- 
tion or forethought of so gaining it. In like 
manner let him beware of acting in such a way 
as to gain special praise or prominence, and so 
forth ; and he doth climb this step warily if he 
doth earnestly ruminate in his heart this thought, 
that what thing soever he hath begun and carried 
out with such an intention shall not only bring 
him no reward, but shall even get him great 
punishment. Wherefore let him diligently con- 
sider this word: **Amen, I say unto you, they 
have received their reward"; and likewise this 
verse of the psalm: "When God hath scattered 
the bones of them that please men they are put 
to confusion because God hath despised them," 
and this: ''If I yet pleased men, I should not be 
the servant of Christ." 

The second ascent is that as a man must be 
careful not to do his good deeds so as to be seen 
of men, or to be conspicuous before them, so also 
let him beware lest vainglory mar his sacrifice, 
by joining herself to him in the midst thereof; 
and let him always be forward to embrace those 
things in which he may be oppressed and lightly 
entreated, putting aside those from which glory 
and honour may arise. 

Yet vainglory, to the end that through deceit 
she may drag one back from this ascent, doth 
often cheat him by fraud, and not by violence, 
that is, she doth sometimes suggest that a great 



The Ascents against Pride 1 39 

thing should be undertaken, pretending that it 
is done through zeal for God, not with a zeal to 
glory. For example, that a man take upon him 
the office of preaching, and the order either 
of priest or deacon, that he may be able to win 
souls for the Lord and show to others a pattern 
of an exemplary life ; yet this desire is vain and 
must be cast out, for by this very thing a man 
is made unworthy of such an office, namely, that 
he is inclined thereto of desire. Wherefore the 
blessed Gregory saith: **He who being called 
to the priesthood doth hold back, and being 
sought therefor doth shrink away, that man 
should be promoted to serve at the holy altar, 
and in like manner he that doth seek it of his 
own motion, or doth thrust himself forward 
importunately ought without doubt to be re- 
je6led. Consider the notable example of a certain 
man who was deceived by this ill suggestion, 
that is given in Cassianus, his eleventh book ot 
the Institutes of Monks. 

The third ascent is lofty, and not many do 
climb up thereto, but it is this: when a man hath 
blown out the lamp of vanity and overthrown it, 
he doth so greatly love lowliness and contempt 
of the world that sometimes, even in the face of 
the multitude, he will do or undertake something 
whose fulfilment shall bring abje6l ignominy, 
and that for love of lowliness and a desire to be 
held in light esteem. 

IT Chapter LXIII. Of the ascents whereby we 
should war against pride. 

NOW at the very last it is needful to set in 
order steps to reach the throne where 
pride hath her seat, and thence to hurl down 
that queen of vices, even as queen Jezebel was 



I40 The Spiritual Ascent 

hurled headlong. But one must ascend hither 
by means of the steps of humility, and of these 
the first doth consist in this, that a man know 
in very truth that he is weak, incapable of good, 
vicious and deficient in other regards, and that 
he exalt not himself above himself; but if over- 
come of temptation he hath sometimes done so 
that he reprove and chastise himself. But a two- 
fold pride doth strive to drag the climber back 
from this step, namely, pride carnal and pride 
spiritual : the first deceiveth him by suggesting- 
that he is better than he really is because of his 
learning, his riches, the rank of his parents, 
or something of like nature, and this pride will 
not suffer him truly to know himself and his own 
worthlessness; and the signs by which thou 
canst recognize carnal pride in thyself or in 
another are these, according to Cassianus: First 
of all, loudness in speech, then sourness when 
silent, abundant and excessive laughter in moods 
of joy, suUenness that is beyond reason in 
moods of gravity, rancour in reproof; such 
pride is easy of speech and her words break 
forth everywhere without any weightiness of 
purpose, she doth lack all patience, knoweth 
not charity, is bold to show contempt but 
cowardly to bear it, slow to obey and haughty 
at receiving reproof, but weak in cutting off her 
own will and ever striveth to set up her own 
standard; also she is become unable to take 
counsel, that is to say, in all things she doth 
trust her own rather than her elders' counsel. 

But to the end that thou mayest ascend to 
the aforesaid steps of humility by thrusting 
down carnal pride, it is needful first of all that 
with the inmost affe6lion of thine heart thou 
show true humility to thy brethren, not con- 



The Ascents against Pride 141 

seating to hurt or to sadden them in aught. 
Secondly, that thou exercise thyself continually 
in lowly works and contemptible offices ; as, for 
example, service in the kitchen and the menial 
offices that must be filled, such as sweeping the 
house, washing the dishes, and always going 
clad in humble and abject wise like a beggar 
and so forth. Likewise use an humble bearing 
and lowly speech, choose the lowest place, avoid 
boastful titles as to be called Rabbi, or Sir, 
choosing nothing that hath to do with boastful- 
ness. Ever have before thine eyes the hour of 
thy death, for when these and like things have 
become matters of use, they incline the mind to 
lowliness and hinder it that it be not puffed up. 
But pride of the spirit is different, for it doth 
make the mind to swell and lifteth her above her- 
self, as it were, by the many virtues and great 
merits which she doth claim and boast herself 
to have in a special degree, thinking that these 
virtues were either given her of God or come of 
her own deserts. Now this is far more perilous 
than carnal vices, for there is no one of these last 
which doth so drain out all virtues, and so de- 
spoil and strip a man bare of all righteousness 
and sandlity as this evil of pride; yea, and its 
wont is to hurl down and slay in utter ruin them 
that were set upon the very housetop of the virtues. 
But that thou mayest stop this inward swelling 
and climb up io the step of humility aforesaid, 
it is needful that in all thy virtues, in all thy pro- 
gress and in all thy good works, thou say and feel, 
both from the bottom of thine heart and with thy 
lips: **Not I ; but the grace of God that is with 
me ; by the grace of God I am what I am : it is 
God that worketh both to will and to do accord- 
ing toHis good pleasure. "Alsodiligently consider 



142 The Spiritual Ascent 

thine ownworthlessness and earnestly weigh this, 
namely, that the good qualities of thy mind are 
not thine own, but the gift of God, and of them 
shalt thou give an account. But thine evil quali- 
ties are thy very own, and they are altogether 
evil, grievous by reason of many circumstances 
and worthy of most grievous punishment. But our 
good qualities are not altogether good, being in 
many regards imperfect; negligence, lukewarm- 
ness, hypocrisy, vainglory and so forth, often do 
so greatly stifle the good that is ours, that such 
good qualities are little meritorious and little 
accepted of God. 

Likewise thou must often give heed to others 
that are higher and better than thou, both men 
and also iSie Lord Jesus Christ, Who saith: 
** Learn of Me, for I am meek and lowly of heart," 
thus by comparing thyself with others thou wilt 
esteem thyself lightly. But when a man hath 
continued so doing for some while, he doth begin 
to know himself truly what he is, and if he doth 
exercise himself in his affedlions after this man- 
ner, and doth so continue steadfastly, thenceforth 
he doth begin to put on an affe6lion of such a 
nature that, as in the first ascent he perceived 
himself to be worthless, useless and so forth, so 
also now he would desire, so far as in him lieth, 
to be so considered by others, or even more 
worthless rather than better than he really is, 
unless, indeed, such reputation might cause 
scandal to his neighbour; and this is the second 
ascent and the second step of humility. But the 
third step and ascent is when a man who hath 
put on such an affection to humility by means of 
lowly exercises and knowledge of the truth, is 
not exalted even by great virtues and lofty gifts, 
nor doth flatter himself at all because of them. 



Of the Spiritual Descents 1 43 

but doth attribute and assign them wholly to 
Him from Whom he hath received all his good 
gifts; of such nature was the humility of Christ, 
and such that of the angels and of the saints in 
glory. 

H Chapter LXI V. Here beginneththe fourth part, 
which concerneth the spiritual descents, which 
are divided into two : the first the descent to one- 
self, the second that to one's neighbour. 

NOW hast thou heard, O man, the descents 
by which thou hast gone downward, that 
is to say thou hast heard how thou oughtest to 
order upgoings in thine heart, by what exercises 
and steps thou canst go up, how that thy task 
is to implore the aid of God by devout prayer, 
and what manner of reward thou shalt receive 
in another place. These are the things that were 
set before thee in the beginning, but Holy Scrip- 
ture doth speak in another place of these up- 
goings, saying: '* Jacob saw a ladder set up and 
the angels of God ascending and descending 
upon it"; wherefore perhaps thou dost marvel 
in that the angels upon the ladder, and holy men 
in like manner, do descend, for it is no marvel 
that they should go upward. And yet this matter 
may be understood without absurdity, because 
even holy men, so long as they are sojourners and 
are weighed down by the body which is cor- 
rupted, cannot aiscend continually and without 
check so as never to falter in their upward way, 
seeing that they are laden with the weight of 
corruption, nor can they but go down by times 
through relaxing their spiritual exercises. 

Again, there are descents profitable and even 
of advantage to the purpose, by the which even 
they that are truly climbers on the upward way. 



144 'I'he Spiritual Ascent 

and men that are spiritual may sometimes break 
their ascent for a while, undertaking such back- 
ward steps as may be profitable to themselves. 
But in order that thou mayest understand what 
are these descents, I say that there are two, the 
one by which a man goeth downward to himself, 
and a second by which he goeth downward to 
his neighbour. And each one of these is sub- 
divided into three steps. 

% Chapter LXV. Of the first descent by which a 
man goeth down, out of regard for himself, from 
an higher to a lower step. 

FIRST then a man goeth down to himself, and 
this is an example of such descent. A man 
who is set upon an higher ascent and hath been 
carried upward to a loftier step, doth on occasion 
go downward to the end that he may exercise 
himself yet more perfedlly upon a lower stage, 
because he feareth he shall lose what he gained 
in the lower stages if he climb ever upward. For 
a man that is going upward ought not to reach 
forward to the things that are before in such a 
manner as never to know in his heart the need of 
looking back to the things that are behind; but 
he must reach forward and go on from virtue to 
virtue in such a way as never to be heedless of 
the steps to which he hath already come, and by 
which he hath climbed upward, and in such a 
way as to be zealous in keeping with all his 
might what he hath already attained. For ex- 
ample, thou hast been smitten with compunflion 
through fear, through meditating on death, the 
last judgement and the pains of hell ; thou hast 
done much good thereby and art come in the 
next place to hope; then through the remem- 
brance of the joy of heaven and &e goodness of 



Of the First Descent 145 

God thou didst stir thyselfin sweeter wise to the 
compunflion of love ; oughtest thou then to leave 
fear? Shouldest thou altogether put behind thee 
all meditations on death and the judgement? I 
trow not ; nay sometimes thou must ascend by 
hope to the higher, and gaze on the glory of 
heaven that thou mayest be enticed by the beauty 
thereof to climb yet higher ; but anon thou must 
descend again by the step of fear, and study yet 
more earnestly than before the vanity of the 
world, the shortness of thy life and the bitter- 
ness of the pains of hell ; for so shalt thou be 
adread to descend lower yet; so shall hope go 
before and draw thee upward while fear is behind 
urging thee, as with a goad, to go forward and 
climb higher ; so in all thine exercises and at 
all times thou shalt ascend and descend treading 
the steps of fear, hope, and charity, till charity 
herself is made all perfeSEl, driving forth fear, 
that is the fear lest thou fall into torpor, false 
security, or presumption. Thus it is that the 
angels and holy men do ascend to heaven through 
affedlion and desire thereto, and of set purpose 
descend into the abyss, or go down alive into the 
pit. But concerning the step upon w^hich a man 
ought to exercise himself more fully, discretion 
must needs be used so as to discriminate herein 
according to the progress, state and condition 
of each several person ; yet in thine ascent and 
in thy descent, thou shalt, like Mary who was a 
sinner, embrace both feet of Christ ; so like the 
prophet thou shalt sing of mercy and judgement 
to the Lord. 

Now all things that are in the Scriptures, 
according to Augustine, have reference to these 
two ascents and descents; for the former are 
made that thou mayest love God's mercy, 

L 



146 The Spiritual Ascent 

the latter that thou mayest fear His power; 
wherefore the holy prophet in his divine speech 
doth tell how he heard of these two only. "God 
spake once," saith he, **and these two things 
have I heard, that mercy is to Thee, O Lord, 
and thou dost recompense every man according 
to his work"; all the prophets, all the Holy 
Scriptures are concerned with these two things. 
Hear the blessed Gregory as he doth commend 
to thee this ascent and descent. "Albeit," saith 
he, "that fear may always seem to be far re- 
moved from safety, yet is nothing safer for a 
man than constant fear tempered with hope, for 
this doth hinder the imprudent mind from hurling 
herself into vice through desperation, or from 
falling to ruin through exultation in her gifts ; 
for the more humbly, and yet hopefully, the 
mind doth tremble for herself before the eyes of 
the striiSl but loving Judge, the more firmly doth 
she stand. " If, therefore, thou art not willing that 
the foot of pride come against thee (for by this 
all who work [iniquity do fall) then be slow to 
withdraw thy foot altogether from fear. 

% Chapter LXVI. Of the second descent by 
which a man must go down by times to learn 
discipline in his outward condu6l and bearing. 

IN the second place, O man, thou must g-o 
down to thyself and order and arrange thine 
outward man duly in the matter • of condu6t, 
that thine inward devotion and holiness of heart 
may shine forth outwardly in thy bearing and 
behaviour. Wherefore rule thine outward man- 
ners that thou mayest keep guard over thyself, 
be an ensample to others and amiable to all. This 
wilt thou accomplish in most excellent wise if 
thou study to observe these things in thine out- 



Of the Second Descent 147 

ward bearing, first, that it be staid; secondly,* 
humble ; third, benignant ; for of these the first 
doth make thee a pattern for others, the next 
watchful over thyself, the last lovable to all. 

Now to be staid lieth in this, that a man show 
not levity in running about, be not prone to 
laughter nor curious, nor chattersome, nor a 
jester. Staidness doth rule the head, inwardly 
composeth the mind, and outwardly doth guard 
the whole body from insolence. It ruleth the 
head, I say, because it doth hinder it from 
lightly turning hither and thither, the eyes from 
wandering, the ears from curious listening and 
so on with each matter. An humble bearing doth 
bow her neck, maketh answer in low tones and 
doth smooth the gestures. She doth love simple 
vesture, taketh her place amongst the lowest, 
refuseth every mark of ostentation, doth flee 
singularity and maketh a man quick and prompt 
to serve his fellows. Benevolence maketh him 
affable and compassionate to the afflidled ; tract- 
able, easy to be entreated and readily bent to 
follow command, eager to impart of his own self 
and his possessions for a good end, cheerful and 
modest, pleasant, faithful and compassionate, 
kindly and beneficent. But this virtue of bene- 
volence is needful for them that live together as 
a company in so far as it is concerned with cer- 
tain outward signs of kindness which the philo- 
sopher calleth Friendship. **Noman,"saith he, 
"can live from day to day with one that is sour 
and hath naught that is pleasant in him," and 
verily thou art constrained by a duty of natural 
uprightness to live with others showing that 
pleasantness that cometh of benignity. Where- 
fore thou oughtest to wear a kindly and pleasant 
manner, especially when thou art with others, 

L2 



148 The Spiritual Ascent 

and where many are assembled together it doth 
befit thee to cloak sadness of heart with a certain 
cheerfulness of countenance. 

Yet over-abundant laxity should be avoided, 
lest the vice of vanity be nurtured by the pretext 
of goodness to others. Therefore, saith Hugo: 
** When thou art in company with others, and it 
please you that ye confer one with another, let 
your speech be of conduct or of the Scriptures ; 
now let us sigh for the miseries of this present 
life, now rejoice together over the hope of joy to 
come, now refresh our hearts by revealing to 
each other the hidden things that each doth 
know, now sigh together for the vision of Jesus 
and the good things that are in heaven." But if 
it be profitable sometimes to relax the tension of 
our minds by turning to lower things and plea- 
santthoughts, let such unbendings be thoroughly 
honest, free from levity, and though they lack 
an overweight of gravity yet let them not want 
edification. 

In these three things therefore, namely, staid- 
ness, humility and benignity, lieth thine outward 
discipline of charadler; humility doth temper 
staidness lest she seem puffed up, and benignity 
doth hinder her that she look not austere or 
graceless. 

T Chapter LXVII. The third descent, so far as 
it referreth to oneself. In this a man must needs 
exercise himself in the labour of his hands, see- 
ing that for his frailty he cannot always nor long 
continue in spiritual exercises. 

IN the third place thou must often choose, as thou 
makest thine ascent, some bodily or manual 
labour; nay, verily, thou must so order thine 
exercises that thou train thyself every day and 



Of the Third Descent 149 

at set times in manual toil, and also at their own 
set times make progress in the upgoings of thine 
heart, although perhaps thou shalt not be hin- 
dered from making this progress even whilst 
thou dost labour with thine hands. For thou canst 
pray, meditate and exercise thyself in fear and 
desires whiles thou art at labour; our holy 
fathers had this for their rule, for they did trust 
that the more faithfully they gave themselves to 
labouring with their hands, so much the greater 
would be their progress in attaining the heights 
of purity, charity and spiritual perfe6lion. Where- 
fore, O man, seeing that thou art frail, think not 
thyself an angel (for these have a spiritual food 
which thou knowest not), so as to desire con- 
tinually to cleave to the things of the spirit, but 
at set times exercise thyself with the labour of 
thine hands, and this for a multitude of reasons. 

In the first place, lest thou utterly give up all 
spiritual exercises, being overcome of weariness, 
for think not thyself to be more fervent and spiri- 
tual than the great Saint Anthony who would 
have returned to the world being thus overcome 
save that he learned from an angel so to ascend 
and descend, in this wise dividing his time be- 
tween bodily and spiritual work. Moreover, the 
opinion of Cassianus is this, that he who is not 
content to do some manual labour every day can- 
not persevere to the end in the cell. 

The second reason is this: that although to 
some small degree such toil may withdraw thee 
from leisure for contemplation, yet will it make 
thee more able for it afterward; for, as thou hast 
heard, a man cannot make the ascent while his 
lusts are yet with him, but these are the very 
things that hinder his upgoing. Wherefore it doth 
behove thee to overcome these lusts, andespeci- 



1 50 The Spiritual Ascent 

ally by manual toil, because every idle man is 
tempted of desire. Thus manual labour doth sub- 
serve the spiritual ascent in proportion as it doth 
remove the obstacles thereto. In the third place 
thine heart is very unstable, and as a little boat 
is tossed hither and thither in the waves of the sea, 
so is the heart shaken by divers affedlions and 
thoughts. Therefore, assaith Cassianus, '^ It doth 
beseem thee to make fast thine heart, as with 
an anchor, that is, with the weight or occupation 
of manual toil.'' 

Fourthly, because the enemy findeth more 
doors whereby to let in temptation when we are 
idle than when we are busied; and verily, as men 
say: " He that is busy is tempted by one fiend 
only, but an idler is harried by fiends innumer- 
able." 

Fifthly, if thou dost diligently consider it, the 
work of thine hands giveth thee profitable ad- 
monishment for thine upward way, teaching thee 
firstly of the place in which God set thee, but 
from which thou art fallen; for when thou wast 
set there in the fullness of peace, it did not beseem 
thee to labour, and if Adam was placed there, 
as saith the Scripture, to till Paradise, yet then 
he needed not toil, but tilled it with all delight, 
and perceiving in the lower creatures the power, 
wisdom and kindness of the Creator, he was led 
to praise Him. 

Sixthly as Bernard saith: "The labour of 
the hands is as a binding up of the wounds 
wherewith thou art corrected and admonished 
for sin. " For, indeed, it was after t^^ fall that the 
precept of the natural law was given, namely, 
* * In the sweat of thy face thou shalt eat thy 
bread. " So then as often as thou labourest with 
thine hands, so often art thou admonished con- 



Of the Third Descent 1 5 1 

cerning the fall of transgression ; and likewise 
that thou must work for six days, that is all the 
lifetime that thou livest here, for this is the time 
of toil; but on the seventh day, when this pre- 
sent life is ended, the Spirit shall bid thee rest 
from thy labours. Thus art thou admonished by 
such toil to reach out to that place where it shall 
not be needful for thee to labour, for there thy 
task shall be only to be at rest and behold the 
Lord, how kind He is. Furthermore, the labour 
of the hands doth make thee free, so that there 
is no need for thee to praise others, or desire 
aught that they have, as the Apostle doth write 
to the Thessalonians. 

Seventhly, as saith Bernard, this same labour 
doth often as it were press down the body by its 
weight and mass, and so sometimes expresseth 
a sweeter essence of compun6lion and maketh 
it purer. For these and many other reasons it 
was that our Holy Fathers, especially those in 
Egypt, did labour so faithfully, and for this are 
they so highly extolled by the saints. 

But to the end that thou departnotfarfrom the 
upgoings of thine heart, thou oughtest always 
to choose, so far as in thee lieth, such kinds of 
bodily labour as seem to have a greater affinity 
to spiritual exercises, as, for instance, the writ- 
ing of holy books, for this is a lesser impediment 
to thine ascent, and more fruitful in the things 
of the spirit. For as many holy books as thou 
writest, so many heralds of the truth as it were 
dost thou create, and as many men that are 
smitten with compundlion and profited thereby, 
so many are the merits of which thou art a par- 
taker, and for this cause it is that the blessed 
Bernard doth approve the work of writing more 
than other labours; many of the Holy Fathers 



1 5 2 The Spiritual Ascent 

were writers; all the brothers and disciples in 
the monastery of St Martin did write, and the 
blessed Jerome doth specially admonish the monk 
Rusticus about this task amongst others, and 
divers saints both for lowliness' sake and for the 
avoidance of idleness did write their books with 
their own hands, as we read was the custom of 
Ambrose and Jerome. But verily when thou 
toilest with thine hands, thou must not be idle 
of mind, but exercise thyself to piety of heart by 
saying some prayer, by meditating, or, indeed, 
sweetly ruminating what thou writest; yea, as 
saith Augustine, in speaking of the work of 
monks, thou mayest sing some holy chant over 
thy work; and such a thing would not hinder thy 
toil any more than the songs which they of the 
world sing over the work of their hands do 
hinder that work; but they must toil faithfully, 
not as worldlings who receive only wages that 
pass away, for thou dost earn not a temporal 
wage alone but also a fadeless crown in heaven. 
Consider this, that the holy angels did spe- 
cially announce the birth of Christ the Lord to 
shepherds who were busied with their toil. But 
do not thou be too intent or eager over thy work, 
but moderate and discreet; above all things thou 
oughtest to keep silence over thy task, for 
silence, according to the prophet, is that in 
which our strength lieth; and if it be a thing to 
keep everywhere and always, save when neces- 
sity may compel, or utility urge us, so also it 
must be specially observed during our toil, as 
saith the Apostle: "We beseech you in the Lord 
Jbsus that ye eat your bread with silence." 



Of Descents for one's Neighbour 153 

H Chapter LXVIII. Of the descents in regard to, 
or on behalf of, one's neighbour; of which the first 
is made at the bidding of our Superior. 

IN like manner it is often necessary to come 
down from these ascents for one^s neighbour's 
sake, that is, one must cease awhile from the 
upward way, but not desert it altogether; but 
there are three ways in which we descend for our 
neighbour's sake, for it may be done because of 
our superior, because of our equal, or because 
of our inferior. Thou must descend, I say, because 
of thy superior; for example, it may be that thou 
dost desire to be still so far as in thee lieth, like 
Lazarus to mourn over thy sins and to make 
perfedl thy compundlion by the remembrance of 
them and of the last judgement and so forth; or 
else thou dost desire, like Mary, to sit at Jesus* 
feet as He preacheth, that is to exercise thyself 
in thy mind upon the life and Passion of Christ, 
or upon something else which is a mighty step 
on the upward way. But lo, thy superior cometh 
and calleth thee, he doth bid thee go forth, and 
commandeth thee to descend; then let Martha 
delay not to fall at the feet of the vicar of Jesus, 
that is the said superior; and to fall at his feet 
is this, namely, with all humility and devout 
readiness to descend and turn one's inclinations 
from the inward exercise; but if Mary should 
abide still in the house, being occupied only with 
that inward devotion from which Martha was un- 
willingly torn away,inthatcase, I say, even though 
Mary sat at Jesus' feet, Martha would murmur, 
yea, even if Mary be weeping for her brother, 
Martha must of necessity go into the inner house 
(that is to say, thou must go into the inner man) 
and call her in low tones (that is to say, secretly 
chide thyself) and say to her: '^The Master is 



1 54 The Spiritual Ascent 

come, and calleth for thee, "that is, ** He to whose 
charge thou hast committed thyself, namely, thy 
superior, doth call and bid thee go forth, for till 
now thou art sitting still. Surely thy vocation is 
not better than the devout fulfilment of the law^ 
of obedience." Hearing this word, let Mary arise 
and in like manner fall at Jesus' feet, saying-: 
**My heart is ready; my heart is ready, ready 
for quiet contemplation at Thy command, but 
ready also to minister in things external, if Thou 
bid me do so." Not only art thou bound so to do 
at the bidding of thy father, but also it ought to 
be done out of charity when a brother doth exhort 
thee thereto; for the Holy Fathers readily put off 
their exercises that they might be able to preserve 
obedience inviolate; and also they thought this 
came above all things, namely, to follow not their 
own but another's will. 

Moreover, although obedience to a command 
or to a need is more binding, do not thou curi- 
ously consider whether thou art bound or not, 
for often to obey out ofcharity is more meritorious, 
and obedience fulfilled in devotion doth increase 
charity. 

1[Chapter LXIX. Concerning the second descent 
in regard to our neighbour, by the which we do 
condescend to him, by giving either aid, counsel, 
admonition or correction. 

IN the second place thou must descend in 
regard to thy neighbour, and condescend to 
him, being moved thereto by compassion and 
piety; thou must aid him with help and counsel, 
for instance, thou must assist them that are 
afflidled in the body and succour them, but much 
more if thou seest them affli6led in the spirit, 
admonishing them so far as thou canst, correcting 



Of Descents for one's Neighbour i s 5 

them, drawing" them, giving" them counsel and 
comfort when they are tempted and troubled; 
for save that Paul had come down from the 
third Heaven, and descending from his lofty 
exaltation of mind had inclined him to the 
weaker, he would have drawn no man; but he 
did so descend being made all things to all men; 
to carnal men preached he Jesus, and Him cru- 
cified; but to spiritual men he added further 
spiritual things; so alsado thou be all things 
to all men, succouring each one as his need 
may demand. If bodily infirmity doth weigh 
down any, give them hearty compassion and 
freely minister to them so far as thou canst, 
especially to those that are of the household. If 
poverty doth bind them, give to the sufferers 
if thou canst, and succour them even if thou bear- 
est penury awhile, that like the widow's mite thine 
offering may be not of thy superfluity but of thy 
living; and that thou mayest help others out of 
thine own poverty and the lack thou sufFerest in 
food, clothing and the like. 

But if thou canst not relieve them in goods, at 
least do so with pious admonishment, for a good 
word is better than the best gift, and the alms 
of the spirit than alms of the body ; wherefore 
above all things if thou thyself, standing on the 
higher steps of the heart, seest some below thee 
wandering from the yoke of Christ, descend 
with all speed, and leave thine ascent (if it seem 
expedient so to do for the time), draw these men 
to thee, admonish and correct them; say not in 
thine heart: "Mine own salvation is sufficient 
for me; I would be solicitous for myself, not for 
another; am I indeed his superior? Havel been 
set as his keeper?" Nay, zeal for good begetteth 
not thoughts like these; but, as saith the blessed 



156 The Spiritual Ascent 

Gregory, *4n proportion as thou hast received 
grace to aspire to the things that are on high, 
so do thou call thy neighbour back from depra- 
vity. Announce to him that wandereth, after the 
manner above set forth, the eternal kingdom, or 
punishment eternal, that so thou shalt deserve 
to be called an angel. " 

Thus administer to each the word of admoni- 
tion as may seem to thee expedient for his need. 
Consider, as said Bede, that no converse between 
men can be more lofty or more pleasing to 
God than that of those who drive themselves 
from vice, and subdue their minds to the study 
of virtue. Beside this, such men do strive by 
daily exercise to turn others to the grace of 
their Maker, and by the constant gathering 
together of faithful souls to increase the joy of 
their country in Heaven. But we must not 
understand this to mean public preaching, but 
to have reference to private admonition and 
brotherly exhortation, for this is meant by the 
saying: ^^God hath given commandment to each 
one concerning his neighbour." 

Public preaching ought not to be undertaken 
by any man, especially the young, save in great 
moderation, unless those who preach are as it 
were filled with virtue and grace like a flask 
which runneth not over except it be first quite 
full, as Bernard saith in his comment on the 
Canticles. 

Truly it is a hard and perilous thing that he 
who hath but a little oil should pour it forth to 
the end that he may seem to love others more 
than himself, and not to a6): against the law of 
charity; perilous, I say, unless he poureth his oil 
as the prophet bids us. 

In like manner, being moved thereto by the 



Of Descents for one's Neighbour 157 

spirit of gentleness, and having compassion on 
thy brother, thou must descend when thou seest 
another committing sin, or ruling himself dis- 
orderly, no matter how thou dost perceive it; 
do this that by condescending to him in pious 
wise thou mayest be able, through brotherly cor- 
redlion, to draw him higher and lead him to 
amendment. So far as in thee lieth, thou must 
not suffer vice to reign in anyone, but compas- 
sion with lowliness must go before, and moderate 
zeal with discretion must eat thee up, so that 
thou cease not to reproach a sinner whensoever 
thou dost reckon that there is a chance of amend- 
ment. 

Again, ever give heed to thyself, lest thou also 
be tempted, and so, as saith Bernard, let that 
zeal bum within us, most beloved, with love of 
justice and hatred of iniquity. Let none pamper 
his brother's vice, and none hide his sins, nor say: 
**Am I my brother's keeper?" 

Let no man bear it lightly that his order perish, 
nor that discipline be relaxed, so far as lieth in 
him to hinder these things. But thou oughtest 
so to succour thy neighbour as to give him mate- 
rial alms if he have lack in the body, and freely 
to expend pity and aid of the spirit upon him, if 
he need spiritual help. Secondly, thou must assist 
him with thy counsel, instructing and directing 
him that erreth, specially in temptation and in 
matters concerning spiritual exercises, yet look 
to it that thou teach not others what thou know- 
est not thyself, for it is better humbly to confess 
ignorance than presumptuously to be ready to 
teach; wherefore let thy counsel ever be conso- 
nant with Holy Scripture. As concerning those 
counsels which thou dost receive or lay down in 
advising another, if they be private matters take 



158 The Spiritual Ascent 

heed lest thou publish them abroad, especially 
such as concern other men's temptations; from 
this come many perils as is said in the Second 
Conference of the Fathers. 

In giving counsel beware lest thou follow thine 
own passion or inclination, for this doth prevent 
judgement, and zeal knoweth not discretion. 
Likewise before thou dost give any counsel, and 
especially if it be in a hard matter, deliberate 
some while, speak not that which may first come 
to mind, but be mature of judgement, ever giving* 
thy counsel with submission to the opinion of 
others, lest thou be found too pertinacious; also 
desire thyself to consent to lowly men rather than 
to gain their assent. For this cause thou ought- 
est not to make light of the counsel of any, for 
GrOD doth often reveal to little ones what he hid- 
eth from the wise; but do thou give ear to the 
counsels of all men, not, indeed, straightway 
receiving it, but prove all things, as saith the 
Apostle, and whatsoever may be good, that hold 
fast in humility and give unchanging consent 
thereto. 

H Chapter LXX. Of the third descent by which 
it is needful that a superior go down, through care 
and solicitude for those that are set under him. 

BUT if thou hast others under thee, then doth 
it behove thee to go down much further and 
more often, yea, thou must very often leave thine 
upward path so as to have leisure to keep them 
that are set under thee in ward and discipline; 
in ward, I say, meaning that thou keep safe in 
their worthy conversation them that are stand- 
ing ; in discipline, that thou correct them that 
are wandering, or them whose conversation is 



Of Descents for one's Neighbour 1 59 

less well ordered. For be assured that otherwise 
the Lord shall require at thine hands the blood 
of those souls that were set under thee, and save 
that so far as in thee lieth thou dost bring with 
thee thy littlest brother thou shalt not see the 
face of Joseph, that is, of thy true Saviour. Con- 
sider here how perilous is the condition of a 
superior, seeing that it is needful that such a 
man desert himself, and by this negle<5l he doth 
often lose himself; for because such an one is 
greatly busied outwardly and is idle inwardly, 
he doth sometimes negledl his upgoings, descend- 
eth to an hard heart, becometh insensible because 
he perceiveth outward things only, and hath no 
taste for the things of the spirit, as Bernard hath 
well shewn in his first book on Contemplation. 

Wherefore, so far as in thee lieth, take the 
counsel of the saints, avoiding the condition of 
a superior and too great outward occupation, 
save in so far as thou must always show an 
humble and prompt obedience. 

But when a man is constrained to obey a call I 
to outward occupations he ought very anxiously 
to strive, whensoever he can or whensoever he 
hath time to do so, to return to inward things : 
and to be at leisure for his own soul, lest, as i 
hath'been said, he become lacking in sensibility. . 
For this cause, saith Saint Gregory, "Holy men 
who are constrained by the necessity of their 
office to serve outward ministries do always 
eagerly take refuge in the secret places of the 
heart and there climb up to the mountain top of 
inward contemplation; there, being as it were 
set upon an hill, they see the law of the Lord; 
whilst putting behind them the tumult of their 
temporal a6ls they so search out the sentence of 



i6o The Spiritual Ascent 

the Heavenly Will, looking down from the peak 
of their contemplation. But to the end that they 
may perform their outward ministrations without 
offence, they must constantly return to the secret 
places of the heart. " 



Detc en^etb tbc ^cpout trcatfBe 
of (3etat^ of Zutpben, concetnittd 
Spiritual Escents* 



i6i 



Concerning four tbinae in wbicb 
tbc^ wbo arc bcGinnIng toecrvc 
(3o^ muet be cautioue it tbe^ 
vooulb malie progreea. 

THERE be four things in which the young 
and they that are beginners must be cautious 
if they would make progress. The first is that 
they grow not lukewarm nor depart from that 
good will with which theycame into the Religious 
life, nor from the first fervour of their novitiate, 
for this is the reproach of one in the Apocalypse: 
'4 have somewhat against thee because thou 
hast left thy first Charity. Be mindful, therefore, 
from whence thou art fallen, and do penance, 
and do the first works." 

Now they leave their first charity who, though 
at first they are fervent and devout toward all 
things, yet afterward do become lukewarm and 
slothful; they give themselves up to levity, and 
allow those vices, which they came to drive out, 
to have the dominion over them, serving God 
according to their own desire not according to 
the good pleasure of His Will. For this cause 
the Lord gave this precept to the Children of 
Israel, "Remember that day in which ye went 
forth from Egypt"; now the day on which we 
do go forth from Egypt doth mean the good will 
by the which we are led out of the world, and 
this we must always remember that we never 
depart from the fervour thereof; thus it was that 
one who desired to leave the world and enter the 
Religious life asked a certain holy father how 
he ought to live; and the father replied to him: 

M 



1 6 2 Of Four Dangers 

* * See what manner of man thou wast on the first 
day, and continue ever to live as such. " That is, 
consider the condition of thy will on that first 
day on which thou didst determine to enter the 
Religious life; see how humble thou wast, how 
ready to be obedient in everything, undertaking- 
hard and mean tasks; how patient of corre6lion, 
penury and toil; how modest and fearful; how 
zealous to amend thy life and to recover the days 
which thou didst lose in the world; how little 
thou didst care to seek out or tell the rumours 
of the world, for thou wert not set on detraction 
nor occupied with any curious matters; think 
how thou didst flee from and cast away all carnal 
affections and a£ls, offering thyself wholly to 
God, a living burnt-offering, so that henceforth 
naught of the life of sin could live in thee but 
that all might be slain and sacrificed to the Lord 
with the sword of obedience through the ministry 
of the priest (i.e., thy superior), to the end that 
thou mightest rise again, with Christ renewed 
in thee. 

Strive to live for ever after according tq this 
model, lest otherwise thou seem to be unlearning 
and going backward in the school of religion 
rather than making progress. For they who go 
to a school for study and return homeward hav- 
ing spent their time in vain, can count up only 
wasted expenses, for one cannot see wherein they 
have profited; we also are like them when we 
count up the time spent in the Religious life and 
our progress in virtue doth appear but small, 
since perchance we were more devout and fervent 
in our novitiate than now after many years. 

But this is most shameful and very hurtful, as 
is said in the fifth chapter of the Hebrews, for 
when ye ought to be masters of virtue because 



Of Four Dangers 163 

of the long time that ye have been In the religious 
life ye require to be taught again what are the 
very elements of the beginning of the Word of 
God; that is, ye have need to be taught, like 
unskilled novices, how ^ne ought to begin to 
serve Him, and ye are become as those who need 
milk and not solid food, that is, ye are of like 
kind with them who must be fostered with the 
soft blandishments of childish and carnal conso- 
lation, not being strong enough to bear the 
manly exercises of virtue in hard reprehension 
and contumely, in necessity and in persecution 
for Christ's sake. For every one that is a par- 
taker of milk is untaught in the language of 
uprightness being a babe alike in merit and in 
virtue. 

The second thing is that a man must be cau- 
tious as to the person at whose instigation he 
doth begin, lest he be moved by the ill example 
of lukewarm men to follow their pattern; for in 
this way some who are weak in spirit, seeing 
others round them that are slothful in the service 
of God, idle and talkative, puffed up and rebel- 
lious, filled with ambition and vicious in other 
ways, do say in regard to themselves, "If this 
is allowed to others, why not to me?" Thus do 
they become more apt for evil, taking their pat- 
tern from those whom they see to be worse; and 
they rejoice that they have found comrades in 
evil, lest they be made to blush by being alone 
in their ill ways, because if otheri^ are spared 
hardships they wish to be spared also in like 
things. Now the devout servant of God ought 
to answer on his part as against this, saying, 
* * I came here simply for God's sake, and not for 
aught else, wherefore I will not follow any man 
in such fashion as to draw back from Him; but 

M2 



1 64 Of Four Dangers 

had I known that those here were so greatly 
different I would never have chosen their com- 
panionship. For this cause I ought to follow them 
only who will inform me in those things for whose 
sake I entered the Religiouslife, namely, to appre- 
hend GoD) to make satisfa6lion for my sins and 
gain glory eternal." The painter or sculptor that 
would make a notable work seeketh no models 
save the best that he can have ; the traveller ask- 
eth not the way from the ignorant, but from them 
that know it and have walked often thereby; and, 
as saith John, " Do not imitate evil, but good." The 
third thing is that a man must be careful not to 
be over-bold in judging the deeds of others, par- 
ticularly when he knoweth not for what cause 
nor with what intention these be done, for just 
as we see not the thoughts of others, so, also, 
we know not their intentions nor wherefore this 
or that is done. So if an a£l may be excused in 
any way, let us always interpret it in the better 
sense, that is if we would have an heart at peace 
with ourselves and with others, desiring not to 
disturb them nor to offend God: for we do often 
judge a thing to be evil which in itself is not so, 
and by our over-boldness we sin, usqrping to our- 
selves the judgement of the secrets of the heart, 
which judgement belongeth to God. Our masters, 
who are in the place of God, sometimes may 
judge thus by piecing together the conditions of 
an a<5l, but it is not expedient that others should 
be judged by us, until, being fully taught in all 
things through the gift of discerning spirits and 
being made truly spiritual, we are able to judge 
all things and to be judged of none ; just so is 
one that seeth clearly and looketh on a blind 
man, for he is not seen of the blind man, nor 
may this last see himself; as saith that text in the 



Of Four Dangers 165 

fourteenth chapter of the Epistle to the Romans, 
•* Who art thou that judgest thy fellow- servant? 
To his own master he standeth or falleth." 

Often they who are over-bold to judge another 
deserve to be suffered to fall into like or heavier 
excesses, that they may learn from their own 
weakness to have compassion on that of another; 
as is said in the sixth chapter of Saint Luke, 
"Judge not that ye be not judged, for with what 
iudgement ye judge shall ye be judged. " 

The fourth thing in which novices must be 
careful is this, namely, that they be not broken 
down by adversity or temptation ; but let them 
think of the reasons that led them hither, so that 
they may bear for God's sake all things which 
can happen to them in this life. In like manner, 
he that goeth into the battle knoweth that he 
ought not to look for quiet and delight, but rather 
for toil and wounds, as is said in the fourteenth 
chapter of A6ls, ** We must through much tribu- 
lation enter into the Kingdom of God"; and in 
the last chapter of Saint Luke it is said, " It 
behoveth Christ to suffer and so enter into His 
glory." 

praise be to Oo^. 



/ 



Letchworth: At the Arden Press. 



flotee 

Pc^e 2, line 12. — *'In which GoD did of old place man 
and create him " is an alternative reading which may 
clarify the sense. 

Page 49, line 16. — Similarly tor the words: ''In the 
Bread and Wine" read,*' Under the appearances of Bread 
and Wine." 

Page $Sy lineal, — "Carnal/' meaning natural rather 
than supematuiul. 

Page 71, line 14. — The words " do rather withdraw 
themselves," suggest a reference to the modern pro- 
nouncements of the Holy See on the subject of Frequent 
Communion. 

Page 116, line 8. — " These are the eight . . .*' We now 
commonly reckon the Deadly Sins to be seven in number. 



..,^/ 



ZEgBQItJ, Gerard 

The splritxial ascent 



T70.5 
ZS« sp 
1908 



1 



