     __________________________________________________________________

           Title: The Latin Works and the Correspondence of Huldreich
                  Zwingli, Together with Selections from His German
                  Works, Vol. I
      Creator(s): Huldreich (Ulrich) Zwingli
                  Samuel Macauley Jackson (Editor), with other
                  translators credited per work in the volume's own
                  contents
     Print Basis: New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons / Philadelphia:
                  Heidelberg Press, 1912
          Rights: Public Domain
Source Collection: Internet Archive, archive.org identifier
                  latinworkscorres01zwin, "possible-copyright-status":
                  "NOT_IN_COPYRIGHT" per the item's own metadata API.
                  Fetched directly (curl, raw bytes).
    Rights basis: 1912 publication date places this well out of US
                  copyright (114 years before this session, 2026);
                  independently confirmed by archive.org's own
                  copyright-status field.
   Content note: A multi-work compilation of early treatises and letters
                  - not individually indexed by this header; see this
                  corpus's corpus-map entry for this file's own per-work
                  breakdown.
   OCR quality: Raw, uncorrected djvu OCR. Runs of 2+ spaces collapsed to
                  one throughout; no wording changed.
     __________________________________________________________________

i lli;!!i! 


mi 


D'visioQ fO '^ 
bectton _ _ 


Of this translation of the Works of Huldreich 
Zwmgli, seven hundred and fifty copies have been 
printed from type, and the type destroyed. 


May, 1912 


HULDREICH ZWINGLI. 


The Latin Warks ( oct 

and ^^^e/G; 

The Correspondence of 

Huldreich Zwingli 

Together with Selections from his German Works 

Edited, with Introductions and Notes, by 

V 

Samuel Macauley Jackson 


Translations by 

Henry Preble, Walter Lichtenstein, and 
Lawrence A. McLouth 


Volume One 
1510-1522 


G. P. Putnam s Sons 

New York London 

Ubc lknicl?erbocfter press 

1912 


Copyright, 1912 

BY 

SAMUEL MACAULEY JACKSON 


TClK ftniclierbocfiec Dtess, 'Dew BocR 


PREFACE 

THE first collector, editor and publisher of the works of 
Huldreich Zwingli was his scholarly and devoted son- 
in-law, Rudolf Gualther, who married his daughter Regula, 
became pastor of St. Peter's in Zurich in 1542 and succeeded 
BulHnger as antistes in 1575. He translated more than 
thirty of Zwingli's German treatises into Latin, which gave 
them a much wider constituency. These translations, along 
with the works originally in Latin, he brought out in 1545 
and prefixed to the three volumes in folio an elaborate 
Apologia pro Zuinglio, which was also separately published. 
To Gualther' s three volumes a.fourth was added, ^ consisting 
of biblical annotations furnished by Leo Jud and Kaspar 
Megander, either directly from their notes of Zwingli's 

' Opera | D. Hvldrychi Zvin ( glii, mgilantissimi Tigurinae eccle | sise An- 
tistitis, partim quidem ab ipso Latine conscripta, partim | uer6 fe uemaculo 
sermone in Latinum translata: omnia | nouissime recognita, & multis adiectis, 
I quae hactenus uisa non sunt. | Salvo semper et incolvmi or- 1 thodoxae eccle- 
siae ivdicio. | [Device commonly used by Froschauer (often also speUed 
Froschouer) as a play upon his name, Frosch meaning a frog, a tree with frogs 
about it.] I lesvs. | Venite ad me omnes, qui laboratis & onerati estis, & ego| 
requiem nobis praestabo. | Matthaei xi. | (There is nothing said on the title- 
page about this being the first volume, nor is there any date, or name of pub- 
Usher. On the reverse of the page is the famiUar woodcut of Zwingli.) 

The other volumes have these title-pages, confining the transcript to the 
differing words: Opervm | D. Hvldrychi Zvin |'gUi tomus secvndvs, continens | 
Toi iroXefjLiKo,^ id est pugnas, qxias ipsi cum Pontificijs, | Anabaptistis, & alijs 
aduersarijs suis | intercesserunt. | [Device, also often used by Froschauer, a 
boy riding a frog, with other frogs arotmd.] (The rest of the page as above.) 

Opervm | D. Hvldrychi Zvin | glii tomvs tertivs, ea, qvae in Genesim, | Exo- 
dum, Esaiam & leremiam prophetas, partim ex ore iUius |excepta, partim ab 
illo conscripta sunt, unkcum | Psalterio Latinitate donato, cotinens. | [Device 
as above] (the rest of the title-page the same). 


iv Preface 

lectures or from what he had himself written out. This 
edition was reprinted in 1581.^ 

The third edition is the one familiar to all modem students 
of Zwingli, and which has well served them for many years. 
It was collected and edited by Melchior Schuler and 
Johannes Schtilthess. ^ It separates the Latin from the 

In Evangelicam | historiam de Domino nostro | lesv Christo, per Matthaevm, 
Marcvm, | Lucam, & loannem conscriptam, Epistolasqfe aliquot Paiili, | Anno- 
tationes D. Hvldrychi Zvinglii | per Leonem ludae exceptae & aeditae. | Adiecta 
est Epistola Pauli ad Hebraeos & loannis | Apostoli Epistola per Gasparem 
Megandnim. | [Device of tree with the frogs about it.] | Matth. xi | Venite ad 
me omnes qui laboratis & onerati | estis, & ego reficiam uos. | Tigvri excvdebat 
Christophorvs | Froschouerus Mense Augusto, Anno | M.D.XLV. | 

' Opervm | D. Hvldrichi Zvin- | ghi, vigilantissimi Tigvrinae | ecclesiae antis- 
titis, partim qvidem ab | ipso Latine conscriptorum, partim verb 6 uemaculo | 
sermone in Latinum translatorum | pars prima. | Accesservnt hvic aeditioni 
svb j finem eiusdem authoris epistolae selectiores de | varijs rebus scriptae. | 
Catalogum & seriem eonun, quae hoc libro conti- | nentur, post Apologiam 
inuenies. | [Device] Salvo semper et incolvmi or- |thodox£e ecclesiae ivdicio. | 
lesvs. I Venite ad me omnes, qui laboratis & onerati lestis, & | ego requiem vobis 
praestabo. | Matthsei xi. | Tigvri | Excudebat Christophorus Froschoverus, 
I Anno M.D. LXXXI. | (The device is geometric.) 

Opervm | D. Huldrichi Zvin-| ghi pars secunda, con- 1 tinens ra iroXc^t/cA, id 
estpv- 1 gnas, quae ipsi cum Pontificiis, Anabapti- | stis, & aliis aduersariis suis 
I intercesserunt. | Elenchvm omnivm, quae hoc | volumine continentur, versa 
pagi- I na exhibebit. | [Device, boy riding a frog] (then the same as above to 
the end). 

D. Hvldrichi Zwin- | glij Annotationes in Genesim, E- | xodum, Esaiam & 
leremiam pro- | phetas, vna cum Psalterio | per eundem Latini- 1 tate donate. | 
[Device, boy on a frog] | (and same as above to the end). 

D. Hvldrichi Zvin- 1 glii in plerosque Novi | Testamenti libros, qvoriim e- 1 
lenchum post prsefationem & indicem re- 1 peries, annotationes ex ipsius ore | 
exceptae per Leonem | Ivdae. Adiecta est epistola PauH | ad Hebraeos, «' loannis 
apostoli epistola | per Gasparem Megandrum. | [Device, boy on frog] | (and 
same as above to the end). 

' HuldreichZwingli'sl Werke | Erste voUstandigeAusgabe | durch| Melchior 
Schuler und Joh. Schulthess | Erster Band | Der deutschen Schriften | erster 
Theil I Lehr- und Schutzschriften | zum Behufe des Ueberschrittes | in die 
evangelische Wahrheit und Freyheit | von 1522 bis Marz 1524. | Zurich, bey 
Friedrich Schulthess. | (1828.) 

(All the contents of this volume which were written in German along with 
the exposition of the Sixty Seven Theses for the First Disputation, also origi- 
nally in German, are given in Latin translation, and this translation is some- 
times called Vol. L of Zwingli's works. It bears this title: Huldrici Zuinglii 
I opera | completa ieditio prima | curantibus | Melchiore Schidero et To. 
Schulthessio | Volumen primum | Germanica origine scripta | quorum pars 


Preface v 

German treatises and puts them in different volumes. In 
this edition the letters by and to Zwingli are included. The 
edition is in eleven parts and a supplement. 

prima continet | didactica et apolegetica | pro consequendo transitu j in evan- 
gelicam veritatem ac libertatem | ab anno 1522 usque ad Martium 1524 | Tur- 
ici apud Fridericum Schulthessium. | 1829. |) 

The other volumes have these title-pages, transcribing what is distinctive 
on each: Huldreich . . . | Zweyten Bandes erste Abtheiliung. | Der deut- 
schen Schriften | zweyter Theil [ Lehr- und Schutzschriften | zum Behufe des 
Ueberschritts | aus dem Papstthum in die evangelische Wahrheit und Freyheit 
I vom April 1525 bis 1528 | betreflfend die Tauferey sammtliche | und | betref- 
fend die streitige Abendmahlslehre | von 1526 bis Januar 1527. | Zurich, bey 
Friedrich Schulthess | 1830. | 

. . . Zweyten Bandes zweyte Abtheilung | Der deutschen Schriften | 
dritterTheil | Lehr- und Schutzschriften | betreffend | die streitige Abendmahls- 
lehre I von 1527 bis July 1528 | liturgische und poetische sammtliche | und | 
vermischte kleinere meistens poUtische |von 1522 bis July 1526 | Zurich, in der 
Schulthess'schen Buchhandlung | 1832. | 

. . . Zweyten Bandes dritte Abtheilung. I Der deutschen Schriften jvierter 
Theil, I apologetischen, kirchlichen, geschichtUchen, | grdsstentheils | polit- 
ischen Inhalts, | aus dem letzten Zeitraume, | von 1526 bis 153 1. 1 Zurich, Druck 
und Verlag von Fr. Schulthess. | 1841. | 

Huldrici Zuinglii | opera | completa editio prima | curantibus 1 Melchiore 
Schulero et lo. Schulthessio | Volumen tertium | Latinorum Scriptorum | pars 
prima | Didactica et apologetica | pro evincendo transitu | in evangelicam veri- 
tatem et libertatem | ab anno 1521 ad 1526 | Turici ex officina Schulthessiana 
I (F. Schulthess und S. Hohr.) | 1832. | 

. . . Volumen quartum | Latinorum Scriptorum | pars secunda | Didactica 
et apologetica | ab anno 1526 usque ab obitum auctoris | ceteraque varia | poetica 
paedagogica philologica historica | Accedunt | sermones vulgares in Psalmos | 
lingua plerumque vernacula. | Turici ex officina Schulhessiana | 1841. | 

. . . Volumen quintum | Latinorum Scriptorum | pars quinta | Exegetica 
Veteris Testamenti | maximam partem | Turici ex officina Schulthessiana | 
(F. Schulthess und S. Hohr) | 1835. 

. . . Voluminis sexti tomus primus | Latinorum Scriptorum | pars sexta | 
Exegetica Veteris Testamenti residua | ac de Novo Testamento Evangelia | 
Turici . . .| 1836. I 

. . . Voluminis sexti tomus secundus | Latinorum Scriptorum | pars sexta 
I Exegetica Novi Testamenti | residua. ) . . . | 1838. | 

. . . Volumen septimum | Epistolarum | a ZuingUo ad ZuingUumque | 
scriptarum | pars prima | Turici apud Fridericum Schulthessium | 1830. | 

. . . Volumen octavum | Epistolarum | . . . | pars secunda | . . . 
I 1842. I 

(,■;'; Huldrici Zuinglii | opera | a M. Schulero et Jo. Schulthessio | edita. | Sup- 
plementorum fasciculus | continens | minora scripta hactenus reperta omnia 
tractatus et epistolas | curantibus | Georg. Schulthessio et Gasp. Marthalero 
I ecclesiae turicensis ministris. | Turici ex officina Schulthessiana | i86i.i| 


vi Preface 

The fourth edition ' is that now appearing. It was pro- 
jected by two Swiss scholars who had paid particular atten- 
tion to the Reformation in that country, Emil Egli, profes- 
sor of history in the university of Zurich, and Georg Finsler, 
teacher of religion in the gymnasium of Basel. It has been 
incorporated into the Corpus Reformatorum as Volumes 
LXXXVIII. and successors, and so Zwingli takes his place 
in this authoritative collection next to Melanchthon and 
Calvin. The edition was long preparing and is a great 
improvement upon its predecessor. It began to appear in 
parts in the fall of 1903. With the second volimie a dif- 
ferent publisher begins his work, but otherwise there was no 
change. That was soon to come. EgH died on December 
31, 1908, within eight days of his sixty-second birthday. 
His successor is Walther Kohler, who also succeeded him in 
the university. 

The last part of the second volimie appeared in October 
1898. The next part to appear was the first of the seventh 
volume, for very wisely it was determined to do as Schuler 
and Schulthess did and interrupt the succession of the trea- 
tises with a portion of the letters to and by ZwingU. For 
the collection of these letters Egli had especially exerted him- 
self and had much increased their nimiber by diligent search 
on every hand, both in and out of Switzerland. It would 
have been a particular delight for him to have seen his 
labours in print, but it was not to be. 

The correspondence in the Schuler and Schulthess edition 

/ ' It has two title-pages. Thus of Vol. I Corpus Reformatorum | Volumen 
' LXXXVIII iHuldreichZwinglis I samtHcheWerke | Bandl | [device] | Berlin |C. 
A. SchwetschkeundSohn | 1905. | and on the opposite page: HuldreichZwinglis 
I samtliche Werke | unter Mitwirkung | des Zwingli-Vereins in Zurich | heraus- 
gegeben | von |Dr. Emil Egli | Professor an der Universitat in Zurich | und 
I Dr. Georg Finsler | Religionslehrer am Gymnasium in Basel | Band I| [de- 
vice] I BerUn | Verlag von C. A. Schwetschke und' Sohn | 1905. | (It has the 
Asper portrait of Zwingli, and a Zwingli medallion between the title-pages.) 

Of Vol. II Corpus Reformatortim | Volumen LXXXIX | Huldreich Zwinglis | 
samtliche Werke | Band II | [device] | Leipzig | Verlag von M. Heinsius Nach- 
folge I 1908. I (The other title-page is identical with the above except the name 
of the publisher and the date.) 


Preface vii 

fills volumes seven and eight, and in the new edition the same 
numbers will be given to them. Volume seven was finished 
on December 31, 19 10.' Another change in the order of 
publication was made, and now volume three is appearing 
alternately with volume eight. Nothing seems to be lacking 
to give this edition scholarly completeness. Each of its 
contents is provided with a special introduction; it is then 
studied philologically and bibliographically, and in the case 
of the German treatises, because of the difficulty of reading 
the Swiss German, provided with a glossary at the foot of 
the page. Besides, each treatise has adequate notes giving 
information on all appropriate points. The contents are 
arranged chronologically. All of these editions are found in 
the library of Union Theological Seminary, in New York 
City. 

Most of the translations which appear in this volume were 
made years ago from the Schuler and Schulthess text for the 
publication I then contemplated, but circumstances, among 
which was the fact that there had been announced a new edi- 
tion of the originals, led me to postpone the enterprise and 
then I became absorbed in other work and could not attend 
to it. When I was at liberty to do so the new edition had 
made considerable progress. Happily the translators were 

' Corpus Reformatorum | Volumen XCIV | Huldreich Zwinglis | samtliche 
Werke | Band VII | [device] | Leipzig | Verlag von M. Heinsius Nachfolger 

1 1911- I 

Opposite: Huldreich Zwinglis | samtliche Werke | unter Mitwirkung | des 
iZwingli-Vereins^in Zurich | herausgegeben | von | Dr. Emil EgUf | professor 
an der Universitat in Zurich | D. Dr. Georg Finsler | Religionslehrer am 
Gymnasium in Basel | und | D. Dr. Walther Kohler | Professor an der Univer- 
sitat in Zurich | Band VII | [device] Leipzig | Verlag von M. Heinsius Nach- 
folger I 191 1. I 

To this volume there is a third title-page: ZwingUs Brief wechsel | Gesam- 
melt, erlautert | und unter philogischer Mitwirkung der Professoren | Dr. Her- 
mann Hitzig und Dr. Albert Bachmann | bearbeitet von | Emil Egli j heraus- 
gegeben von I Georg Finsler | Band I | Die Briefe von 1510-1522 | mit einer 
Abhandlung von Prof. Dr. P. Kalkoff: | Erasmus von Rotterdam und seine 
Schuler WiUielm Nesen und Nicolaus | von Herzogenbusch im Kampfe mit 
den Lowener Theologen | [device] | Leipzig Verlag von M. Heinsius Nachfolger 
I 191 1. I (The volume has the portrait and a biographical sketch of Elgi.) 


viii Preface 

willing to revise their translations with the new text in hand. 
These translators are Mr. Henry Preble of New York City, 
who has done all the Latin treatises, and Lawrence A. 
McLouth, Professor of German, New York University, and 
Walter Lichtenstein, Ph.D., librarian of Northwestern 
University, who have made the renderings from the German. 

When the present volume was undertaken, I asked per- 
mission of the editors and publishers to be allowed to use 
such portion of their notes and introductions as suited my 
purpose. They have generously given me permission and 
so my readers will share with those who use the new edition, 
in the original, a considerable part of their learning. 

I desire here to thank these editors, publishers and trans- 
lators for their generosity and manifestation of interest in 
this enterprise. By this combination of Swiss and American 
labours, Zwingli is properly presented to the English-speaking 
public, as he would not be without it. 

Those familiar with my Selections from Zwingli, ^ published 
by the University of Pennsylvania in 1901, will notice that 
in this and the volumes which, I trust, are to follow, the 
contents of that volume appear. For permission to reprint 
that matter I am indebted to the courtesy of the Department 
of History of that University, and I here express my grateful 
thanks. 

' Selected works | of | Huldreich Zwingli, | (i 484-1 531) | the Reformer of 
German Switzerland. | Translated for the first time from the originals. | The 
German works by Lawrence A. McLouth, Professor of German in New | York 
University, and the Latin by Henry Preble, New York City, | and Professor 
George W. Gilmore, Meadville, Pennsylvania. | Edited f with general and 
special introductions and occasional notes | by | Samuel Macauley Jackson, 
I professor of church history in New York University; editor of "The Heroes 
of I the Reformation," and author in that series of the life of Huldreich Zwingli. 
I Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania. | 1901. | Sold by | Longmans, 
Green & Co., | 91 and 93 Fifth Avenue, New York. | [1901.] 

The volume contains the translation of the following articles: Visit of the 
Episcopal delegation to Zurich, April, 1522 (same as the letter of Zwingli to 
Erasmus Fabricius in this volume) ; The petition of eleven priests to be allowed 
to marry, July, 1522 (in this volume); the Acts of the first Zurich Disputa- 
tion, January, 1523; Zurich marriage ordinance, 1525; and Refutation of the 
tricks of the Catabaptists, 1527. 


Preface 


IX 


In this volume, will be found, in English translation, all the 
matter from Zwingli given on the first three-hundred and 
twenty-seven pages of the edition of the originals now appear- 
ing, and by way of introduction, and as far more interesting 
than anything I could write, the original life of Zwingli, 
written by his bosom friend, Oswald Myconius. This is, I 
beUeve, its first appearance in the English language in modem 
times, but, as the special introduction states, it was first 
translated in the sixteenth century. 

I have also inserted a treatise attributed to Zwingli in 
the Schuler and Schulthess edition, but which was really by 
Erasmus and Thomas Blarer, because it is alluded to by 
Zwingli in his Suggestio, which will appear in Volume III of 
this series. The grounds for its inclusion by Schuler and 
Schulthess are thus stated in their special preface : 

" When Zwingli learned that the papal anathema was upon 
the point of being launched against Luther, he went to his 
friend Wilhelm von Falk, who in the absence of the legate 
Emiius was fulfilling his functions towards the Federation, 
and tried to persuade him to dissuade the Pope from putting 
forth the condemnatory Bull, on the ground that nothing 
could be more surely foreseen than that the Germans would 
treat both the Bull and the Pope with contempt. Report- 
ing this to Myconius in a letter^ Zwingli said, 'That the 
same fate awaits myself seems exceedingly likely ; I am ready, 
and in such event shall not lack for consolation.' But the 
warning was altogether too late. And now Zwingli pub- 
lished this writing without the name of the author or of the 
place of printing, the edition coming out in the late summer 
of 1520. 

" Simler gives in his collection (Vol. IV.) two Latin editions, 
one written in Latin letters, the other in German letters 
(one sheet folded in quarto), and a translation of the same 
period, with the title ' Consilium hominis ex animo satisf ac- 
tum cupientis et Romanae sedis dignitati et Christiani orbis 

' In the new edition, VII., 343, 4. 


X Preface 

paci ' (' Advice of a man who from his heart desires that both 
the dignity of the Roman See and the peace of the Christian 
worid be fully safeguarded'). 1521 (a sheet and a half folded 
in quarto). The Latin edition in German letters is charac- 
terized by many errors, several omissions, and bad punctua- 
tion. There is an appendix with the title, 'Apologia Christi 
dni nostri pro Martino Luthero ad urbem Rhomam,' (' Christ 
Our Lord's defence of Martin Luther before the city of Rome*) . 
Cratander, printer at Basel, sent this writing to Von Watt on 
March 8th with the Acta Lovaniens ('Louvain Proceedings') 
against Luther, remarking that he recognised in both the pen 
of Erasmus. The inference was correct in regard to the 
'Proceedings' but not in regard to the 'Advice,' etc., for 
Von Watt in the copy preserved in the Library of the monas- 
tery at Ziuich has made a note in his own hand that Zwingli 
was the ' Advice ' suggester. ^ The ' Defence ' is also without 
mention of its author: only the fact that it is appended to 
the 'Advice' makes it seem probable that it is the work of 
one and the same author." 

It is proposed to follow this volume with others, until all 
the Latin treatises of Zwingli, all the letters to and by him, 
and much of the matter now in German, including both the 
First and Second Disputations, shall have been published. 
It is not expected to include his commentaries on the Bible. 
The volumes will necessarily vary in size, but will probably 
average five hundred pages each. This initial volimie is 
imfortunately much smaller than those which follow, but 
circtmistances have prevented its enlargement. 

Since work was begun by me onthisvoltime there has come 
into my hands the Rev. Dr. Beresford James Kidd's Documents 
illustrative of the Continental Reformation. (Oxford, at the 
Clarendon Press, 191 1 .) It is a first-class source book. The 
headings to the sections are admirably done and present a 
remarkably concise history of the period covered. Most of 

' Wirz, N. Hist. eccl. Hebr., I., 194, 5; 184, 5. 


Preface xi 

the selections are in Latin, but there are also translations from 
the German, and some of the matter is in its original English. 
The section devoted to Zurich affairs is to be highly com- 
mended. Almost all the Latin matter will be found in this 
and subsequent volumes, translated, whileinEnglishKidd gives 
the items from Egli's Actensammlung relative to the punish- 
ment of those who broke the Lenten fast in 1522, the street 
fighting which ensued, and the defence of Froschauer before 
the magistrates, all of which are referred to in this volimie's 
special introduction to the sermon "On the choice of foods." 
But much other illustrative material will; be welcomed by 
the student. 

Samuel Macauley Jackson. 


New York, 
May 20, 1912. 


TRANSLATION 

Professor Dr. S. M. Jackson 
New York City 

Honored Professor: 

Now that I have conferred with the Publisher 
(M. Heinsius' successor in Leipzig) and with Prof. W. Koehler, 
I am in a position to reply to your letter of September 5th, 
1911. 

I inform you that the Publisher, as well as Professor 
Koehler and I, hereby give you permission to use freely, for 
your purposes, all parts of our edition of Zwingli. We 
attach, however, the condition that in your edition you 
expressly mention this perrhission and our names. More- 
over, Professor Koehler and I desire to receive two copies 
each of your edition. 

To your enterprise I wish good success. 

Very respectfully yours, 

Georg Finsler. 

Basel, 16, Sommerweg, 
Nov. II, igii. 


 cn^ ^^ 


/ 


Facsimile of the letter from Prof. Dr. Georg Finsler, one of the original e( 

Koehler, and of the publisher, the free 


horising, in his own name and in that of his surviving colleague, Prof. Dr. Walter 
edition of the Works of Zwingli now appearing. 


CONTENTS 

PAGE 

PREFACE ......... iii 

ORIGINAL LIFE OF ZWINGLI ...... I 

I A 

THE FABLE OF THE OX. A COMMENTARY ON THE PRESENT 
(autumn, 15 IO) COURSE OF AFFAIRS, BY HULDREICH 
ZWINGLI OF THE TOGGENBURG, IN CRUDE CENTIMETRE 
FORM ......... 27 

I B 

THE FABULOUS POEM OF THE PRIEST ZWINGLI CONCERNING 
AN OX AND MANY OTHER ANIMALS, REFERRING TO 
CURRENT (autumn, I5IO) EVENTS . . . -31 

II 

ACCOUNT BY HULDREICH ZWINGLI OF THE ENGAGEMENTS 
BETWEEN THE FRENCH AND THE SWISS HARD BY 
RAVENNA AND PAVIA AND IN OTHER PLACES, AND OF 
THE CONVENTION AT BADEN IN SWITZERLAND, IN THE 
YEAR I512 35 

III 
THE MISSING DIALOGUES ...... 48 

IV 
THE LABYRINTH ........ 50 

V 

TRANSCRIPT OF THE PAULINE EPISTLES . •• • 55 

xiii 


xiv Contents 


VI 

A CHRISTIAN SONG WRITTEN BY HULDREICH ZWINGLI WHEN 

HE WAS ATTACKED BY THE PESTILENCE (1519) . . 56 

VII 

ADVICE OF ONE WHO DESIRES WITH HIS WHOLE HEART THAT 
DUE CONSIDERATION BE PAID BOTH TO THE DIGNITY 
OF THE POPE AND TO THE PEACEFUL DEVELOPMENT OF 
THE CHRISTIAN RELIGION ..... 58 

VIII 

I. WHAT ZWINGLI SAID AND PREACHED AT THIS TIME 
(1521) AGAINST THE MERCENARY SERVICE OF THE SWISS. 
2. WHAT ZWINGLI PREACHED AT THIS TIME (152 1 ) . 68 

IX 

CONCERNING CHOICE AND LIBERTY RESPECTING FOOD — CON- 
CERNING OFFENCE AND VEXATION WHETHER ANYONE 

HAS POWER TO FORBID FOODS AT CERTAIN TIMES 

OPINION OF HULDREICH ZWINGLI . . . . ^0 

X 

LETTER OF HULDREICH ZWINGLI TO ERASMUS FABRICIUS 
ABOUT THE PROCEEDINGS, ON THE 7TH, 8TH, AND 9TH 
OF APRIL, 1522, OF THE DELEGATES SENT TO ZURICH BY 
THE BISHOP OF CONSTANCE . . . . 113 

XI 

A SOLEMN WARNING BY HULDREICH ZWINGLI, A SIMPLE 
PREACHER OF THE GOSPEL OF JESUS CHRIST, ADDRESSED 
TO THE HONOURABLE, WISE, STEADFAST, SENIOR CON- 
FEDERATES AT SCHWYZ, THAT THEY SHOULD BEWARE 
OF, AND FREE THEMSELVES FROM, THE CONTROL OF 
FOREIGN LORDS . . . . . . ■ ^3^ 

XII 

PETITION OF CERTAIN PREACHERS OF SWITZERLAND TO THE 
MOST REVEREND LORD HUGO, BISHOP OF CONSTANCE, 


Contents xv 

PAGE 

THAT HE WILL NOT SUFFER HIMSELF TO BE PERSUADED 
TO MAKE ANY PROCLAMATION TO THE INJURY OF THE 
GOSPEL, NOR ENDURE LONGER THE SCANDAL OF HAR- 
LOTRY, BUT ALLOW THE PRIESTS TO MARRY WIVES OR 
AT LEAST WOULD WINK AT THEIR MARRIAGES . 150 

XIII 

A FRIENDLY REQUEST AND EXHORTATION OF SOME PRIESTS 
OF THE CONFEDERATES THAT THE PREACHING OF THE 
HOLY GOSPEL BE NOT HINDERED, AND ALSO THAT NO 
OFFENCE BE TAKEN IF TO AVOID SCANDAL THE PREACH- 
ERS WERE GIVEN PERMISSION TO MARRY . . l66 

XIV 

DEFENCE CALLED ARCHETELES, IN WHICH ANSWER IS MADE 
TO AN ADMONITION THAT THE MOST REVEREND LORD 
BISHOP OF CONSTANCE (BEING PERSUADED THERETO BY 
THE BEHAVIOUR OF CERTAIN WANTONLY FACTIOUS 
persons) SENT TO THE COUNCIL OF THE GREAT MINSTER 
AT ZURICH CALLED THE CHAPTER . . . .197 


The Original Life of Zwingli 


[The life of Huldreich Zwingli by Oswald Myconius, written in Latin in 
1532, and dedicated to Agathius of Bern, put into modern English from 
Neander's edition of the lives of the Four Reformers, — Luther by Melanchthon ; 
Melanchthon by Camerarius; Zwingli by Myconius; and Calvin by Baza 
(VitcB quatuor Reformatorum, Berlin, 1841) — on the basis of the version by 
Henry Bennet, published in London in 1561, and revised by Mr. Henry 
Preble. This is the first life of Zwingli to be written.] 

/. — Introduction. 

YOU have asked me, my dear friend Agathius, for a thing 
as worthy of execution as it is far beyond the compass 
of my skill. For great things require great powers. My 
training has been such as to make me creep upon the ground 
so far, and nature implanted a sort of instinctive lowliness in 
me at birth. And is it not indeed an arduous task to sketch 
the life of Zwingli? I do not say to write it fully, and you 
very wisely do not ask this, being well aware of what is to be 
demanded of the humbly endowed. The person properly 
fitted for that [i. e., for writing a worthy life of Zwingli] were 
not so much a Plutarch as a Cicero: so great is he in the 
estimation of his friends, and in reality, though so small in 
the eyes of his enemies, and you say yourself, that Zwingli 
has been spoken of in your ears as God, while there are those 
who disparage him so much that you wonder that the earth 
does not open and swallow them. For this cause, you say, 
you long to become acquainted with the man from some one 
well acquainted with his life and conversation: and this 
particularly on account of the books so solidly composed. 


2 Original Life of Zwingli 

which he left. For you want these to have the greatest 
influence possible. I will not deny that I knew Zwingli 
intimately, both as my highly valued patron, and as the 
most beloved of advisers: that, therefore, I am his debtor to 
no slight degree. But what can I give? — so barren am I of 
appropriate expression! If you had not asked me I might 
have forgotten my indebtedness, but now that you press me 
I will do what I can. And I can say simply, and truly, and 
briefly things that, I think, will give satisfaction to your soul, 
for whom alone I would have what I am about to say written. 

//. — ZwingWs parentage and birthplace. His precocity. 
At ten years of age sent to Buenzli, the schoolmaster at Basel. 
His literary and philosophical studies at Bern and Vienna. 

He was bom, then, of worthy parents, his father [Huld- 
reich] Zwingli, his mother Margarita Meylina [Meile], about 
the year 1487 [correctly January i, 1484], in the village of the 
Toggenburg called Wildhaus, at a height which is almost 
equal to that of any mountain in Switzerland. I have more ■ 
than once thought, in my simple-mindedness, that he drew 
something of divine quality directly from the heavens near 
which he lived, and surely there has not for many years 
been seen among men anything so nearly approaching the 
divine. His father was distinguished for his holiness 
of life and for having attained to the highest dignity 
his neighbours could bestow, for he was chosen Ammann 
[chief magistrate]. Seeing signs of promise in his little boy, 
he committed him at a very tender age to his brother, a 
priest, to see if there were the making of a scholar in him. 
The boy soon gave such satisfaction that he was sent to a 
school-teacher under whom he learned so quickly that he 
found all the things he was taught too easy to give his clever 
intellect due exercise. Therefore he was sent to Basel, being 
then about ten years old, and placed under the teacher, 
Gregory Buenzli, a good man, learned and wonderfully gentle. 
Here, forthwith, he made such progress in character and 


Return to Basel 3 

letters that in the disputations, which were then customary, 
he carried off all the honours from all the boys and youths of 
the school, on which account he incurred the greatest hatred 
on the part of the older boys. His proficiency in music was 
beyond what is expected of his years, as is apt to be the case 
with those especially gifted by nature in any particular art. 
His studies were recognised by Buenzli, who loved him dearly, 
as not congruous with such joyous and pregnant wit.^ 
Wherefore, sending him home, he counselled that measures 
should be taken for his education in accordance with the 
excellence of his abilities. So it came about that he was 
sent to Bern, and came under Heinrich Lupulus, a remark- 
ably learned man, and famous also as a poet, who was the 
first to teach the classics in Switzerland. Introduced by 
him into the secrets of classical learning, he acquired ele- 
gance of diction, and the knowledge and discernment of 
things. He also learned the theory of poesy, so that he 
could compose verses himself, and felicitously criticise those 
composed by others. In somewhat less than two years, he 
had laid the foundation for the study of philosophy. So he 
went next to Vienna [1500], and there embraced in his studies 
all that philosophy embraces, turning it to good account, for 
the increase and embellishment of his learning. 

///. — Return to Basel ; teacher of the classics in the school 
attached to St. Martin's church ; mitigates the severity of his 
studies with the delights of music. 

After several years thus spent, he was recalled home. 
Then in order not to put off longer the practical application of 
his learning, he went to Basel [1502], where he poured forth for 
the benefit of others, what he had been taught, for being the 
head master of St. Martin's school he taught the humanities, 
to the great advantage of the boys. Meanwhile, he more 
closely studied philosophy, and followed carefully the 
trifling of the sophists with no other intention than that, if 

' That is, he had outgrown Buenzli 's school. 


4 Original Life of Zwingli 

he should ever be fighting against them, he might know his 
enemy. He mingled wit and pleasantry with these serious 
studies: for he was sunny in disposition, and agreeable in 
conversation to an extraordinary degree. Afterwards, he 
devoted himself to the theory and practice of all kinds of 
musical instruments, with no other purpose than to refresh 
his mind, when wearied by severe study, and be able to 
return to such study with renewed vigour. I am well aware, 
Agathius, what occurs to you in connection with this, 
namely that his enemies have turned his devotion to music 
against him, asserting that music is rather the handmaid of 
voluptuous pleasure than a help to study. And I confess 
that I have often heard far more abominable things about 
him, especially from the priests living in concubinage: but 
then, what is anywhere so holy that it escapes the besmirch- 
ing of foul tongues! I know whereof I speak, and do not 
care what carping critics say. Is it not a most solid argu- 
ment for the truth of what I affirm, that he not only culti- 
vated music in this way himself, but earnestly advised all 
students of letters to cultivate it on the same grounds? For 
since there is nothing that so harmlessly cheers the mind of 
man, however disturbed by sorrow, or clears it more happily, 
however clouded by perplexities, why should he not have 
given such advice? 

IV. — Becoming Master of Arts, 1506, he is elected pastor of 
Glarus, and gives himself up entirely to theological studies. 

Now when he had for some time sweated over his studies, 
both of the liberal arts, and of philosophy, he received the 
Master's degree, the customary reward in the schools of such 
labour; yielding more to the general opinion of men, who 
judge those only learned who bear these glittering titles, 
than to his own feeling. Then, because the regular course 
of things demanded it, he paid diligent heed to theology in 
the scholastic form, but he quickly perceived what a waste of 
good time it involved, since it was such a jumble of worldly 


Theological Studies 5 

wisdom, philosophy, God, inane loquacities, barbarities, vain- 
glory, and things of that description, that no sane doctrine 
could reasonably be hoped from it. Nevertheless, he con- 
tinued in the enemy's camp, like a spy as it were, until the 
Glareans chose him as their pastor, although he had not yet 
been ordained. Then, truly, what had been begun by others, 
he was compelled to complete. He became a priest, devoted 
himself to studies, especially to theological studies, for 
henceforward he made little account of the heathen classics, 
unless they assisted him in the sacred things, and in preach- 
ing. With this end in view, it should be said in passing, 
that for the sake of the illustrations he committed Valerius 
Maximus to memory, and did not forget him. He saw how 
many things he ought to know, to whom the office of teaching 
the flock of Christ had been entrusted, but more especially, 
the indispensable knowledge of God, as well as the eloquence, 
through which he could expound everything rightly and 
profitably, in such a way that anybody could understand 
him. What he thought should be done, he did. He pored 
over the Old and New Testaments, studied orators and 
their orations to find out their secret, and found it: he put it 
into practice, however, not after the fashion of Cicero, but 
so as to profit us both in speaking and in forming opinions. 
So he made such progress that he was considered by learned 
and virtuous men to have the Sacred Scriptures at ready 
command. But he was so far from being satisfied with this, 
that he desired to add to it a knowledge of the sacred tongues: 
by which he knew he would be able to fill up what he still 
lacked. Wherefore, he gave himself first to the Greek 
tongue, by the help of lexicons and translations. He copied 
Paul's Epistles [in Greek],' and committed them to memory, 
so that it finally came to this, that he understood the 
Greek better than the Latin. Afterwards, he dealt in the 
same way with all the books which make up the New 
Testament. Having learned subsequently from Peter that 

' This is a mistake. The transcript was made at Einsiedeln in 1517, as he 
states himself. 


6 Original Life of Zvvingli 

the Scriptures are not of private interpretation, he looked up 
to heaven, seeking the Spirit as his teacher, and suppHcating 
with prayer that He would bestow that by which the mean- 
ing of the Divine mind might be as perfectly elucidated as 
possible. And lest he should deceive either himself or 
others, by a false representation of the Spirit, he compared 
Scripture with Scripture, and elucidated the dark by the 
clear, so that no one should fail to perceive that the Spirit 
and not a man was the teacher, whenever he expounded 
Scripture. Oh fact divine ! Thus it came about that know- 
ledge of heavenly truth, which lay hidden a long time, to the 
detriment and perdition of souls, was happily restored to us. 
He felt about the orthodox writers [the Fathers?] as they 
felt about themselves, that they should be read with dis- 
crimination, and tested by the canonical Scriptures as by a 
touchstone: for they were generally speaking too much 
adulterated by philosophy and human reasoning to make it 
right to grant them the authority of Scripture, as had been 
done hitherto nevertheless. What he had thus learned he 
turned to practical account in this way. He began to fight 
according to the precept of Christ against the most per- 
nicious abuses, above all against the pensions (as we call the 
presents of princes, which used to be given to certain men 
for the sake of their help in hiring soldiers and making war) , 
which it was his fixed determination utterly to root out so 
that the country might return to its pristine virtue. For he 
saw that there would be room for the heavenly doctrine 
only when the fountain was cleansed of all evil. There is 
no reason, Agathius, why you should say to yourself, 
"Zwingli while yet a papist thought thus of the gospel?" 
Believe me, twenty-seven years ago, on account of this very 
thing, and because he had not condemned the theses of John 
Picus of Mirandola concerning those matters which he 
[Picus] had once vainly set up at Rome in order that he 
might debate them, he was secretly spoken of by certain 
blockheads as a heretic. Hence odium, impudence in 
speech, outcry, wily working of the children of the world 


At Einsiedeln 7 

against Zwingli took their beginning, and increased as his 
virtues increased. On the other hand, the man was so loved 
by those who favoured the right and the good, among them 
the elders and the virtuous among the people, also priests of 
a less corrupt life, that they were encouraged to hope that he 
would restore the ancestral righteousness. Meanwhile he 
preached gospel grace without alluding at all or very cau- 
tiously to the abuses of the Church of Rome. He wanted 
the truth acknowledged by his hearers to do its good work in 
their hearts, for by truths perceived and understood we are 
able without difficulty to distinguish the false. Nor did the 
time permit anything different, for the truth would have 
been wholly lost amid so great a wantonness and evil- 
mindedness of mankind sooner than the abuses of religion 
would have been done away. It is true that I cannot clear 
him while a young man of all stain of sin, but his regard for 
purity, and especially for his holy office, constantly restrained 
him from weakening the influence of the heavenly teachings 
by a bad example. Such was Zwingli at Glarus. 

V.^He removes to Einsiedeln, 1516 ; by reason of his in- 
creased acquaintance with Christ and the Greek literature, he 
comes to perfect understanding of both the Old and New 
Testaments. 

An opportunity was offered to remove to Einsiedeln, 
which for the time being seemed an eminently sensible thing 
to do. Theobold Geroldseck [von Hohengeroldseck], a 
baron, and a doctor of theology, a man equally devoted to 
learning, to the learned, and to true piety, administrator at 
that time of the Hermitage of the Holy Virgin, called him. 
The concourse of men from almost all parts of mankind, so 
celebrated was the name of the place, attracted him, as it 
gave such a favourable opportunity to preach Christ and his 
truth in regions varied and remote ; and also by reason of his 
greater leisure he could prosecute the study of Greek, which 


8 Original Life of Zwingli 

he had not impromisingly begun, until he attained, as it 
were, to the summit. Nor was his hope wholly disappointed, 
for Christ began to be known more soimdly, and he carried 
forward his Greek studies until he attained a perfect know- 
ledge of both Testaments. 

VI. — Called to the first parish in Zurich, he entered upon 
his service on Christmas day, 15 19. 

At this juncture the church at Zurich lacking a pastor in 
its first parish [the pastor primarius] was blest with men 
among its members who laboured day and night to get him 
chosen instead of any one else. He knew nothing of this 
himself until, happening to go to Zurich, he was asked by a 
canon of Zurich, whether he would be able to take charge of 
the people at Zurich in the matter of preaching the word of 
the Lord? He replied that he was able, and if in so cele- 
brated a place Christ's grace was preached and received it 
could scarcely be that the other Swiss cantons would not 
follow its example, and so a return to sense be made. Al- 
though he knew that he should not receive as much salary 
as he relinquished, still if they offered him the service he 
would reply in accordance with their wish, for he would not 
offer himself as a candidate. Not long after I was secretly 
directed, I, I say, Agathius, at the time of election, after many 
had personally canvassed for the place, to put Zwingli's 
name in nomination for the office of pastor. I consented, 
the thing went through, he was called, to the very great satis- 
faction of the good. A little while after this in the very first 
meeting with the canons he declared in person what and how 
he proposed to teach the people, to wit, the history of Christ 
the Saviour as Matthew the Evangelist describes him, nor 
should his honour be longer obscured, whose excellence had 
now for a long time been hidden to the detriment of the 
Divine glory and of souls. The same, however, he would 
expound not according to human reason indeed, seeing that 
he was sworn to no interpreter, but according to the purpose 


Commends Luther's Writings 9 

of the Spirit, which through diligent collating of the Scrip- 
tures, and through fervent prayers from the heart, he doubted 
not that he should be given to understand. On hearing 
this some mourned, and some rejoiced, just as there had been 
difference of opinion previously among his electors. ' What, 
therefore, he promised he began on Christmas day, 1519, 
and thenceforward prosecuted with good omens. 

VII. — The fame of Luther is noised abroad. Zwingli 
commends his writings. He inveighs powerfully against the 
pensionaries, oppressors of the poor, and the idle rich. 

While this was taking place the name of Luther from day 
to day became more celebrated as his books were more and 
more sedulously thumbed by all. Zwingli himself kept 
away from them, but he faithfully exhorted his flock, even 
from the pulpit, to buy and read them. See, I beg of you, 
his idea. He wished that the people, hearing and reading 
them, after they learned that he himself had abstained from 
reading them, should perceiv-e the parity in spirit between 
himself and Luther, yea, their unity, both drawing out of 
the Divine Scriptures, and so would more freely adhere, and 
be obedient unto the truth, however much it might seem at 
variance with what they were used to. In this way mar- 
vellous success was attained in a short time. The method 
of his teaching bore away the palm, for by means of it the 
simple learned equally with the most intelligent and acute. 
It was adapted to the norm of the common mind. Therefore 
it was not possible that any one attending his preaching 
could go away without being better informed and enriched 
in divine learning. Thus while he taught the light of truth 
clearly and most zealously, no one ever spoke more sharply 
against vice : and especially did he inveigh heavily against the 
pensionaries, the oppressors of the poor, and against those 
wasting their lives in luxury and idleness. He exercised an 
authority in rebuke such as I have seen in no other person. 
While with burning words he thundered against idleness and 


10 Original Life of Zvvingli 

pensions, he always added, in order that worthy persons 
who were accounted as of the same rank and class as the 
reprobate might not be disturbed, "Good man, this is not 
meant for you. You have no personal interest in what I am 
saying, so pay no attention to it." Sometimes he pressed 
his theme too far, especially at moments when things had 
happened in consequence of which he made remarks or 
digressions. This was why in the beginning vicious schemes, 
either of priests or of persons abusing their power, were 
formed against the course he advocated. For when it had 
come to pass that by far the better and more numerous part 
of the people believed the truth, he sometimes used these 
"digressions" against those things which were less to be 
borne within the Church. On this accoimt not an hour 
passed in which either from the laity or the priests there was 
not brought out some most insidious plot against this 
champion of the good and the true. But perhaps there will 
be an opportunity to expatiate upon this in another place. 
Now let us return for a little while to his studies. 

VIII. — His studies and scheme of life. 

In the midst of these anxious labours he never omitted 
his reading of the Greek authors, but went through Homer, 
Aristotle, Plato, Demosthenes, Thucydides, and in Ughter 
vein Lucian, Theocritus, Hesiod, Aristophanes, and others. 
And because his studies required it, and just then Andrew 
Boschenstein, learned in the Hebrew language, came to 
Zurich to open a school, he became his very diligent pupil. 
These studies at once pleased him: wherefore after he 
obtained from the Senate [the Great Council] a gymnasium 
[a high-school] of good learning in which the Latin, Greek, 
and Hebrew tongues should be taught, he urged strongly 
that James Ceporinus, a young man proficient in the three 
languages, should be called: under him it was that Zwingli 
acquired whatever pertained to grammar. Then, having 
collated the Septuagint with the translation of Jerome with 


Disputations ii 

the assistance of Leo Jud, who had previously made some 
progress in these labours and studies, and of Felix Manx, 
afterwards branded with the marks of Catabaptism, never 
to be gotten rid of, he ventured dexterously to expound 
Isaiah and Jeremiah, those most excellent prophets. He 
carried on all his studies standing up, setting apart certain 
hours for them, and nothing but dire necessity compelled him 
to omit them. From early morning to lo o'clock he gave 
himself to reading, exegesis, theology, and writing, as time 
and occasion required. After dinner [the usual hour was lo 
A.M.] he attended to those who wished to talk with him or 
get his advice or he conversed or walked out with his friends 
till two o'clock; then he returned to his study. After supper 
he walked about a little, then generally wrote his letters, 
which occupation sometimes kept him up till midnight. 
Moreover, as often as business compelled he was at the 
command of the Senate. 

IX. — Machinations of eiiemies. Successful disputation 
of Zwingli with Francis Lambert on the intercession of the 
Saints; other disputations with others follow. The Pope's 
[Adrian VI.' s] letter to Zwingli. 

Just at this place, Agathius, if it pleases you to hear 
about the labours of Zwingli against the enemies of the truth, 
and the machinations of the wily workers against this man of 
God, it is necessary to go back a little. To be sure Francis 
Lambert, a Minorite of Avignon, whose name was familiar 
to the French and German nations, is not to be reckoned 
among his enemies. Nevertheless, because he was among 
the first to bring on the attacks on Zwingli, he should not be 
passed over. Leaving the monastery, he came to Zurich 
[1522], not having doffed his Franciscan robes, and immedi- 
ately joined with Zwingli in a public disputation upon the 
intercession of the Saints. I do not know what moved the 
man, whether it was merely the truth or because he really 
did it only to keep up appearances, but after a pretty long 


12 Original Life of Zwingli 

speech he yielded readily and thanked God that by means of 
so excellent an instrumentality God had plainly and clearly 
granted him knowledge of the truth. Not long after he was 
followed by John Faber, Vicar General of Constance, and 
Doctor Martin Blansch, preacher at Tubingen, who were 
sent by Hugo, Bishop of Constance, at the request of the 
Zurichers. Although they had nothing in their orders 
beyond hearing the causes of the differences — so they 
reported — and studying how they might be ended, yet one 
word led to another and they fell into discussions concerning 
the gospel, the intercession of the Saints, the constitution of 
man, and I know not what else, so that the day passed in this 
manner, and not unprofitably, for all the multitude, whose 
number was about six hundred, came to realise that earthly 
things are nothing in comparison with heavenly things. The 
Bishop did not satisfy himself with sending the aforesaid 
delegation, for not long after his suffragan came to Zurich to 
persuade them to believe in the intercession of the Saints 
and the sacrifice of the Mass, which also he attempted in his 
book so highly praised by many scholars. But in this he 
had his labour for his pains, for a man noble both in blood 
and spirit on being asked what the vicar-general had done 
replied, "the vicar-general drove away the sow; we drive 
the litter. " Then it was, these things having fallen out thus 
most favourably to religion by the grace of God, Huldreich 
[Zwingli] was first compelled to write, but what books, and 
what useful books — for they present sound doctrine in a way 
at once simple and profound such as no other books do with 
which I am acquainted — he left behind him it is not neces- 
sary even briefly to describe or even to write their titles, 
as they are all accessible, and bear amplest testimony to 
themselves. 

While these things were occurring, somehow the report 
of Zwingli reached even to the Roman Pontiff, who sent to us 
a legate with a letter to him in these words: 

"Adrian, Pope, Sixth of the name, to his dear son 


Reforming the Church 13 

sendeth salutations, and the Apostolical benediction. We 
send the venerable brother Ennius, Bishop of Verulam, our 
domestic prelate and nuncio of the Apostolic See, a man 
distinguished for prudence and fidelity, to that unconquer- 
able nation most completely linked unto us and to the Holy 
See, in order that he may treat with it respecting things of the 
highest importance to us and the Holy See, and to the entire 
Christian commonwealth. Although he is enjoined to treat 
of these with your nation collectively and in public, yet 
because we have a special knowledge of your distinguished 
merits, and deeply love and prize your loyalty, and also feel 
particular confidence in you, we have commissioned this 
bishop, our nuncio, to hand over our letter to you in private 
and manifest our heartiest good-will toward you. We 
exhort your devotion in the Lord, to have all confidence in 
him, and with the same disposition in which we are inclined 
to remember your honour and profit, to bestir yourself also 
in our affairs, and in those of the Apostolic See. For which 
you will earn no small thanks from us. 

"Given at Rome at St. Peter's under the ring of 
the Fisherman, January 23, 1523, the first year of our 
pontificate." 

X. — Zwingli begins to reform the Church. Rise of the 
Catabaptists . Disputation of Baden, 1526. Plots contrived 
against Zwingli. False accusations brought against him. 

I wanted you to know this letter from the Pope so that 
you could see plainly that if Zwingli had preferred the grace 
of man to the grace of God he might have had all he wanted 
in this life. For the Pope did not only write to him as above 
but also to the excellent Doctor Francis Zinck, that he 
should gain the man for himself and the Apostolic See. 
When I asked Francis what the Pope had promised for 
Zwingli 's support he replied seriously, "Everything except 
the papal chair." After this because the gospel strongly 
showing its strength was esteemed as the truth from heaven 


14 Original Life of Zvvingli 

by the greater part, and especially had been received by the 
Senate of Zurich, and the Council of Two Hundred, the man 
began to plan how he could put things into a better state, 
and that everything might be done in order, whatever 
changes seemed especially to pertain to the furtherance of 
the gospel were made at the earliest opportunity. The 
number of the priests and monks had for some time seemed 
greater than was required for the usages of religion. There- 
fore the Senate decreed on the persuasion of Zwingli's celes- 
tial spirit that it should be reduced to the number necessary 
for the ecclesiastical offices. Not that any one was to be 
ejected or deprived of his benefice, but was to hold it during 
life, but when death had made a vacancy it was to remain 
unfilled. The three orders of monks were collected into one 
place, their cowls being taken from them. They were at 
liberty to go out as they pleased to work, to marry, to study. 
And those who did not take kindly to the sound doctrines 
were permitted to migrate whithersoever they desired, so 
careful were they not to offend any one's conscientious 
scruples. The revenues of the Church were employed upon 
either the ministers of the Church or the teachers of good 
learning or the religious and monks who were left or on the 
poor. There were found among them promising youths, not 
a few to whom the study of piety was attractive ; these being 
retained were supported for the benefit of the whole seigniory 
of Zurich, and when the necessity arose were employed. A 
man most devoted to good letters and sacred learning, 
Zwingli instituted among them a school, which if he had 
lived there is no doubt would have been second to none. 
Moreover he made the Senate depute some to judge cases of 
conjugal difficulties, and persuaded them that the worship of 
images must be abolished, the Mass utterly done away with, 
and the Lord's Supper restored. Meantime, good God, 
what a pestilence had crept in! — the heresy of the Cata- 
baptists, prohibiting the baptism of infants, and rebaptising 
themselves, then rushing with wild spirit into all the here- 
sies that ever were. At first when he became aware of the 


Catabaptists [5 

thing, because the leaders were both friends and scholars, 
both citizens and parishioners, he tried in a familiar way to 
dissuade them, but when, promising in his presence, they 
began on leaving to deny, to lie, to gather disciples, to 
disrupt the Church, to set up a new one, he was forced to go 
against Satan with all his strength, and make open war upon 
him. Believe me, Agathius, I was present at nine friendly 
conferences and earnest disputations. If it were my task to 
treat of the matter at considerable length I should certainly 
have something to say. They foamed at the mouth with 
palpable blasphemies and abuse, and in a word whatever 
revelation of evils John' makes they piled upon Zwingli. 
This plague, the more the efforts to repress it, the more fiery 
it became. Therefore the Senate was at length compelled 
to assail it with imprisonment, exile, and death, not as Cata- 
baptists but as perjurers, disobedient and seditious persons, 
unless it (the Senate) wished to give the impression of 
advocating the false rather than the true, sedition rather 
than peace, the bad rather than the good. Yet it was not 
possible in this way to avoid the necessity of forewarning 
the good by published books so that they might not be led 
away by deceits. Doctor Balthasar Hiibmaier was the 
head of the Catabaptists, not long before a friend and 
companion in the gospel, but a little while after a most 
violent foe. He first broke out in writings and then after he 
had escaped from Waldshut, a town on the Rhine, and had 
secretly entered into Zurich, being apprehended, he resisted 
by word of mouth in the court-house in the presence of the 
deputies only. Then he requested the Senate that he be 
permitted to confer with Leo Jud, Sebastian Hofmeister, ^ and 
me. His wishes were complied with a second time. We 
laboured with this man so that he promised to recant the next 
day. Therefore in this mind coming the day after into the 
church from he court-house, he ascended the pulpit after 
Zwingli was come down and confirmed all he had taught 
before, moved thereto he pretended because he (Zwingli) had 

' In the Revelation. ^ Myconius uses his Latin name, CEconomus. 


i6 Original Life of Zwingli 

put so much stress upon constancy, the miserable man 
judging that his pertinacity was constancy! Returned to 
prison he was altogether hidden until by the kindness of 
Zwingli he was secretly sent away, not without a guide and 
travelling money, and came to Constance, where he so loaded 
the man [Zwingli] with abuse that he was forced to apologise 
to the brethren. But enough of the Catabaptists. 

You desire to know about the disputation at Baden as 
your letter shows, and especially why the Senate of Zurich 
refused to permit Zwingli to go to Baden. These matters 
have all been committed to writing and published, and I 
would rather that you should investigate them there. That 
you may not, however, say that you have never heard about 
them, behold here is the letter of the Zurichers to Doctor 
John Eck in which they invite the man to them. Here 
also is the letter of safe conduct for the same and solemn 
promise of all good men bidding him to come and examine 
and expound from both Testaments on an even footing with 
ZwingH (whose errors and heresies he had taken upon him- 
self of his own accord in two letters to the delegates of the 
Confederacy to refute publicly anywhere), the truth of God, 
to the common profit of the whole Church. By reading 
these you will understand that Eck cared nothing for what 
they wrote; so you will easily perceive why the Zurichers 
kept Zwingli at home. And yet the same matter has been 
most truthfully defended also by him in several works against 
Faber. I wish much that I had a copy of the disputation to 
send you. You would see how beautifully he expresses 
himself in his famous style. But Zwingli laboured more in 
running about, cogitating, watching, counselling, warning, 
writing both letters and books which he sent to Baden than 
he would have done had he taken part in the disputations 
even in the midst of his foes, particularly against a chief so 
unskilled in the truth. I have for my part desired nothing 
more earnestly in my life than that he had been permitted to 
take part personally. The Five Cantons would have seen 
where truth and where falsehood ruled. But the place was 


Plots against Zwingli 17 

not favourable to Zwingli.' When this was found out, and 
afterwards at Bern, Mumer, Eck, four bishops, and certain 
principal monks had first been courteously and honestly- 
invited by the Senate, did he not go thither willingly and 
rejoicing for the truth? Nevertheless, he was conducted by 
two hundred armed men through the commonwealths of the 
Confederacy. He made also the long journey to Marburg, 
to the colloquy with Luther and Melanchthon upon the 
Lord's Supper. He feared nothing there, for the place was 
suitable. What tremendous difficulties he laboured under 
in all this I believe you must know already. Certain 
scholars had called him a dogmatist in teaching, principally 
because of his doctrine of the Eucharist. I do not doubt if 
ever they could have read sympathetically and weighed 
faithfully what he wrote to the German princes assembled at 
Augsburg many would have judged him differently. I refer 
you also to that document that I may not waste time in 
writing to no purpose.^ What can you do with a man who 
refuses to learn from it the truth about the Lord's Supper? 
So much for his labours in behalf of the truth. I will now 
tell briefly to what perils he was exposed for its sake. When 
priests and monks had been degraded from their positions 
(so to speak) and a mandate had been issued against the 
pensioners as we call them, the enemy turned to plots to try 
if by any means they might destroy the man. I will be 
silent about the secret plots that may be known to me, and 
will tell you about those known to people in general. Some 
one came to his house after midnight and prayed him to 
come to a man at the point of death. The deacon replying 
for the master of the house that he would do whatever was 
necessary himself (for Zwingli was not to be disturbed during 
the night because of his daily duties) , the visitor objected so 
strongly that the suspicions of the deacon were aroused that 
he had some plot on foot. The deacon therefore, going as if 

' Baden in Switzerland, 14 miies North of Zurich. 

^ In English translation by Jacobs in his Book of Concord, ii,. 159-179, and 
reprinted in Jackson's Life of Zwingli, pp. 452-484. 


1 8 Original Life of Zwingli 

he would tell his master all about it, frustrated the marauder 
by closing the door and leaving him outside. In the morn- 
ing the facts were discovered, that he was to have been 
gagged and carried away secretly in a boat. Shortly after a 
horse was got ready to be used for the same purpose. 

Again we saw a waylayer (it was said he was from Zug) 
in the city girded with the longest kind of sword openly 
wandering about without a cloak watching for a favourable 
opportunity to run across the man and kill him. The man 
was reported and taken into custody, and disappeared. 

Two Zurichers under the influence of liquor — I will not 
mention their names though I know them — threw stones one 
night against Zwingli *s house and breaking his windows 
behaved so cruelly, basely, and inhumanly with their shouts 
and curses and blows that none of the neighbours dared to 
protest even through the windows. So they kept on till 
they had used up their stones, their words, and their strength. 
The tumult was reported to the mayor in the morning, the 
gates were shut and armed men searched for the offenders in 
vain in every nook and cranny of the city until certain 
prostitutes who knew about their hiding places, not being 
adepts in concealing, unintentionally betrayed one of them; 
the other had already escaped. The fellow was dragged 
from the wine cask of a certain priest and taken to prison by 
the enraged crowd. After many trials he was condemned 
to perpetual imprisonment, and for some weeks he lay in 
captivity until he was released by request of Bern. 

Zwingli sometimes dined away from home with friends 
or entertainers. Therefore returning he was almost always 
escorted, without being aware of it, by good citizens, lest evil 
should befall him on the way. And the Senate in this peri- 
lous time placed watchers around his house at night. See, 
I beseech you, what unjust accusations were brought against 
the man that he should have to be protected in this way! 
They called him "a pensionary" because not knowing it was 
wrong he received at one time an annual pension from the 
Roman pontiff. He himself indeed excused this offence to 


False Accusations 19 

his Germans thus: "The dealings which I once had with the 
Pope ceased years ago. I thought then it was allowable to 
receive a pension from the pontiff to defend his way. But 
having realised the sin of it, I gave up the whole business. 
Therefore the deputies (factores), as they are called, accuse 
me of wrong in the matter, and being angry at my giving up 
the pension, impute to me what I have done as a sin because 
they persuade men that by receiving the pontifical pension 
they serve God." And to Berthold Haller and Caspar 
Megander, he thus writes of the gifts of princes: "I 
esteem the glory of Christ and if you prefer mine own also 
more than all the wealth of all the princes, not to mention 
the moderate munificence of one king. In times past I have 
learned what gifts meant, so that in old age desire after them 
is not possible." 

For the rest they not only called him thief and heretic 
and adulterer, so blackening his name and doctrine, but they 
cried out against him publicly with asinine clamour. But 
when these miserable and insane men saw that nothing was 
accomplished by all these assaults, either against the word of 
the gospel, or against the servant of God, they turned them- 
selves with their whole strength against those obedient to 
the Word, if perhaps tired out they might feel disgust with 
the one who caused them to feel another's scorn. They 
calumniated him, made him of no account, publicly and 
privately jeered at him to such a degree that the Zurichers 
began to consider how they might avert this evil. It would 
require a volume if any one would know this affair fully or 
write exhaustively about it. 

To sum up it came about there were formed new alliances 
for the defence of the doctrine of Christ, the old ones being 
left unmolested not without great exertions and planning by 
Zwingli, not surely that anything was attempted against his 
country (this was impossible in such a fosterer of his country), 
but because in accordance with the course once begun he had 
resolved to eradicate vices and establish the evangelical doc- 
trines thus to the praise of God and the advantage of all 


20 Original Life of Zwingli 

Switzerland, nor because he aimed at protecting the things of 
God in this way, but because he desired nothing more than 
that all nations might confess the Lord, and that the extent 
of the alliance might terrify the minds of the ungodly, and 
so more easily win them to Christ, 

XI. — Two civil wars, called the Cappel Wars, in which 
Zwingli participated; in the first {152Q) he was in the 
midst of the deliberations, in the second {1531) he was chosen 
chaplain. 

And so it came even to war, but what kind of war 
as far as our hero and the men of Zurich are concerned? 
The kind that Zwingli himself described in the following 
words to his friends [at Bern, in Works, Schuler and 
Schulthess ed., vol. viii., 290, dated 1529]: "What I have 
written to you before I repeat again and again that you 
may be steady and not afraid of the war. For that peace 
which some urged so strongly is war not peace, and the 
war upon which we are entering is peace not war, for we 
thirst for no man's blood, neither do we propose to shed it 
even if a disturbance takes place, but we want to cut the 
sinews of the oligarchy. If this is not done, neither gospel 
truth nor the gospel ministry will be secure among us. We 
are meditating nothing cruel; on the contrary all we do is 
friendly and fatherly. We desire to save some who are 
perishing through ignorance. We are engaged in the 
preservation of liberty. Therefore do not turn away in 
abhorrence from our counsels. They are milder and fairer 
than they have been represented to you. To all who report 
us falsely you yield ready credence, whereas you have always 
thus far had experience of our reliability but of their in- 
constancy, not to say mendacity. Stand fast therefore in 
this, that in fidelity to God and man you come up to our 
promise. Why should I say more? Fear nothing, for we 
shall so conduct ourselves through the goodness of God and 
the alliance of all that you will be neither ashamed nor 


Cappel Wars 21 

apologetic for us." Thus far he. I have transcribed his 
words the more wilHngly because they testify to you, 
Agathius, in the most convincing manner how entirely unjust 
it is to represent Zwingli as sanguinary. He was indeed a 
brave man in danger, intrepid and wise, but it was as far 
from him to thirst for the blood of even the most inveterate 
enemy as it should be from every wise man and every 
minister of Christ. The liberty of the country, the virtues 
of the fathers, and most of all the glory of God and of Christ 
were both foundation and aim of all his plans, whatever all 
the enemies of Zwingli in all nations say, whatever they 
shout, whatever they maintain. Behold, I speak the truth 
before you and God. 

He therefore took part in the two civil wars, each of 
which is named the Cappel War from the monastery called 
the Chapel. To the first he went of his own motion, so that 
he might be present at the deliberations lest anything might 
occur contrary to what was true and right. Most happily 
things fell out and it was concluded without bloodshed. 
About it he often related to me that in it he had encountered 
more malice and perverse counsel than in his whole life he 
had learned from experience or from books. In the second 
war he was elected chaplain, and although he told himself as 
well as others that he would not go, nevertheless he went. 
His divining mind saw what the future had in store. The 
cause of war never met his approval, i.e., the cutting off of 
provisions [from the Forest Cantons], for he knew what kind 
of counsel famine gives. Albeit, to speak frankly, after this 
plan [to cut off provisions] had been once accepted by the 
reluctant Zurichers (for others whom we know well had taken 
it up in no bad spirit since they thought by consultation 
and discussion a way would be found meanwhile for pacifi- 
catory measures even though the Zurichers had preferred a 
war), Zwingli was not pleased, since he feared that a change 
would only bring them into greater contempt with their 
adversaries, although he did not so very strenuously 
oppose it. 


22 Original Life of Zwingli 

XII. — Zwingli perishes in the Second Cappel War. He 
left Zurich Jor the front early on Oct. Ji, 1531 ; a7id was 
killed that afternoon. 

Also within fourteen days before his departure he said 
from the pulpit in my hearing, amid the general excitement, 
"I know, I know what all this means. It means my death, 
everything is done to put me out of the way. " So also the 
comet which was seen for many weeks he whispered into 
friendly ears would be fatal to him and also to one other 
person. We always had understood it meant (Ecolam- 
padius. In no really military style, then, the Zurichers 
sallied forth (whenever I think of the undisciplined affair I 
am pierced through as by swords) , for there was no order, no 
plans, no direction, so much difference of opinion, so many 
persons running with scared faces here and there, before and 
behind the banner, for I cannot say "soldiers" except of a 
few of them. A very small number in all indeed (five 
thousand were summoned, not four thousand five hundred 
were present) against so well prepared a multitude. So the 
Zurichers set out, Zwingli following in the rear on horseback 
and armed according to our custom. When I saw him, I 
could scarcely stand for sudden pain of heart presaging the 
worst. We passed the day [in Zurich] in continual sighs 
and prayers to God. But He had appointed a different thing, 
for us, not against us, as I certainly interpret it in all piety. 
For be it said in passing, we have learned to advance more 
cautiously. We hold the gospel in higher estimation, we 
reverence God more devoutly, and they are more manifest 
who all this time have been adversaries to the gospel of 
Christ. 

As, then, I saw them going out in the morning, so at night 
I heard the news, — the fight had been sharp yet unsuccessful, 
and our Zwingli had perished. It was reported that three 
times he had in the shock of arms been prostrated, but each 
time he had struggled to his feet ; a fourth time he was struck 
under the chin by a spear, and, fallen upon his knees, said, 


Zwingli's Death 23 

"What evil is there in this? They are able, it is true, to kill 
the body but not the soul." And having so spoken he fell 
asleep presently in the Lord. After the defeat, during the 
leisure given to the enemy (for our soldiers had retired into a 
well guarded place) the body of Zwingli was sought for (and 
who told them so quickly that he had been present in the 
battle or had fallen?), was found, tried and condemned, cut 
into four parts, thrown into the fire, reduced to ashes. The 
enemy having retired after the third day, friends of Zwingli 
went to see if they could perchance find any remains of him, 
and lo ! (strange to say) his heart presented itself from the 
midst of the ashes whole and uninjured. The good men 
were astounded, recognising the miracle indeed, but not 
understanding it. Wherefore, attributing everything to 
God, they rejoiced because this supernatural fact had made 
more sure the sincerity of his heart. A man whom I knew 
very well, in fact very intimately, came to me shortly after- 
wards asking whether I desired to see a portion of Zwingli's 
heart which he carried with him in a casket. Because a sort 
of horror on account of this sudden remark pervaded my 
whole body I declined. Otherwise, I could have been an eye- 
witness of this thing also. 

This, then, is the course of Zwingli's life, this the way of 
his death which the loyalty of his soul to his country and 
the devotion of his heart to the Republic of Christ brought 
upon him, horrible, indeed, in the eyes of men, precious in 
the sight of God, such a death as awaits all teachers of the 
divine righteousness unless the Lord in His singular grace 
prevent and save them. I think I have fulfilled your 
request, Agathius. What I promised I have given, truth 
and brevity; bound to no elegance of diction, I have in- 
dulged in none. I hope there may appear in the future 
some one who for the use of the studious pious shall put 
the finishing hand upon all these things, making his narra- 
tive as attractive as possible while in accordance with truth, 
and giving it the elegance which is worthy so excellent 
a man. 


24 Original Life of Zwingli 

Farewell to you and interpret this my compliance [with 
your request] without prejudice. 

At Zurich in the year MDXXXII. 


The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 


I A 

The Fable of the Ox. A Commentary on the Present 

Course of Affairs, by Huldreich Zwingli of the 

Toggenburg, in Crude Centimetre Form 

(Autumn 1510) 

[The first publication of Zwingli was a poem. It is in two forms, of which 
the Latin is the original. Zwingli wrote them both, but has made the German 
form different in various particulars from the Latin, as well as longer. The 
Latin form has been translated by Mr. Henry Preble, the German by Walter 
Lichtenstein, Ph.D., librarian of Northwestern University, Evanston, 111. 

The Latin form has the caption: Huldrici Zwinglii Toggenburgii ineduca- 
tum bovis fabulosum centimetrum currentiiun rerum commenticium. 

("The fable of the Ox, a commentary on the present course of affairs by 
Huldreich Zwingli of the Toggenburg in crude centimetre form.") 

In Schulerand Schulthessed.,iv., 145-7. I^i Egliand Finsler ed.,i., 10, 12, 
14 (being put opposite to the German form). 

The German form has the caption: Ulrichen ZwingU, priesters, fabehsch 
gedicht von eim ochsen und etlichen tieren ietz louffender dinge begriffenlich 
("The fabulous poem of the priest Zwingli concerning an ox and many other 
animals, referring to current events"). In Schuler and Schulthess ed., ii., 2., 
257-62. In the same volume, pp. 264-8, is a rhymed translation into modern 
literary German. In Egli and Finsler ed., i., 11, 13, 15, 17, 19, 21, 22 (being 
put opposite to the Latin form as far as the Latin extends). 

Egli elaborately explains the circumstances of the time which are alluded 
to in the poem, and to this long preface (i., 1-7) the reader is referred. Suffice 
it here to say that, partly by what Zwingli himself has furnished, we may iden- 
tify the various characters mentioned in the poem with familiar personages. 
Thus the Ox is the Swiss, the Cats are the agents of foreign powers who tried to 
hire, and frequently did do so, the Swiss to fight in foreign wars because they 
had made a reputation for themselves as soldiers. ZwingH, like all other 
lovers of his country, deprecated such conduct, and here he vigorously pro- 
tests against it — a display of zeal which later cost him his place. The other 
animals are the Dog Lycisca, a name borrowed from Vergil (Eclogues, iii., 18: 
"loud barking Lycisca"), who here stands for the wide-awake patriotic clergy, 
the Lion is the King of the Romans, from the House of Habsburg; the Leopard 
is the French; the Fox is Venice; the Herdsman is the Pope; and the Ram, 
another borrowing from Vergil (Eclogues, ii., 64, "the playful goat follows 

27 


28 The Works of Huldreich Z^ingli 

the lucerne-bloom"), is Graubunden or SchafiFhausen. The pasture of the 
Ox is Switzerland.] 

T^HERE was a garden spot hedged about on one side 
-^ by high mountains, on another by gurghng streams, 
and in it roamed, cropping the green blades of grass, a fine 
fat bullock of ruddy hue, with widespread horns and on 
his brow rich waving hair. His chest was broad, and an 
ample dewlap marked his chin. Anon he would take a 
long-drawn breath and quaff the cool waters, generously 
endowed as he was in animal attractions, and without 
an enemy save envious Fortune who mingles gall with all 
things sweet. She gave him cunning keepers at whose nod 
the simple-hearted beast should do all things as though 
directed by Medusa's eye. To his flank clung inseparably 
the dog Lycisca, giving notice of hostile snares, so that the 
ox, with the aid of the Fauns that he delighted to call to 
mind, might be more cautious, and foreseeing blunt the 
attacks of the beasts. Then though lions with their terrible 
roar and many another wild beast might charge upon him, 
they would retire with hardly a wound given, and the rough 
ox would rise ever unconquered, and thus victorious. 

But when they accomplished nothing by either talk or 
onslaught, they turned to other means, and arranged to 
deceive him with cunning. They promised cats all sorts 
of rich things (for cats delight in what is rich) , birds and fish 
withal, that they might induce the ox to leave the cliffs 
and garden spot, and make for lands outside (whereby were 
greater glory) . And first the variegated leopard approached 
with mighty winning ways, and presently began to lure on 
the cats with a rich bait. When they had been caught, 
the poor ox was taken with the same coin, though Lycisca 
barked long and loud but without avail. When the goad- 
bearer (?) began with persuasive words and baleful craft, he 
led the sluggish ox where he would and where he would not. 
And it had not been usual to bury the dung before the un- 
accustomed food eaten and the altered stomach had dis- 


The Fable of the Ox 29 

charged droppings more offensive than gariic ( ?) . Then they 
were ordered to let up on the richer viands, that the excre- 
ments might not smell as badly as horse dung which had 
first been turned over. The cunning keeper never let up 
on the tidbits, but evaded the order with clever words, 
hiding the dung in a ditch, so that the ox might not be 
offended by the odour and would cease to find fault with 
the feast, ' but he could lead the poor beast as before. Thus 
persuaded the ox ran upon drawn swords, devoured blades, 
and incurred all sorts of dangers to enrich the mighty cunning 
leopard, and nourish a serpent. 

When the lion saw this, he became envious of the clever 
fellow's pile, and approaching the ox with drooping tail 
and dishevelled mane, begged him to enter into a holy and 
righteous league with him. This the simple-hearted ox 
presently whispered in the ear of the whiskered cat, who, 
answering without delay, rejected the proposal (that he might 
not lose the bounteous gifts of the leopard), adding: "It 
is not safe to trust to the lean beast (though he be king and 
lord supreme), for when he lacks food, he may make a savage 
attack upon you to satisfy his gnawing hunger." The 
ox listened to the suggestions and scorned the friendship 
of the lion, than which the excellent lion scarcely ever met 
with anything worse, and furious said to himself, '*I '11 get 
even with the perfidious rascal." Straightway he flies to 
the leopard's cave (from whom he had suffered hundreds of 
frauds and contemptuous indignities) and complains, and 
implores his powerful aid. Presently the lion and the 
variegated one strike an adamantine league to make all the 
animals tremble. 

Presently they charge upon a timid fox, and biting at 
the beast soon reduced to despair, try to do him up with 
every kind of snare, but, torn and limping upon three legs, 
he crawls to a herdsman who happened to be nearby, and 
telling of his deep wounds and his bruised head, begs him 

' The Latin of this savoury passage is so obscure even with the emenda- 
tions of Schuler and Schulthess that I do not feel sure of its meaning. — H. P. 


30 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

piteously to help him and (such is the astuteness of the 
animal) promises to return immediately all the fowls that 
he may have carried off. Then the shepherd has pity for 
him, though before he has seen through his little wiles, 
and, forgetting these, proceeds to help the little animal, and 
addresses himself to the ox directly with these words: 
* ' You are not unaware how lively a sense of the tried worth 
and faithfulness of your father and godfather I have ever 
had. Contemplating that, I come to warn you now not to 
let me find you inferior to them. You know how the lion 
and the leopard are mangling the herd. They plunder the 
sheep, and murder them cruelly, tearing them asunder and 
getting them away stealthily under the aspect of simple- 
hearted lambs. I want to anticipate their wiles and thieving 
expeditions and under your initiative make the herd whole. " 
Lycisca barks in joy at these pleasant words and advises the 
ox not to abandon his friend the herdsman, under whose 
guidance he can easily escape the jaws of the threatening 
conspirators. This gnaws the vitals of the cats, and they 
cast glances at the cunning fellow often meditating flight. 
When the ox in his growing sluggishness sees this, he turns 
his head a little, but goes on as though driven by a goad 
as before. When the brethren, the lion and the terribly 
cunning one, behold this, they break forth in rage, howl, 
and, grinding their sharp teeth, declare bloody war upon 
the ox, unless he renounces his agreements and abandons 
the herdsman. Thus is the life of the ox kept in doubt and 
trouble. 

There had been a goat present at these proceedings, 
and he says to himself : " I rather think the ox will get a fine 
beating now, unless he is saved by the protecting staff of 
the herdsman, or unless the leopard and the lion fall out, 
or the variegated one brings gifts of reconciliation, but then 
the herdsman will be angry. The net drawn on all sides can 
be sundered only by arms, but so much the better for me. 
I shall crop the luxuriant clover and scorn their gifts. Let 
those take the gifts who prefer to live in dishonour. " 


I B 

The Fabulous Poem of the Priest Zwingli Concern- 
ing AN Ox AND MANY OTHER AnIMALS, REFERRING 

TO Current Events 
(Autumn 1510) 

I SHALL tell you of a garden fenced in and protected by a 
strong hedge, having high hills in one place, and in 
another are heard rivers flowing by. Here dwells a stout 
ox of beautiful red colour, a hairy, fine forehead, a broad 
chest, and large horns. From his neck hangs down the fine 
flesh. This ox feeds on the green grass from the garden, 
and if he becomes thirsty he drinks the cold water, and thus 
in beastly fashion is well provided for. He is hated only 
by blind fortune, which enviously desires nothing sweet to 
be without bitterness. It ordered cats to join themselves 
to this ox, and they are the sly keepers of the ox and by 
them alone is he led in all matters (thus there were at one 
time three sisters, who between them had only one eye, and 
this Medusa possessed). By the side of the ox there is 
always present also a faithful dog, by the name of Lycisca, 
who makes known to the ox the treacherous plans of the 
animals, in order that he might the more readily frustrate 
the plans with the aid of the Fauns, whom rightly he hon- 
oured in his heart, whereby he always remained in good 
health. Even though the lion attacked him and roared 
cruelly, and many other animals, both large and small, 
he attacked them all boldly, so that badly gored they were 
hardly able to regain their lair. Thus the ox came out 

31 


32 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

of every battle unconquered. Since then the other animals 
could do nothing with blows or with words. We shall see 
how then this ox was duped. Soon the leopard slyly, 
according to his wont, came to the ox. He praises the deed 
of the ox and the glory of it and says that were the ox to 
make a reputation for himself also in a foreign land no one 
else would equal him. He bribes the cats with large pres- 
ents (the highest aim of the cats), that they might not 
cease until the ox had entered into an alliance with the 
leopard. Then the dog protested loudly, but without 
avail, for the ox is drawn by the cats. When then the 
leopard had brought the stupid ox by means of deceit into 
his league, he leads him now here, now there, far, far away. 
Thus the poor ox was betrayed by the cats, so that he con- 
sidered it his duty to aid the leopard by his strength and 
diligent labour. He receives small and great injuries, 
blows, sword-strokes, in short acts as an anvil, and that 
the leopard may become wealthy, he is even ready to nourish 
a serpent. When the lion perceived the good fortune of 
the leopard, he hurried to the ox and addressed him, first 
having put aside his tail and mane. He tells the ox how 
anxious he is to enjoy his company, and asked him in friend- 
ly fashion to join him of his own free will and not forced 
thereto. The ox immediately told this to the cats. The 
latter said: "Comrade" (in order that they might not lose 
the favour and bribes of Sir Leopard) , "have patience ; for it 
is an uncertain matter to trust that chap, though he is a 
king and great lord; but rather remove yourself far from 
him. If he should ever be in need of food he would attack 
you. You see his lean face and hungry mouth; therefore 
be warned in time and let him be." The ox was obedient 
and informed the Hon that he would not accept his alhance. 
This angered the lion and he went about roaring, raging, and 
thinking how he might harm this ox. He bethinks himself 
that no friendship can flourish which is founded on selfish 
interests. Since then the leopard had won the ox over for 
selfish reasons, he would speedily let him go again if it 


The Fable of the Ox 33 

suited his purposes. Therefore the lion goes to the lair of 
the leopard and complains to him and relates his trouble. 
He requests aid from the leopard, though the latter had 
always despised him and had often injured him by robbing 
women and the like. This all should now be forgotten, 
providing their league would have a good reason. Soon 
the alliance was made and soon all animals were to be 
frightened. They soon came to the quarters of the fox and 
with their sharp claws wounded him badly, and their desire 
was to drive him away entirely from all his dens. The fox 
went to the keeper, limping along on three legs, and com- 
plained to him of his deep wounds and of the robbery, and 
he begged favour on condition that he would return all the 
fowls which he had ever taken treacherously from him; 
therefore he asked favour. The herdsman, though he had 
been injured on several occasions by the fox, forgets all this, 
and promises him aid and comfort in putting an end to 
the anger of the leopard and the lion. He hurries to the ox 
and asks him in mild fashion for aid, and says that he is 
suffering from the allies of the ox, that they were attacking 
his cattle and sheep and, dressed in lamb's clothing, were 
butchering everywhere. He does not mention the fox at 
all, of whom perhaps he was thinking most. After much 
exhortation the ox willingly bows to the wish of the herds- 
man. The dog barks for joy. He was greatly pleased at 
this turn of affairs, which gnawed at the heart of the cats 
and caused them great pain. Often they looked mournfully 
in the direction of the leopard. When the ox noticed this, 
he turned about slightly again ; but hurrying along he put an 
end to the delay. When the allies perceived this, they at 
once declared that they would make war against the ox, 
unless he immediately gave up his alliance with the keeper ; 
their object being to draw down upon the ox even the 
hatred of the keeper, so that the ox deserted by all would be 
lost and would be devoured by them. 

There was present a ram, who had a lock of hair on his 
chin, and hence assumes the position of a learned and wise 


34 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

man, though in reality he has little of learning or wisdom. 
He says: "I believe the ox will be ruined on account of the 
way he acts ; unless the herdsman protects him with his staff, 
or the league of the leopard and lion is dissolved, or the 
leopard again gives presents. But in the latter case the 
shepherd is to be feared. The net is spread and everything 
prepared. I shall be taught by the fall, to eat the green 
herbs and to resist all bribes and presents; for where bribes 
have free play, there liberty cannot continue to exist. 
Liberty is such a blessing that one reads the Spartans said 
to Hy dames ^ that they would fight for it not only with 
spears but also with axes. But where bribes besiege the 
hearts of animals, all friendship, liberty, and faithful alli- 
ance is despised." 

MEANING OF THIS POEM. 

By herdsman I mean the Pope, by dog the clergy, while 
by lion I mean the Roman king; the French king is repre- 
sented by the leopard, and the common people by the ox. 
Who were the cats? — Well, whoever is angry should await 
his opportunity. 

'The general of Xerxes in the third war of the Persians against the 
Greeks. 


II 

Account by Huldreich Zwingli of the Engagements 
between the french and the swiss hard by 
Ravenna and Pa via and in other Places, and of 
THE Convention at Baden in Switzerland, in the 
Year 1512 

(Auttimn 15 12) 

[De gestis inter Gallos et Helvetios ad Ravennam, Papiam aliisque locis, 
et conventu apud Thermas Helveticas anno 1512 relatio Udalrici Zwinglii, 
Autumn 1512. In Schuler and Schulthess ed., iv., 167-72. In Egliand Fins- 
ler ed., i., 30-7. Translated by Mr. Henry Preble. The Baden alluded to was 
in Canton Aagau, and only 14 miles north of Zurich. 

The "Account" was sent in October 15 12 to Joachim Watt, then in 
Vienna, by the hand of Zwingli 's brother James, who was about to enter the 
Scotch monastery there (it was so called because founded by the Irish monks 
who came to the Continent under Columbanus in the sixth century). The 
"Account" was one of those exhibitions of Latin composition made by Human- 
ists for their scholarly friends. They were often declared by their authors to 
be poor affairs and written at great haste, so that their faults must be forgiven 
— whereas they may have spent much time in elaborating them and were the 
best they could do. This particular "Account " was derived from such reports 
as had come in Zwingli's way, especially from parishioners who had come back 
from the war. The Swiss had been the allies of the Pope. Opposed as 
Zwingli was to the mercenary service, and to war in general, he thought at that 
time that it was even commendable to aid the Pope. He changed his mind 
later. In 15 13 and 151 5 he was in Italy as chaplain of the Glarus contingent. 

Immediately preceding the "Account" in the editions is the following 
letter to Vadian, written because he had not acknowledged it: 

Huldreich Zwingli to Joachim Watt, the philosopher, greeting: 

I could not have wondered enough at the tardiness of your writing, my dear 
Joachim, if I had not known the interruptions to which you are subject and 
the press of business under which you labour. For my affection for you is of 
such a character that it thirsts for as many letters from you as the Danube 
has drops of water; and if they are not forthcoming it pants continually as with 

35 


36 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

a burning fever. I have sent to you a certain report [the "Account "] roughly 
drawn up and hastily written, which you will make allowance for as you know 
I wish. For you know that I belong to that kind of men whom you destroy 
if you do not make allowance for them. For poor and worthless trifles are set 
down at their first suggestion and with no polishing, just as they fall. 

I beseech you to be as kind to my brother [James] and to the other, Valen- 
tin [Tschudi], as you can, if they are with you. Another one also is sent, Lud- 
wig Roesch, by his brother, pastor of the parish of Wye [St. GaUen], [he is] 
the grandson by his daughter of my Httle old chaplain ; and he is commended 
to your sound judgment. Whatever kindness you do him you shall receive 
a return for; it shall not be in vain. 

If you wish to know what news there is with us, there is a good deal going 
on, but all is uncertain. Every day we receive messengers from the Pope or 
Caesar [the Emperor], the Milanese, the Venetians, the Savoyards, and the 
French, and send others to them. I will attempt to write you these in such 
good shape (if I only can) as not to greatly disgust you, I trust, although my 
workshop brings forth nothing except what belongs to the moment. 

I am applying my ignorant self to the study of Greek and Latin. So take 
good care that your toil and labour do not come to naught. What is to be 
taken in hand after the "Introduction" of Chrysoloras [so he calls, as was 
usual, the " Erotemata," i. e., interrogatives, which was the first Greek grammar 
in use in the West, and whose earliest edition appeared in Venice in 1484. The 
author lived c. 1355-1415] is done? I do not know who has stirred me up to 
the study of Greek unless it is God; for I do not do it on account of glory, for 
which I do not look, but solely for the sake of sacred hterature. I commemo- 
rate Arbogastus [Strubius] with my little praises without conceit. If the 
laurel pinches the hair, soften it with a laurel cake, t. e., a trifle (try something 
easier in the same line), for Henry Loreti of Glarus has been crowned with the 
poet's wreath by the Emperor [Maximilian] at Cologne. 

From our house, Feb. 23, 1513.] 

SINCE the defamation of our Brothers-in-arms^ is con- 
stantly flying abroad on swift wing, and since that which 
the event itself stamps with approval as rightly and justly 
done is undergoing most unfair distortion through the slan- 
derous words of wrangling detractors, I have determined to 
sketch for you with laconic brevity and thus all the more 
vigorously the true position of our commonwealth. Let 
me pass by, therefore, the terms under which a treaty was 
entered upon and concluded between the Most Blessed 
Vicar of Christ, Julius Second, and our allied forces; I call 
them Brothers-in-arms and Allies all the more gladly because 
it is reported that some fool or worthless wretch (a Pytha- 
' The Swiss. 


The Italian Campaign of 15 12 37 

gorean ferule ought to be laid upon him for his early ripe im- 
pertinence in thus venturing to wag his tongue) has stated that 
we should more strictly be denominated traitors and conspira- 
tors than allied forces. I might throw a morsel to this snarl- 
ing cur and, since he is pleased to draw inferences from the 
individual to the general and universal, I might say: "Does it 
follow that because a certain man has shown himself the assas- 
sin of his mother coimtry, all his townsmen are or ought to be 
called matricides ? ' ' Could anything more ridiculous be said ? 

But be it enough to show how the King of the French ^ 
(who, having laid siege to the Church of Christ, has been 
most incontinently flattered all this while with the honorary 
title "Most Christian") has worried and subdued the Vene- 
tians in a protracted war of many battles, and those no 
child's play either; how he has ravaged or taken away their 
cities, and has crowned his reckless insolence by engaging in 
hot encounter with the Most Blessed Head of Christendom, 
setting up an antipope^ at the instance of the Devil, as they 
say, and taking away Bologna, that mother of learning and 
nurse of pontifical law, as well as various other noble cities. 

Last Easter His Most Excellent Majesty, the King of 
Spain ^ (whom they now style "Most Christian King"), 
seeing that the bark of St. Peter was being tossed by the 
waves to the danger point, took pity upon the Church to 
such a degree that he hurriedly got together the best army 
he could and sent it forthwith to reinforce the troops of the 
Pope, which were still tarrying in the middle of Italy as 
during their winter quarters. This force — such is the delight 
as well as the skill of the race in war— made straight for 
Ravenna. When the lord of the French discovered this, 
he immediately gathered together the great forces that he 
had in the field against the Spaniards and their allies, the 
Venetians, and sent them to Ravenna. As soon as the 

' Louis XII. 

^ This was a mistake. It is true, however, that a French ecclesiastical 
council in 1510 resolved to refuse obedience to the Pope. 
3 Ferdinand the Catholic. 


38 The Works of Huldreich Zvvingli 

Spaniards got sight of them, they eagerly accepted battle 
and their courage was raised all the higher by the cunning 
of an engineer whose cleverness was worthy of Archimedes or 
Daedalus. He devised some light carts armed with scythes, 
and upon each of these he placed a small cannon, and they 
pushed these carts ahead of them by their hands or feet. 

The French army was commanded by a Grand Master' 
(a dignitary among the Lombards), who stationed the lan- 
cers [German mercenaries, Lanzknechts] in the van with 
the Swabians and Gascons next them, and flanked them 
with an imposing body of horsemen. He remained in the 
rear with the reserves. 

The Spanish army w^as smaller than the Venetian, for 
they had been battered in many conflicts and few were left, 
but they were united with a force of brave young warriors. 
Made one army, the two numbered thirty thousand men. 
Pushing their cannon forward when the signal for battle 
was given, they touched them off and rained forth a shower of 
balls. Thereupon, as the enemy's lancers hesitated, they say 
the Grand Master cried out: "What are you waiting for? 
Are you put there to be imbedded with iron balls like a 
target? O that you were now that unflinching band of 
allies who at sight of the foe roar like savage lions and charge 
with a rush. Up, soldiers, up; refuse not victory, ye M^ho 
have so long been wont to conquer and have not learned de- 
feat ! Rout the lines so often put to flight, break their ranks, 
give them swords and lances and javelins for their shot!" 
The rain of balls had now let up a little, and the Frenchmen 
began to advance on the double quick. The Spaniards 
lighted their rolling cannon and pushed them down with all 
their might into the midst of the enemy, inspiring the great- 
est terror in the lancers and hope of victory in themselves. 
Thus they came into close quarters so compactly and with 
such fire and valour that, though neither line yields, each is 
forced to stop frequently to take breath. Again and again 
they withdraw the wearied ranks and replace them with 
' Gaston de Foix, Duke of Nemours and nephew of Louis XII. 


The Italian Campaign of 15 12 39 

new ones, and so, giving and taking wounds, accompany 
the sun from his rising to his going down. 

Seeing how stubborn a fight it is to be, the Spaniards 
dash in so savagely that the contest becomes forthwith one 
of swords hand to hand where the battle is hottest. They 
maim and slash and butcher the Gascons and the cavalry — 
for of the lancers the larger part had already fallen, while a 
few had escaped by flight— till eight thousand men are 
slain. At this sight the Grand Master, raising his eyes to 
heaven, ground his teeth and cried: "Either this day shall 
be my last or I will not suffer the Spaniards thus to win a 
bloodless victory." Then, putting spurs to his horse and 
followed in a mass by the reserves, he charged so recklessly 
upon the foe that he was overwhelmed and fell fighting 
nobly. The rest, pitted against an enemy now thrown out 
of order and fearing nothing less than a fresh army, put him 
to flight and, winning the victory and the town, shut out 
the Spaniards and Venetians, who had gone forward some 
distance in their onslaught. Night put an end to the 
battle. Hannibal did not inspire the Romans and Italians 
with greater alarm after the disaster of Cannae, such were 
the lamentations on all sides at the French supremacy 
hanging over their heads, and such the prayers for mercy 
and help and comfort. 

Accordingly the allied forces, contemplating the situa- 
tion of the Mother of Christians, thought it would be a bad 
and dangerous precedent if they should allow the first best 
monarch to rage so far as to trample with impunity upon the 
common mother of the Faithful of Christ. With sudden zeal 
they began to hold meetings and determined to repair 
energetically the damaged affairs of Italy and the Church. 
TRe Cardinal of Santa Potentiana [Matthias Schinner^] 

' Matthias Schinner, here mentioned, was born in Muhlebach, in Upper 
Valais, Switzerland, in 1456, educated at Zurich and Como and became bishop 
of Sian (Sitten) in 1500. In 1509 Pope Julius II. appointed him legate in 
Switzerland, and he induced the Swiss to send troops to the Pope. But he 
subsequently lost their favour and was compelled to leave the countr - For 
his services the Pope made him a cardinal in 151 1. He belonged to the fight- 


40 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

(legate a latere) attended the conference and with entreaties 
and protestations urged them in the name of their compact 
to take the field at once. He had only money enough to 
give a pound to each soldier, yet, incredible as it seems, an 
army of twenty thousand of the choicest infantry was 
enrolled in six days and hastened under arms through the 
Tyrol, over the Adige (for passage had been granted by the 
Emperor, but secretly, because he was anxious to have the 
remainder of the agreement of Treves duly carried out), 
and past its bluffs and fortifications (they call them en- 
closures) to Verona, occupied as it was by the French and 
the lancers alike. The French abandoned the city before 
the Brothers-in-arms reached it. Thus the Emperor casually, 
yet in accordance with his purpose, paid the King of the 
French, through the flight of his men, the two hundred dol- 
lars— crowns they call them — which he had borrowed. 
Going in search of the enemy the army receives with great 
honour the Cardinal of Santa Potentiana (he is bishop of 
Sion) , and there they take counsel, having learned what had 
befallen the army of the Venetians. Presently these arrive 
with seven hundred cuirassiers and nearly five hundred 
light-armed foot-soldiers. They were Rascians, a Venetian 
tribe, and at sight of our forces showed such joy that it 
was a sort of premonition of success. Onward they marched, 
therefore, to a river (its name I did not hear and so do not 
know it),^ across which could be seen a formidable French 
encampment. The banks, of different elevation, were 
joined by a bridge, and the farther bank, Valleggio by name, ' 
had three very strong towers at the head of the bridge filled 

ing parsons, even as the Pope did, for he led the Swiss in person in the battle 
of Marignano in 1515, which was a bad defeat to the Swiss, and the Allies 
against the French in 1521, which resulted in the defeat of the French. In 
the early days of the Reformation he was on friendly footing with Luther and 
Zwingli, but like so many other prelates who had yielded intellectual assent 
to the theology of the Reformers, he could not bring himself to leave the Old 
Church, and in course of time advocated violent measures to suppress the 
Reformation. He died in Rome on September 30, 1522. 

* It was the Mincio. "15 miles south-west of Verona. 


The Italian Campaign of 15 12 41 

with armed men, while a neighboring height, strengthened 
by a solid and strongly garrisoned castle, still further secured 
the camp. There a shower of projectiles was kept up for 
some time from both sides until the cannon of the Venetians 
proved superior. The French were driven from the castle 
and towers and camp and our soldiers were supplied with an 
abundance of provisions. 

Marching on from there they came to a place called 
Pontevico ' [French Pontevin] and found it occupied by the 
French. A castle in the middle of the stream ^^ is connected 
by a double bridge with the two banks. The storming of 
the place had been made difficult by the cutting down of 
the bridge on the side where the army was approaching. 
Thereupon (so vigorous for any kind of task is the youthful 
band of the Brothers-in-arms) they make a feint of swim- 
ming across in sight of the enemy and building a bridge imder 
cover of the Venetian cannon. Then some of the best of 
them climb down the bank and, finding no one to prevent 
them, swim across, launch' the enemy's boats, and cross 
over the bridge thus extemporized. But the enemy had 
already fled and they caught only such as they reached with 
the cannon from afar. After this place I understand that 
another was captured, strong enough in men but not in 
courage. For, having an unjust cause, the French easily 
lost heart and furthermore had been deprived of the support 
of the Germans. 3 They knew, too, with what sort of enemy 
they had to deal provided they should come down to battle. 

Seeing no chance to trust themselves safely to the open 
field anywhere, they shut themselves up in Pavia," to try 
what the chances of fate might bring, and began to collect 
there all the supplies possible. Then the most vigorously 
impetuous of the allied forces intercepted a great number of 
their fatted oxen and furnished the whole army with fresh 

' 19 miles south-south-west of Brescia. 
= The Oglio. 

3 The Lanzknechts had been ordered by the Emperor Maximilian to 
return home. 

  On the Ticino, which joins the Po 33^ miles south-south-east of Pavia. 


42 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

meat for many days. Huldreich von Sax, leader of the army 
of the Brothers-in-arms, a man as universally prudent as 
courageous, determined to lay siege to the city since to storm 
it seemed impracticable. They had already reached the 
bank of the Po ' when the French made a second attempt to 
prevent their crossing. But no obstacle is insurmountable 
to him who really works. I must describe here an episode 
which, though hard to believe, is still true as well as amusing. 
There were among the French eight hundred of the Lancers, 
survivors of the disaster of Ravenna. When some of our 
men swam across the Po ' to fix the first supports for a bridge 
on the farther bank, these Lancers rushed out to stop the 
undertaking. Meanwhile all the youthful band of Brothers- 
in-arms, being practised swimmers, runners, and jumpers, 
had thrown off their clothes and, clinging to their spears, 
were swimming naked across the Po, ' to engage with the foe, 
who seemed to be given them by God for constant practice 
in the art of war. For they always burst forth into a war- 
like laugh whenever they have to engage with the Lancers, 
not because these are un warlike and defeated without effort, 
but because they have much oftener defeated them than 
been defeated by them, and yet it is always part of that 
force that is sent to confront them. The Lancers took to 
their heels and got themselves back into the town, though 
they saw the shining whiteness of our bodies. Thus the 
Po ' was crossed without hindrance, and they made vigorous 
preparations to besiege the city. After a few days' siege it 
was captured in the following manner. A few challenges 
indicate to their unsuspecting minds how things are likely 
to turn out. Six Frenchmen at once challenge four of the 
Brothers-in-arms and are slain, then two call out one — 
pleasant news to hear — and that a man of Glarus. He, 
being used to hunting the wild beasts of the mountains, 
carried an arquebuse on his shoulder, and having made the 
battle equal by killing one of his antagonists with the bullet 
from his gun, attacked the other with his sword. Then, as 

'It should be the Ticino, a branch of the Po. 


The Italian Campaign of 15 12 43 

they fought, another Brother came up and finished the al- 
most conquered Frenchman. Then the French, losing 
confidence in their defences, their forces, and their courage, 
begin to meditate a retreat as soon as a fit opportunity 
offers, and see that it can be accomplished by means of the 
lancers. They address them in these words: 

"You see, excellent fellow fighters, that either by chance or 
by the hand of fate, the fortune of our French arms is grow- 
ing daily worse. Therefore we must take measures for our 
escape, since we cannot for victory. You see there is no 
hope left. You see nothing remains to us short of death 
save flight alone. Ah, how vigorously you have laboured 
in these days to have the palm of victory bestowed upon 
you ! Add valour to your valour now, though the day be your 
last. Let us heavy-armed and light-armed infantry guard 
the way as long as the part of the city that looks towards 
the Mincio ' is free from the foe, that the means of getting 
out may not be cut off, and that we may all be restored to 
safety together. Be it enough for those who could not win 
to save their lives, in order (I use an expression of Demosthe- 
nes) to win another day. We leave all the engines of war 
in your hands, that none may think himself betrayed; for 
in them is our best hope of safety." 

The unsuspicious Lancers suffered the French to retire 
with whatever they chose, thinking that the}^ would make 
good their words by their deeds, but they no sooner got across 
the Mincio' than, plunging into full flight, they abandoned 
the Lancers. When the people of Pavia saw this, they began 
to promise a month's pay to both the soldiers of the Venetian 
army and the Brothers-in-arms, on condition of not being 
plundered. Our soldiers were possessed with a desire to 
fight with the Lancers, and some of them got thereby all 
they wanted. The cannon had been posted in the zoologi- 
cal garden outside the city. A hundred men from the differ- 
' It should be the Ticino. 


44 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

ent divisions were detailed to watch these, and it was not 
yet noon when the women and old men, whom the Lancers 
had not viewed with the least suspicion, began to slip out 
first. They set up ladders against the walls and signalled 
to our soldiers to enter. The hundred who had been set to 
guard the cannon run up rashly enough, mount the ladders 
with a few others, leap the walls, and form themselves in 
line within the city unknown to the whole army, for eager- 
ness for battle kept every one busier fighting than spreading 
news. Thereupon they would have all been cut down to a 
man had not the chance to fight been taken from the Lancers 
as well as from themselves by the very narrowness of the 
streets. They had their cannon, while the invaders had 
nothing but the weapons in their hands and their fiery 
courage, and they were often forced to dodge into some corner 
as the balls went flying about. They devote their special 
energies to capturing some piece of ordnance. Presently 
they succeed in turning about two, all ready to light, and, 
firing them into the enemy, drive them back more and more. 
Then some one scaled the wall and cried out: "Victory! 
The city is ours!" But the army refused to believe the 
soldier, and forbade approaching nearer the wall. "The 
day was lost," they said; "they were not aware there were 
any friends in the city." At length some, shaken by the 
stentorian uproar, mount the walls and crushing forward 
the vainly resisting Lancers drive them into the river. 
Only fifty of the eight hundred were taken alive. Meanwhile 
the Brothers-in-arms are let in through the gates. The 
Venetian cavalry dash swiftly ahead to see if they can come 
up with any stragglers among the retreating foe, but catch 
very few. Then a shout was raised in the whole town, 
proclaiming Julius and the Swiss victorious. The castle 
still held out, but was taken two days later and with it 
eight heavy cannon, ten long ones (so-called Dragons) 
and ten field-pieces, some of which had belonged to the 
Venetians. When they saw them they embraced them, 
wet them with their tears, and kissed the image of St. 


The Italian Campaign of 1 5 1 2 45 

Mark, so much to heart had they taken their long-suffered 
disgrace. The remaining cities that had not surrendered, 
sent envoys and surrendered themselves into the power of 
the Cardinal^ and the Allies. Meanwhile the Spaniards 
took Genua by storm, and Asti begged suppliantly for 
peace, and surrendered to the Holy Alliance. Thus, freed 
by the Brothers-in-arms, all Italy, both the Ligurian coast 
and Lombardy, proclaimed that they owed as much to the 
allies as Greece set free once owed to Titus Quinctius. "^ All 
through the cities and towns and country trumpets were 
sounded, bells were rung, teachers, monks, and orators 
mounted the platform to publish the Allies as God's People 
to punish the enemies of the Bride of the Crucified Lord. 
The nobles flock together from all sides to see the victorious 
army, and send gifts of wine and grain, and all the world 
shows great gratitude with dancing and merry-making. 
The victorious army remained several days at Pavia and 
put to rest an insurrection that had begun to raise its head. 
I refrain from describing it since it ended thus quietly. 
Then envoys were sent from both sides to settle the affairs 
of the Milanese. Three hundred of the Florentines who were 
with the French obtained from the Cardinal and Huldreich 
von Sax permission to depart unmolested after the French 
had disappeared in scattered flight over Mont Cenis, but 
afterwards, having got a glimmer of hope that they were 
going to renew hostilities, they turned to follow them 
in contravention of their oath, and were captured by 
the Venetians, who were in friendly alliance with the re- 
gion. Several strongholds are still occupied by the French 
garrisons, which it is hoped will be driven out in a few days, 
when they see that no confidence is to be placed in their 
monarch. 

A convention was ordered to assemble at Baden, Hhe gen- 
eral municipal headquarters of the AUies. Here there came 

'/. e., Schinner. 

' Flamininus, the conqueror of Philip of Macedon in the second Mace- 
donian War, 197 B. c, and "the Hberator of the Greeks." 
3 In August-September, 1512. 


46 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

together the envoys of His HoHness the Pope, Julius II., the 
Emperor, the Cardinal of Santa Potentiana [Schinner] (Dele- 
gate a /a/erc) , the King of Spain, the King of the French (but 
that was kept secret), the Duke of Savoy, the Duke of Lor- 
raine, the Venetians, and the Milanese, each with their special 
demands. There you might see the caution and cunning of 
mankind, how some twine one thing into another and get 
at their object indirectly, others say the opposite of what 
they mean, because the earlier words of another lord seem 
likely to hinder them from blocking him off. The Emperor 
himself caused the greatest confusion of all, for when it 
had been agreed upon in secret that Maximilian, the son of 
the banished Duke Louis Sforza, should be restored to the 
throne, he declared, to the great astonishment of every- 
body, that Lombardy, as an imperial province, ought not 
to receive a ruler from any one but the Empire. This the 
Allies took very ill, declaring that the Emperor had promised 
to send cavalry but had kept only the letter of his promise ; 
the brunt of the war had been borne by themselves and the 
Pope and the Venetians. The Emperor now wanted to 
swallow up what he had contributed nothing to win. These 
controversies did not, however, degenerate into conflict. 
Another delegation arrived from the Holy Father Julius 
and the Cardinals, saying that the Brothers-in-arms had 
been included in the book of Rescuers of the Church. ^ His 
Holiness was grateful and would grant whatever they 
wanted. The majority, nay all, ask for the right to carry 
on their banners the picture of the Crucifixion ; the Men of 
Glarus, the picture of the Resurrection. In final assembly 
it was decreed that Maximilian, son of Louis, be restored 
to his father's throne, etc. 

I should have written more (for this is not a hundredth 
part of the whole) , beloved Joachim, had not urgent mat- 
ters called me to other things. I hope you will read in 

' A reference to the papal Bull Etsi Romani in which the Swiss are called 
"Rescuers of the Church." A German translation of the Bull is in W. 
Oechsli, Quellenbuch zur Schweizer-Geschichte, i., 25955., and of the Account, 
here given, pp. 255-259. 


The Italian Campaign of 15 12 47 

the same spirit that I have written, and grant me indul- 
gence, for in the space of three hours it certainly was 
not vouchsafed unto me to write more elaborately and 
more fully. 


Ill 

The Missing Dialogues 

REFERENCES in the Zwingli Correspondence show that 
ZwingH wrote at least two Dialogues which were 
passed among his friends in manuscript, and which were 
perhaps intended by him for publication. But there is no 
evidence that they were ever put in print, at all events no 
copy either in manuscript or print is extant. Of the nature 
of the first we cannot even conjecture. In the letter of 
Johannes Dingnauer to Zwingli, dated Dec. 6, 15 14, occur 
these words: "But what the learned among us think of your 
Dialogue, and especially that unique most learned specimen 
of all learned men, Erasmus of Rotterdam, you will hear 
when we meet." (In Schuler and|Schulthess ed., vii., 9; in 
Egli, Finsler and Koehler ed., vii., 20 sq.) Five years later 
we have several allusions to a Dialogue entitled "The Pest," 
and which was suggested by Zwingli' s experiences with that 
scourge. The first reference occurs in the letter of Kaspar 
Hedio to Zwingli, dated Dec. 10, 1519: "The second ques- 
tion that you ask relates to 'The Pest.' The word 'pest' 
was of evil significance till you made it a word to which a 
good meaning can be attached, for the 'pest' which wretch- 
edly distresses miserable mortals is indeed bad, but 'The 
Pest' of Zwingli is good." (In Schuler and Schulthess ed., 
vii., 100; in Egli, Finsler and Koehler ed., vii., 237 sq.). The 
second reference is in Zwingli's letter to Oswald Myconius, 
dated Dec. 31, 15 19: "As to my 'Pest' about which you 
wanted to be informed (in your second letter, I think) — I 

48 


The Missing Dialogue 49 

wish that it and every sickness mentioned in it were extinct. 
When Hedio wrote me he said that Nepos was going to write 
to me about it; as yet no one has written, neither Nepos, 
nor his son-in-law, nor his father-in-law. He was at Rhe- 
nanus's in Selestadt. I hear that it is commonly reported 
that the learned approve it but fear for me because it is too 
bitter. But I could have wished that it [the plague itself] 
had been sweeter to me at the time when it was slaying me. 
For what are called 'plagues' therein by me have no less 
an evil effect upon me than that one which threatened to 
send me to Orcus." (In Schulerand Schulthess ed., vii., 103 
sq.; in Egli, Finsler and Koehler ed., vii., 245.) The last 
allusion to this lost production is in the letter of James Ne- 
pos to Zwingli, dated April 17, 1520: "I had sent your Dia- 
logue, most cultured Master, by the lame bookseller before 
I went to see my friends. Send it back, if you think best 
(as I said to you in person). I will see that it is put into 
print." Nepos was a proofreader of Froben, the great 
printer of Basel. (In Schuler and Schulthess ed,, vii., 130; 
in Egli, Finsler and Koehler ed., vii., 301.) 


IV 

The Labyrinth 

(Spring 1 51 6) 

[Der Labyrinth. In Schuler and Schtilthess ed., ii., 2, 245-51 ; in modern 
literary German, pp. 251-6. In Egli and Finsler ed., i., 53-60. Translated by 
Walter Lichtenstein, Ph.D., librarian of Northwestern University, Evanston, 
Illinois. 

This poem is a great improvement upon its predecessor. It is a fruit of 
Zwingli's humanistic studies, and tells in a pleasing manner one of the most 
familiar classical tales. He has given us himself the moral he wished to draw, 
and there is no evidence that he had any other design. But others, as for in- 
stance Schuler and Schulthess, disregarding ZwingH's own statement, have 
considered it an allegorical poem like that about the Ox and so have made this 
table of identifications: The one-eyed lion is Spain — Aragon; the crowned eagle 
is Maximilian; the winged lion is Venice; the cock is France; the ox is the 
Swiss; the cats are those who entice the Swiss to become mercenaries; the bear 
is the abbot of St. Gall; the ring is the law of Schwyz and Glarus; the dogs are 
the allies of the Swiss cantons.] 

IF you are surprised at this construction, hearken and 
immediately the whole affair will be described; it is 
known as the Labyrinth and was first thought of in Egypt, 
later it became known in Italy, Lemnos, and Candia. It 
was builded very neatly, as you will see, in accordance with 
the plans of Daedalus of Athens, in Crete (now known as 
Candia). The expense of construction was borne by Minos, 
who wished to hide therein the shame of his wife, Pasiphae, 
who, having had intercourse with a bull, gave birth to a 
monstrosity, which from head to waist was human, while 
the rest of its body resembled that of a strong bull. This 
terrible creature had to be fed on human beings. Minos 
imprisoned the Minotaur in the Labyrinth and gave him 
only human beings to eat, especially Athenians, whom he 

50 


The Labyrinth 51 

punished in this fashion for having slain his son, Androgeos, 
without cause. All this Theseus learned when he came to 
his father ^Egeus. This young hero, who had already slain 
the robber Sciron, the murderer Corynetes, and others, 
besides capturing the Marathonian bull, was accompanied 
by Heracles. The anger of Theseus was aroused by the 
means Minos took to revenge himself, and he determined to 
put an end to this disgrace to the fair name of Athens. 
Therefore he sailed to Crete in order to battle valiantly. 
When Ariadne, daughter of King Minos, saw him, she fell 
in love with him and sent secretly to him, and when he came 
she spoke : ' ' Theseus, do not fear. Though you are compelled 
to fight this monster, you will not be conquered. Remember 
well, however, the entrance to the Labyrinth, and do not 
allow yourself to be made insane by the dreary horror of the 
place. For this terrible battle take along this roll of thread, 
which unroll behind you, in order that you may regain the en- 
trance; otherwise after the battle with the monster is over 
you will die miserably in the solitary place. " Theseus took 
the thread and his club, and boldly hurried to the entrance 
of the Labyrinth. First he opened the creaking door and 
then entered the cave. It must be understood that the 
Labyrinth was so constructed that the sound of one vault 
re-echoed in all the others, and the sound broke in upon the 
stillness as if the bull was bellowing near by. But Theseus 
did not allow himself to be frightened, and he soon became 
accustomed to this sound. Then again the dreariness 
frightened him, the cave, so curiously constructed, had now a 
long walk, then suddenly sharp corners and narrow passage- 
ways, changing soon after to chambers with high ceilings, 
so that he could feel the air, and then again he had to crawl 
through sand. There were many doors and unexpected 
windings, as well as descents, hallways, blind passages, and 
the like. Furthermore the walls were disfigured with 
images of cruel animals of all kinds. Thus he saw the 
image of a terrible lion, single-eyed, which would have frozen 
his heart with fear; but he bethought himself in time to 


52 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

examine this deception, and he soon discovered that the lion 
was merely a figure on the tapestry. This greatly encour- 
aged him. A little later he caught sight of a picture, which 
seemed to him very terrifying. It was a crowned eagle 
looking in all directions, with its mouth wide open and hav- 
ing terrible claws and large wings and tail. He reflected, 
however, that the crown signified virtue rather than anger, 
and confidently passed on. Then he came to a cock, whose 
comb stood upright in elegant fashion as if he were afraid 
of no animal, be it large or small, and looking as if he wished 
to fight all. The cock had attracted a large number of 
hens and was showing them food, and in the middle of them 
all the cock himself was sitting. Theseus did not permit 
this to worry him, but concluded that these animals after 
wandering about for some time had lost their way and had 
been unable to regain the exit alive. Therefore Theseus, 
thread in hand, continued on his way. Suddenly he saw 
another image, which frightened him greatly. It was a 
terrible winged lion, who closed the path; Theseus wondered 
whether it was a griffin, but approaching closer, he bethought 
himself that wings are intended for flight, not for standing 
still, if the animal is attacked; he recognised it to be a lion 
non-ferocious, but full of deceit. He was intermixed with 
the birds lest he be recognised as a beast-of-prey and he 
could never escape unattacked. Boldly advancing he saw 
an intelligent, beautiful ox, led by many cats, each of which 
fancied he was able to lead him according to its desire, so 
that it might jump upon him. Some drew him this way, 
others that way; in front, behind, and everywhere walked 
on the reckless crew, so that Theseus recognised easily how 
much they were annoying the ox; but since they were so 
roguish, he let them be in order to pass on. Thus he soon 
saw an ugly representation, which frightened him greatly. 
It was a bear, an untamed animal, in order that it might 
terrify all the more. But since he thought it a mere picture 
he approached and saw that an iron ring passed through 
the bear's nose and in front some one was beating and 


The Labyrinth 53 

taming him. Theseus cast all fear aside, thinking the bear 
would be tamed in due time. Thus he passed on unharmed 
and soon went through another door, where he saw a large 
number of dogs, which he despised, for he saw they were 
mere images, since they were motionless. Soon thereafter 
he heard the monster pawing and roaring in terrible fashion. 
Therefore he strengthens himself against fear, saying to 
himself: "If you overcome this monster, you will bring for- 
tune to yourself and great honour; also you will release the 
people of Athens from this onerous tyrant. Forward then ; 
fortune favours the brave. If fortune does not smile, but 
deceives you, it is still something for one to have attempted 
the great deed. For he alone dies bravely, who perishes 
while attempting to do a brave deed. " 

Thus he came to the beast, who, pleased, raised itself 
and launched itself against Theseus, thinking first to throw 
the hero to earth and then devour him. But Theseus de- 
fended himself bravely and threw the roll of thread into the 
mouth of the beast, so that it could not readily open its 
jaws. Then fighting bravely he gave the monster so many 
blows that it finally was weakened and at last was tamed by 
death. Then Theseus took out the thread. Thus retribution 
always comes in the end to all who are presumptuous. God 
does not forget, however long He delays.* 

Now you shall learn that this Labyrinth signifies the 
worry and work of this world; but Theseus, the bold hero, 
stands for the strong, good man of honour, who always does 
right and sacrifices himself for his native land. The monster 
signifies shame, sin, and vice; but the thread, intelligence, 
which teaches us to follow the straight path of duty if we 

» [The sentiment of the German rhyme is familiar through the English of 
Longfellow, in his poem "Retribution," a translation of one of the Sinn- 
gedichte of Friedrich von Logau (see Complete Works of Henry Wadsworth 
Longfellow, Cambridge edition, ed., H. E. Scudder, Boston, 1908, p. 616):. 

"Though the mills of God grind slowly, yet they grind exceeding small; 

Though with patience he stands waiting, with exactness grinds he all." 

W. L.3 
But the German poet echoed Greek poets. 


54 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

wish to cover ourselves with glory. The maiden Ariadne 
signifies the reward of virtue, which no one ever regrets. 

Now look at men, how without reason they wander 
around in the Labyrinth without the thread; therefore they 
will hardly be able to come to the light again. I fear that 
they have decided to dwell here forever with their following, 
though we are only guests here, strangers, exiles, sufferers, 
and wanderers; thence when we think ourselves to be well 
settled our souls are taken from us. In us there is no love 
of God, which would turn aside from as much evil, and 
would lead us to despise all earthly treasures, in order to 
gain God more easily. The world is so full of deceit that we 
have no more the image of Christ than the heathen. Yea 
we are worse ; for the heathen do all deliberately, so that re- 
pentance and misery does not come over them. We, on the 
other hand, in our conceit hurry all matters along thought- 
lessly. Therefore we are all in trouble. Whoever commits 
crime and murder is considered a bold man. Did Christ 
teach us that? "Greater love hath no man than this, that 
a man lay down his life for his friends." [John xv., 13.] 
See how for a little gain we barter away our lives; thus we 
plague our neighbours, and injure all natural right with wars, 
quarrels, and other matters, so that we might think the 
hellish furies to have broken loose. Tell me what have we 
of Christians more than the name ? No one shows patience or 
wisdom. Most of all the princes have learnt nothing except 
to pursue their own desires. As soon as a notion enters 
their heads, everything else must cease. But when God 
allows peace to shine upon us, men become beasts. In 
order, however, not to stir the fire (for men are very angry, 
when abused), I have bethought myself of the pleasant 
fashion of a series of fables, which you can easily under- 
stand. I shall tell how each animal wandered up and down 
the Labyrinth and shall request them all to acquire better 
manners. ^ 

•The promise was apparently unfulfilled. 


V 
Transcript of the Pauline Epistles 

IN Egli and Finsler ed., i., 6i (the page is really not num- 
bered), mention is made of Zwingli's transcript of the 
PauHne Epistles made from Erasmus's Greek Testament, 
which appeared from the enterprising house of Froben in 
Basel in 1516, — the first Greek Testament. There is no evi- 
dence that Zwingli owned a copy of this edition — so his trans- 
cript was made from the copy in the library of the monastery 
at Einsiedeln. The transcript was finished in March, 15 17, 
and is still extant, being in theZwingli Museum in Zurich. It 
has numerous marginal annotations, many of them doubtless 
of a much later date. These have been copied and will ap- 
pear in the volume of Egli, Finsler and Koehler ed., devoted 
to Zwingli's exegetical writings. The transcript is very 
neatly done. Zwingli boasted that he had committed these 
Epistles in Greek to memory ! He was very fond of showing 
off his attainments in Greek, frequently in rather an amusing 
fashion. But then he always follows his quotation of a 
Greek word, or at most a clause, with a translation, so the 
reader is helped out. In my biography of Zwingli (2d ed., 
121 sq. and 135 sq.) is much information about this tran- 
script, including a special excursus and a photographed 
facsimile of one of its pages. Dr. Philip Schaff in his 
Church History, vii., 31, gives the text and a translation 
of the last lines which Zwingli wrote as the colophon of 
his transcript. 


55 


VI 


Christian Song Written by Huldreich Zwingli 
when he was attacked by the pestilence 


(End of 1519) 


[Ein christenlich gsang, gestelt durch H. Z., als er mit pestilentz angrifiEen 
ward. In Schuler and Schulthess ed., ii., 2, 270-2. In modem literary 
German, translated, pp. 272-4. In Egli and Finsler ed., i., 67-9. Trans- 
lation reprinted from my life of Zwingli, pp. 132-4. 

This is the most successful of Zwingli 's preserved poetry. It was the 
memorial of his serious illness from the plague which in 1519 carried ofE 
nearly half of the population of Zurich. Though unadapted to singing it 
has been given a tune and is found in many hymn-books of the 15th and i6th 
centuries, published in Zurich.] 

L — At the Beginning of the Illness. 
So let it be ! 


Help, Lord God, help 

In this trouble ! 

I think Death is at the door. 

Stand before^ me, Christ; 

For Thou hast overcome him ! 

To Thee I cry: 

If it is Thy will. 

Take out the dart, 

Which wounds me 

Nor lets me have an hour's 

Rest or repose! 

Will'st Thou however 

That Death take me 

In the midst of my days. 


Do what Thou wilt; 

Me nothing lacks. ^ 

Thy vessel am I ; 

To make or break altogether. 

For, if Thou takest away 

My spirit 

From this earth, 

Thou dost it, that it^ may not 

grow worse, 
Nor spot 
The pious lives and ways of 

others. 


' In the sense of "protect." 

'The words may also mean equally well, "nothing shall be too much for 


^ "It," i.e., my spirit. 


56 


Song: Written when Attacked with Pestilence 

o 


57 


//. — In the Midst of his Illness. 

My tongue is dumb, 

It cannot speak a word. 

My senses are all blighted. 

Therefore is it time 

That Thou my fight 

Conductest hereafter; 

Since I am not 

So strong, that I 

Can bravely 

Make resistance 

To the Devil's wiles and treach- 
erous hand. 

Still will my spirit 

Constantly abide by Thee, how- 
ever he rages. 


Console me, Lord God, console 

me! 
The illness increases. 
Pain and fear seize 
My soul and body. 
Come to me then. 
With Thy grace, O my only 

consolation ! 
It^ will surely save 
Everyone, who 
His heart's desire 
And hopes sets 
On Thee, and who besides 
Despises all gain and loss. 
Now all is up. 


III. — During Convalescence. 


Sound, Lord God, sound ! 
I think I am 
Already coming back.^ 
Yes. if it please Thee, 
That no spark of sin 
Rule me longer on earth, 
Then my lips must 
Thy praise and teaching 
Bespeak more 
Than ever before. 
However it may go, 
In simplicity and with 

danger. 
Although I must 
The punishment of death 

' "It," i.e., Thy grace. 
2 I.e., to health, to myself. 


no 


Sometime endure. 

Perhaps with greater anguish 

Than would now have 

Happened, ^ Lord ! 

Since I came 

So near ; '^ 

So will I still 

The spite and boasting 

Of this world 

Bear joyfully for the sake of 

the reward 
By Thy help, 
Without which nothing can be 

perfect. 


3 I.e., if I had died this time. 
■* I.e., to death's door. 


VII 

Advice of one who Desires with his Whole Heart 
THAT Due Consideration be Paid both to the 
Dignity of the Pope and to the Peaceful De- 
velopment OF THE Christian Religion 

(Late summer of 1520) 

[Consilium cuiusdam ex animo cupientis esse consultum et pontificis 
dignitati et Christianse religionis tranquillitati. Translated by Mr. Henry 
Preble. In Schuler and Schulthess ed., iii., 2-6. But its authors were Eras- 
mus, and for the "Defence" Thomas Blarer. See Egli and Finsler ed., i., 
434, n. I. See preface to this volume.] 

IT is the part of a Christian spirit to be heartily devoted 
to the Vicar of Christ, and to desire that his authority- 
remain intact. On the other hand, it belongs to the pious 
duty of the Pope to hold nothing of his own so dear as not 
gladly to exalt above it the glory of Christ his Lord and the 
general peaceful development of the Christian religion. 
And those who are devoted to the authority and glory of 
the Pope, should show wisdom in their devotion. This 
they will do if they champion them by means which are 
approved by even the unspoken judgments of the pious 
and good. Otherwise no one does injury to the Papal 
dignity more than they, who would have it guarded and 
defended by no other safeguards than human fear and 
rewards. Therefore the more zealous a man is for the 
Christian Religion, the more deeply he is pained by this 
disturbance that has arisen at the hands of certain persons^ 
who have embittered Luther into writing somewhat unre- 

' Allusion to Tetzel, Wimpina, Prierias, and many others. 

58 


Advice on the Pope and His Authority 59 

strainedly, and have goaded the otherwise gentle heart of 
the Pope' into deahng with Luther more severely than is 
perhaps expedient for the peace and quiet of the Republic 
of Christ. The character of Luther's writings I am not at 
present considering, but only suggesting that we take into 
account not only what befits Luther but what makes for 
the peace of the Church. For often and openly have offences 
been ignored, that greater disturbance might not arise. 
In the first place it is distinctly enough admitted that 
the thing started from bad beginnings. It sprang, no doubt, 
from hostility to the good literature now springing up even 
among the Germans, and hostility to the languages now 
showing new life everywhere. For those who thus far, 
without being fortified by these things, have been held to 
be teachers of consummate learning, think their own in- 
fluence is being overshadowed by the brilliancy of them. 
Certain persons, therefore, have left no stone unturned to 
crush them, differing greatly in this from the Roman Pontiff, 
who has the highest respect for these studies. Further- 
more, as to Luther, the largest part of this evil must be laid 
at the door of those who have preached and written about 
indulgences and the power of the Roman Pontiff things 
which no educated and religious ear could bear, so that as 
far as the beginning of this disturbance is concerned Luther 
may fairly seem to have been influenced by devotion and 
zeal in the cause of the Christian Religion. Moreover, those 
who do not excuse his beginning afterwards to write more 
bitterly, yet make allowance for it, saying that he was not 
altogether without reason angered by the exceedingly 
bitter hectoring and taunts of certain persons. Without 
having yet read his books, they raised among the people the 
cry of "Heretic, Antichrist, Schismatic," before the Pope 
had made any public interposition of his authority in the 
matter at all. Nobody admonished or confuted him, though 
he declared himself, as he even now declares himself, ready 
for discussion with any one — they only damned him. For 

'Leo X. (1513-21). 


6o The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

the answer of Prierias the Augustinian^ even those who ob- 
tained the Bull against Luther do not countenance. 

When the proposition of Eck had been entrusted to the 
decision of the School of Paris, the Schools of Cologne and 
Louvain, though nothing had been entrusted to them, came 
forward and simply damned Luther. And though they did 
this by common consent, they do not agree on certain points, 
and those vital ones. Furthermore, the personages by whom 
the matter has been managed so far are such as may fairly 
be looked on with suspicion, for their own interests were 
involved. Nor is their life or teaching such that their 
judgment ought to have any great weight, especially in 
so important a matter. 

The method of procedure against Luther is, therefore, 
rightly discountenanced by all the best and most learned, 
even though Luther had written things clearly heretical. 
Nor does one, if he discountenances the course and the 
method of the proceeding, on that account side with Luther, 
any more, by heaven, than if one suggests that a murderer 
ought not to be punished unless he has been convicted and 
condemned by due process of law. And, in fact, the Bull 
which is promulgated rather mercilessly against Luther^ 
displeases even those who are devoted to the dignity of 
the Roman Pontiff, because it savours more of the impotent 
hate of certain monks than of the mildness of him who 
represents the gentleness of Christ, or than of the spirit of 
the Holy Father, Pope Leo, than which until now nothing 
has seemed more merciful and kindly. Hence a great sus- 
picion arises that there are people who abuse his natural 
gentleness and kindliness to serve their own individual 
passions. 

And yet, by as much as the authority of the Roman 
Pontiff is more sacred than all other, by so much should 
the more watchful care be taken to prevent anything ema- 

' This is a mistake. He was a Dominican. 

'Issued June 15, 1520. A translation is given by H. E. Jacobs in his Hfe 
of Luther (N. Y., in "Heroes of the Reformation" series, pp. 413-435). 


Advice on the Pope and His Authority 6i 

nating from him which may seem unworthy of him to those 
unspoken judgments of good men that no potentate, how- 
ever great, can afford to disregard. Besides, the more widely 
this matter extends and the more dangerous it is, the more 
carefully should one avoid setting forth any decision without 
due consideration. 

Every one knows that the Christian life, through the ten- 
dency of things gradually to deteriorate, has fallen off sadly 
from the pure gospel teaching of Christ, so that everybody 
admits there is need of some marked official renovation of 
regulations and customs. Therefore, while nothing ought 
to be attempted wantonly, neither should those be wantonly 
snarled at who offer suggestions with honest purpose, even 
if they seem to do it too freely. And even though it were 
beyond all controversy that Luther had quite wandered 
from the truth, yet it were the part of theological comity, 
first to give the man brotherly admonition, then to refute 
him by sound reasoning and by the testimony of the Holy 
Scriptures, and, if when thus refuted he would not return 
to wisdom, to treat him as we are wont to treat a lost mem- 
ber. Those who advise this course are not advocates of 
Luther, but of theological propriety and of the Papal dig- 
nity, if, peradventure, Luther might in this way be utterly 
done away with, cast out first from the minds of men and 
afterwards also from the libraries. As it is, by the burning 
of his books he is, perhaps, to a certain extent, plucked from 
the libraries, but meanwhile his opinions become fixed in 
the minds of a greater number of people, since they see 
that these are not refuted. 

The better endowed minds of the laity have an opinion 
of their own, as well as the clergy, and opinions, even in the 
case of the learned, are apt to take their start from a man's 
natural temperament. There are so many learned as well 
as good men, who, though most purely and tenaciously 
devoted to the truth of the gospel, yet find no cause of 
offence in Luther's books! Minds of this kind desire to be 
taught ; they neither wish nor ought to be driven by force. 


62 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

It is the mark of a donkey to yield to force only, and the 
mark of a tyrant to use force. Surely it is most becoming 
to theologians to teach with all gentleness, and not to 
work with taunts or benefits or secret banding together. 

Nor must we consider here what befits Luther only — 
I am not sitting in judgment upon him now — but what at 
the present crisis is best for the peace of the Republic of 
Christ. 

We see that Luther is respected by all for the uprightness 
of his life, and that he has thus acquired a firm hold upon 
the hearts of men, especially of the Germans, though among 
other nations also, the people of the soundest judgment, 
that is, the people farthest removed from things which are 
wont to corrupt the judgment, are all most favourably 
inclined to Luther. 

Every one acknowledges that he has derived benefit 
from that preacher's books, even if some things in them, 
perhaps, fairly deserve disapproval. 

We know the feelings of the Germans, we see the per- 
sistency of Bohemia for all these years, and the not very 
different state of things in the neighbouring regions. We 
hear daily serious complaints from many quarters declaring 
that the yoke of the Roman See can be borne no longer. 
And this burden they do not perhaps lay so much to the 
charge of the Papal authority as to that of those who abuse 
the authority of the Pope to further their own tyrannical 
doings. 

Thus if things are managed in a spirit of hatred and 
violence, anybody of much discretion will readily foresee 
what an upsetting of things may arise from this. For we 
see that the most dangerous dissensions in the world have 
often sprung from rather trifling beginnings. 

Nay even, the world seems utterly weary of the old 
theology with its tendency to slip overmuch into the hair- 
splitting of the sophists. It thirsts for the fountains of the 
teachings of the gospel, and seems likely to burst in to reach 
them, unless the doors are opened. Thus even if Luther 


Advice on the Pope and His Authority 63 

be altogether obnoxious, yet the theology of the schools 
ought to be reformed. 

Since, therefore, the difficulty arose from a bad begin- 
ning in the first place, and there seem to have been errors on 
both sides, first on the side of those who by their wicked de- 
nunciations roused the anger of Luther and then embittered 
him more and more by their hate-inspired and ungovemed 
uproar, and especially since they seem in this matter to be 
working for their own private gain, while no such suspi- 
cion can fall upon Luther content with his modest position, 
it seems desirable that this whole case be settled by a com- 
mission of persons who are absolutely free from suspicion 
of partiality. 

But cognisance of matters of faith belongs in an especial 
degree to the Roman Pontiff, and his prerogative must not 
be taken from him. Yet for the general good he will suffer 
this matter to be entrusted to others, men of pre-eminent 
learning as well as of known honour aiid integrity, upon 
whom no suspicion can fall either of a desire, from fear or 
hope, to toady to the Roman Pontiff as against the truth of 
the gospel, or of advocating the opposite side through general 
devotion to humanity. 

These commissioners shall be nominated, one each from 
his own nation, by three princes themselves entirely be- 
yond suspicion, the Emperor Charles, the King of England, ' 
and the King of Hungary. ' After having carefully read 
through Luther's books and examined Luther orally, they 
shall give their decision and it shall be binding. And Luther 
now convinced, will frankly acknowledge where he is wrong 
and will see to the publishing of his works in another edition 
with the errors corrected by himself, that a rich harvest of 
gospel gain may not be lost on account of some few mistakes. 
For many men regard it as unfair and unprofitable that on 
account of a number of slips such as belong to human affairs 
the parts that are right should also be condemned. For in 
the books of St. Augustine there still exist and are read 

'Henry VIII. •Louis II. 


64 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

answers of heretics taken down by the stenographers that 
are full of impiety and blasphemy. 

But if Luther shall even after this persist in the things 
that have been condemned by the commissioners, it will be 
necessary to go to heroic treatment. Thus no one will 
side with Luther if thus beaten, and if he returns to wisdom 
the matter will be settled without disturbance of the Repub- 
lic of Christ. 

Nor will the authority of the Roman Pontiff be impaired 
by this course, but the suspicions of men will be met, with 
whom the decision of the Pontiff himself is likely to have less 
weight in this case, because he might seem to be favouring 
his own side in the matter of indulgences and the primacy. 
On the contrary, he will be the more commended by all 
men for devotion to his sacred duty in having given up 
something of his prerogative for the truth of the gospel 
and the peace of the Christian world. 

But if there are any to whom this plan is not acceptable, 
the next best thing seems to be to refer this case to a General 
Council to be called at an early date, and such a council seems 
for various other reasons to be demanded by the condition 
of the Republic of Christ, unsound as it is in many respects. 

For it seems inopportune to treat so difficult a matter 
in a cursory sort of way, especially when such confusion 
reigns in the Emperor's affairs, and things are unstable 
enough, both in Germany and in Spain, to make it unde- 
sirable to add stuff for new disturbances. Besides, it is 
fitting that the inauguration of a new Emperor be carried 
through with favourable omens, and not be rendered sinister 
and unpropitious by hateful things of this kind. 

I would not prejudice any one in favour of this plan. I 
have only said with singleness of purpose what it appears to 
me best to do, and I have been especially influenced to do so 
by invitation of men in the highest places both lay and cleri- 
cal. I pray that the truth of the gospel may prevail and 
that all things may redound to the glory of Jesus Christ. 
Amen. 


Advice on the Pope and His Authority 65 

NtxYjaaTW TQ Tou Xptaxou ■xatoeta xal aXif)0eta (may the knowledge 
and truth of Christ prevail!) 


Christ Our Lord's Defence of Martin Luther addressed to the 

City of Rome. 

Thou summonest me to rise and judge my cause, as if 
thy cause were mine. Thou thoughtest in thy wickedness 
that I should be like thee. I will accuse thee and will set 
before thy face, will set before thy face, I say, those things 
which I myself and afterwards Peter, first priest appointed 
by me, and Paul, chosen of me, taught thee, to wit, humility, 
gentleness, frugality, and peace, not arrogance, not tyranny, 
not extravagance, not wars. Show me in all of thee a single 
one of those virtues which Paul taught. Show me that thou 
art free from a single vice of those which Peter and Paul 
denounce. Thou sayest my Martin^ bases his reviling of 
thee upon empty rumours. If the rumour of the tyranny of 
Count Jerome had been an empty rumour, nine husbandmen 
had lived the longer whom he ordered strangled for one 
hunting dog, and Florence would have been free from treason. 
If the rumour concerning Brother Peter, Sixtus's cardinal, 
and his pomp and luxury had been an empty rumour, thou 
hadst not deserved these verses against thee on his account : 

"Holy Rome had put him into an unavailing hat. 
This urn of snowy marble holds Peter. 
Sylvetus mourns, Syrasia mourns and the lamb. 
It will be pander, she harlot, he catamite." 

The rumour concerning the vices and virtues of Caesar 
Borgia is not vague ; rather all the world heard of his life and 
that of his father, Alexander Sixth, as not such as I taught, 
and strangers from all nations and kingdoms saw him at the 
Jubilee with a seraglio such as was especially unbecoming to 
my vicar. But greater and more dreadful things John Francis 
Sutanus set forth against thee in his unadorned speech. And 
there are people who proclaim openly the doings of Julius, ^ 

' Martin Luther. » An allusion to Julius II., Pope, 1503-13. 


66 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

his lust and the youths who are said to have danced before 
His HoHness with stark naked girls. You quote the words 
of my prophets. I have also other prophets, one of whom 
thundered: "Woe unto you that join house to house and 
lay field to field till there be no place ! Will ye dwell alone;in 
the midst of the earth? Woe unto you that rise up early in 
the morning that ye may follow drunkenness and drink till 
night! And the harp and the lyre and the tabret and pipe 
and wine are in your feasts, and ye regard not the work of the 
Lord. ' ' ^ And another of my prophets cried : ' ' Where are the 
princes of the nations who find their sport in the birds of 
heaven, who lay up treasures of silver and gold in which 
men trust, and there is no end to their acquisition thereof. " ^ 
Thou mightest long since have returned to reason in conse- 
quence of other teachings and revilings from friends of mine 
who have castigated thy vices in these latter days. Thou 
mightest read Sermon 85, Francis Petrarca, John Campanus, 
Bernard, Ludolph, John Pico della Mirandola, Philelphus, 
Raphael Maffejus, Pace's Speech at the Death of Innocent 
VIII., Baptista of Mantua's Sylvae, Fasti, Calamitates, 
First Parthenice, Eclogas, and various pas.sages of Platina. ^ 
Hast thou never had pity upon captive Constantinople to 
restore her to me, though in thy Bulls of Indulgences thou 
hast for many years made frequent mention of the crucified 
capital and of casting out the enemies of my faith by the 

'From Isa., v., 8, ii, 12. 

* Latin Vulgate of Baruch, iii., 16-18. 

3 By "Sennon 85" is probably meant the 85th homily in the collection of 
Paulus Diaconus, which was the most familiar Homiliarium of the period. 
It is taken from Ambrose and is upon Luke iv., 28, 29 — the story of the 
expulsion of our Lord from Capernaum — an appropriate passage here. It 
will be found in Migne's series of the Latin Fathers, xv., 1629. 

To facilitate reference to the works of the Humanists whose names appear 
above, their names are here arranged alphabetically according to the form of 
the names as given in the catalogue of printed books in the British Museum: 
Bernardus, Sylvester; Campanus, Joannes Antonius; Filelfo, Francesca; 
Ludolphus, de Saxonia; Maffejus, Raphael Volaterranus ; Pace, Richard; 
Petrarca, Francesco; Pico, della Mirandola, Giovanni Francesco; Sacchi, 
Bartholomaeus, de Platina; Spagnuoli, Baptista, Mantuanus. 


Advice on the Pope and His Authority 67 

alms taken from the poor and humble of my fold ? For what 
purposes has the money been disbursed that thou hast raked 
together or received from thy agents meanwhile? Where 
is the treasure left by Paul Second^ and Julius Second?* 
Where the vast mass of money which at every moment thou 
has been wont to gather in gratifying all sorts of men? 
For thou refusest nothing if there is gold in it. Thou shalt 
give account some day of thy dealings. Thou shalt not 
escape me. Thou shalt not elude my judgment, even 
though thou dost triumph in thy arrogance over the simple- 
mindedness of my children. 

^D.,1471. 'D.,1573. 


VIII 
I . What Zwingli Said and Preached at this Time 

AGAINST THE MERCENARY SERVICE OF THE SwiSS 

(1521) 

[Zeugenaussage und Predigtworte zu den Soldvertragen mit dem Ausland. 
In Egli and Finsler ed., i., 73. Translated by Walter Lichtenstein, Ph.D., 
Librarian of the North-western University, Evanston, 111. The first text is 
taken from Ziircher Staatsarchiv, A. 225, i (Frankreich) ; the second from 
Heinrich BuUinger's Reformationsgeschichte, herausgegeben von J. J. Hot- 
tinger und H. H. Voegeli, i Bd., Frauenfeld, 1838, p. 51, reprinted in Schuler 
and Schulthess ed., ii., 2, p. 350. They prove that Zwingli's early disapproval 
of the Swiss entering the mercenary service, except that of the Pope, as 
shown in his poem "The Ox," had now no exception, for he exclaimed 
against the Pope as well. He does not appear to have published any tract 
on the subject, but satisfied himself with pulpit and private utterances. 
Very largely in consequence of Zwingli's stand, the Canton of Zurich forbade 
all mercenary service.] 

A WOMAN told him that in a certain house here in Zurich 
several people — he did not know whether or not they 
were natives of Zurich — sat together and wondered whether 
if the Swiss Confederacy considered Kiburg, Gniningen, ^ and 
the Lake of Zurich as separate, thus making of the city and 
dependent territory four independent members [of the Con- 
federacy], they would also have joined the French league. 

2. What Zwingli Preached at this Time 

Zwingli preached frequently at this time against the 
practice of accepting money ; and showed how such practice 

* Two dependencies of Zurich. 

68 


opposes Mercenary Service of Swiss 69 

would dissolve and overturn a worthy Confederacy. He also 
opposed alliances with princes and lords for if once entered 
into every honest man would hold that what had been 
promised would have to be carried out. Therefore one should 
contract no alliances, and if God had once helped a people 
to be rid of alliances one should beware and not enter upon 
new agreements which would cost much blood. "And I 
could wish," said Zwingli, "that one would declare the 
alliance with the Pope null and void and would send the 
treaty back with the messenger." He also said: "Against 
a wolf one raised the hue and cry, but no one really opposed 
the wolves who destroyed most people." It was fit and 
proper that these latter wore red hats and capes; for if 
one shook them ducats and crowns would be scattered round 
about ; if they were wrung out, the blood of your son, brother, 
father, and good friend would flow. In short, though Zwingli 
was accused by divers persons of having winked at 
the papal enlistments, influenced by the imperialists, 
nevertheless the fact was that there was nothing he opposed 
so vigorously. The papal partisans in fact did not love 
him so dearly, nor he the papists that they were at all 
likely to have any confidential conferences. 


IX 

Concerning Choice and Liberty Respecting Food — 
Concerning Offence and Vexation — Whether Any- 
one HAS Power to Forbid Foods at Certain Times- 
Opinion OF HULDREICH ZWINGLI 

(April i6, 1522) 

[Von erkiesen und fryheit der spysen. Von ergernus und verboserung. 
Ob man gwalt hab die spysen zu etlichen zyten verbieten. Meynung Huld- 
richen Zuinglis. Translated by Lawrence A. McLouth, Professor of German, 
New York University. In Schuler and Schulthess ed., i., 1-29; in Egli and 
Finsler ed., i., 88-136. 

This is, as Egli has demonstrated, the expansion of a sermon Zwingli 
preached on March 23d, 1522, together with an appendix addressed to the 
chapter of the Great Minster, Zwingli's church, on the question whether any 
one had authority to forbid flesh at any particular time. It was the first of 
Zwingli's publications in the interest of the Reformation. It shows the 
practical order of his mind. 

The Roman Catholic Church has enjoined that in strict fasts there 
should be only one meal a day and that at it no meat and no product of 
animals used as food, such as milk, butter, cheese, eggs, should be eaten. 
The "choice of foods" here spoken of was between allowed foods such as 
fish, including shell fish, animals which lived on fish, as otters and beavers 
and certain water fowls, but not wild duck or wild goose. The drink must 
be of such things as quench thirst, as water, wine, beer, coflfee, tea, lemonade, 
but not fluids which are foods under another form, such as milk and soup. 
The Church regulations as to fasting were in ZwingU's day in Zurich enforced 
by the civU authorities. 

Zwingli had come to the conclusion that whatever practice lacked Bibli- 
cal support was not of obligation. He had previous to the Lenten fast that 
year maintained that it lacked Biblical support, but he did not himself dis- 
obey the city regulation. Some of his parishioners were more bold and consist- 
ent and ate meat. The chief offender was the printer Froschauer, who, 
under plea that he had an unusually large amount of work to do during this 
Lent, ate meat with his work-people, and when Zwingli called upon him 

70 


Liberty Respecting Food in Lent 71 

offered some to Zwingli ! Zwingli declined, but could not deny that Frosch- 
auer was entirely within his rights as a Christian man. The authorities 
thought differently and cited Froschauer before them. It was then that 
ZwingH preached this sermon in which he maintains the eating of meat during 
Lent was not forbidden in the Scriptures. The magistrates were thereby 
influenced to refrain from punishing Froschauer, and to repeal the ordinance 
the following year. 

Egli, in his Actensammlwig zur Geschichte der Ziircher Reformation in den 
Jahren 1519-1533, gives in No. 234 the defence which Froschauer made 
before the civil authorities. Disputes as to the Scriptural warrant for the 
Lenten regulations caused street fighting. The Actensammlung takes account 
of these breaches of the peace (No. 232) , and records the trials of the offenders 
(No. 233). [See preface to this volume.] 


To all pious Christians at Zurich, I, Huldreich Zwingli, 
a simple herald of the Gospel of Christ Jesus, wish the grace, 
mercy, and peace of God. 

DEARLY Beloved in God, after you have heard so 
eageriy the Gospel and the teachings of the holy Apos- 
tles, now for the fourth year, teachings which Almighty God 
has been merciful enough to publish to you through my weak 
efforts, the majority of you, thank God, have been greatly 
fired with the love of God and of your neighbour. You 
have also begun faithfully to embrace and to take unto 
yourselves the teachings of the Gospel and the liberty which 
they give, so that after you have tried and tasted the sweet- 
ness of the heavenly bread by which man lives, no other food 
has since been able to please you. And, as when the children 
of Israel were led out of Egypt, at first impatient and un- 
accustomed to the hard journey, they sometimes in vexation 
wished themselves back in Egypt, with the food left there, 
such as garlic, onions, leeks, and flesh-pots, they still entirely 
forgot such complaints when they had come into the promised 
land and had tasted its luscious fruits : thus also some among 
us leapt and jumped unseemly at the first spurring — as still 
some do now, who like a horse neither are able nor ought to 
rid themselves of the spur of the Gospel ; — still, in time they 
have become so tractable and so accustomed to the salt 
and good fruit of the Gospel, which they find abundantly 


^2 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

in it, that they not only avoid the former darkness, labour, 
food, and yoke of Egypt, but also are vexed with all brothers, 
that is, Christians, wherever they do not venture to make 
free use of Christian liberty. And in order to show this, 
some have issued German poems, some have entered into 
friendly talks and discussions in public rooms and at gather- 
ings; some now at last during this fast— and it was their 
opinion that no one else could be offended by it — at home, 
and when they were together, have eaten meat, eggs, cheese, 
and other food hitherto unused in fasts. But this opinion 
of theirs was wrong; for some were offended, and that, too, 
from simple good intentions; and others, not from love of 
God or of his commands (as far as I can judge), but that 
they might reject that which teaches and warns common 
men, and they might not agree with their opinions, acted as 
though they were injured and offended, in order that they 
might increase the discord. The third part of the hypocrites 
of a false spirit did the same, and secretly excited the civil 
authorities, saying that such things neither should nor would 
be allowed, that it would destroy the fasts, just as though 
they never could fast, if the poor labourer, at this time of 
spring, having to bear most heavily the burden and heat of 
the day, ate such food for the support of his body and on 
account of his work. Indeed, all these have so troubled 
the matter and made it worse, that the honourable Council 
of our city was obliged to attend to the matter. And when 
the previously mentioned evangelically instructed people 
found that they were likely to be punished, it was their 
purpose to protect themselves by means of the Scriptures, 
which, however, not one of the Council had been wise 
enough to understand, so that he could accept or reject 
them. What should I do, as one to whom the care of souls 
and the Gospel have been entrusted, except search the 
Scriptures, particularly again, and bring them as a light into 
this darkness of error, so that no one, from ignorance or 
lack of recognition, injuring or attacking another come into 
great regret, especially since those who eat are not triflers 


Liberty Respecting Food in Lent 73 

or clowns, but honest folk and of good conscience? Where- 
fore, it would stand very evil with me, that I, as a careless 
shepherd and one only for the sake of selfish gain, should 
treat the sheep entrusted to my care, so that I did not 
strengthen the weak and protect the strong. I have there- 
fore made a sermon about the choice or difference of food, 
in which sermon nothing but the Holy Gospels and the 
teachings of the Apostles have been used, which greatly 
delighted the majority and emancipated them. But those, 
whose mind and conscience is defiled, as Paul says [Titus, 
i., 15], it only made mad. But since I have used only the 
above-mentioned Scriptures, and since those people cry 
out none the less unfairly, so loud that their cries are heard 
elsewhere, and since they that hear are vexed on account 
of their simplicity and ignorance of the matter, it seems to 
me to be necessary to explain the thing from the Scriptures, 
so that every one depending on the Divine Scriptures may 
maintain himself against the enemies of the Scriptures. 
Wherefore, read and understand; open the eyes and the 
ears of the heart, and hear and see what the Spirit of God 
says to us. 

First, Christ says, Matthew xv., 17, "What goes in at 
the mouth defileth not the man," etc. From these words 
any one can see that no food can defile a man, providing it 
is taken in moderation and thankfulness. That this is 
the meaning, is showed by the fact that the Pharisees 
became vexed and angry at the word as it stands, because 
according to Jewish law they took great account of the 
choice of food and abstinence, all of which regulations 
Christ desired to do away with in the New Testament. 
These words of Christ, Mark speaks still more clearly, vii., 
15: "There is nothing from without a man, that entering 
into him can defile him; but the things which come out 
from him, those are they that defile the man." So the mean- 
ing of Christ is, all foods are alike as far as defilement goes : 
they cannot defile at all. 

Secondly, as it is written in the Acts of the Apostles, 


74 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

X,, 10, when Peter was in Joppa (now called Jaffa), he 
went one day upon the housetop at the sixth hour, and 
desired to pray. He became hungry and wished to eat; 
and when the servants were making ready, he fell into a 
trance and saw heaven opened and a vessel descending as 
it were a great linen cloth held together by the four comers 
and let down upon earth, in which cloth were all four-footed 
animals, wild beasts, and creeping and flying creatures. 
Then a voice spoke to him, saying: "Arise, Peter, kill and 
eat." But Peter said, "No, Lord, for I have never eaten 
forbidden or unclean food." Then again the voice spoke 
to him, saying: "What God has purified, shalt thou not 
consider forbidden or unclean." Now, God has made all 
things clean, and has not forbidden us to eat, as his very 
next words prove. Why do we burden ourselves wilfully 
with fasts? Here answer might be made: This miracle, 
shown to Peter, meant that he should not avoid the heathen, 
but them also should he call to the grace of the Gospel, and 
therefore material food should not be understood here. 
Answer: All miracles that God has performed, although 
symbolical in meaning, were still real occurrences and events. 
As when Moses struck the rock with his staff and it gave 
forth water, it was symbolical of the true Rock of Christ, 
from which flowed, and ever shall flow for us all, the forgive- 
ness of sins and the blessings of heavenly gifts, but none 
the less was the rock really smitten and gave forth water. 
And so here, although this miracle was symbolical, still 
the words of God's voice are clear: What God hath cleansed, 
shalt thou not consider unclean. Until I forget these words 
I shall use them. 

Thirdly, Paul writes to the Corinthians (I., vi., 12): 
"All things are lawful unto me, but all things are not ex- 
pedient : all things are lawful for me, but I will not be brought 
under the power of any. Meats for the belly and the belly 
for meats: but God shall destroy both it and them. " That 
is, to me are all things'free, although some things are rather 
to be avoided, in case they offend my neighbour too much. 


Liberty Respecting Food in Lent 75 

(About the troubling of one's neighbour, I shall speak special- 
ly later on). And therefore no one can take from me my 
freedom and brin^»gie under his authority. Food is taken 
into the belly to sustain life. As now the belly and the food 
are both to be destroyed, it makes no difference what one 
eats or wherewith one nourishes his mortal body. 

Fourthly, Paul says, I. Corinthians viii., 8: "But 
meat commendeth us not to God: for neither, if we eat, are 
we the better; nor, if we eat not, are we the worse." This 
word Paul speaks of the food which was offered to the idols, 
not now of daily food. Notice this, however, to a clearer 
understanding. At the time when Paul wrote the epistle, 
there were still many unbelievers, more indeed, it seems to 
me, than Christians. These unbelievers offered to their 
idols, according to custom, animals, such as calves, sheep, and 
also other forms of food; but at these same offerings, a great 
part, often all, was given to eat to those that made the 
offerings. And as unbelievers and Christians lived together, 
the Christians were often invited to partake of food or meat, 
that had been sacrificed to the honour of the idols. Then 
some of the Christians were of the opinion, that it was not 
proper to eat this food; but others thought that, if they ate 
the food of the idols, but did not believe in them, such food 
could not harm them, and thought themselves stronger in 
their belief, because they had been free to do this thing, than 
those who from faint-heartedness and hesitation did not 
venture to eat all kinds of food. To settle this difference, 
Paul uses the above words: "No kind of food commends us 
to God." Even if one eats the food of the idols, he is not 
less worthy before God, nor yet more worthy, than one who 
does not eat it; and whoever does not eat it is no better. 
Indeed that will seem very strange to you, not only that meat 
is not forbidden, but also that even what has been offered 
to idols a Christian may eat. 

Fifthly, Paul says in the First Epistle to the Corinthians, 
X., 25: "Whatsoever is sold in the shambles, that eat, asking 
no questions for conscience' sake." These words are clear 


76 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

and need no explanation, except that they are among other 
words about the offence caused by the food of idols. But 
do not let yourself err. From the pulpit I shall speak 
sufficiently of giving offence, and perhaps more clearly than 
3^ou have ever heard. 

Sixthly, Paul also says, Colossians ii., i6: "No man 
shall judge you in meat or in drink, or in respect of a holy 
day. " Again you hear that you are to judge no man either 
as good or bad from his food or drink; he may eat what he 
please. If one will, let him eat refuse. Here it should be 
always understood that we are speaking not of amount but 
of kind. As far as kind and character of food are concerned, 
we may eat all foods to satisfy the needs of life, but not with 
immoderation or greediness. 

Seventhly, Paul says again, I. Timothy iv., i: "Now 
the Spirit speaketh expressly, that in the latter times some 
shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, 
and doctrines of devils; speaking lies in hypocrisy; having 
their consciences seared with a hot iron; forbidding to 
marry and commanding to abstain from meats, which God 
hath created to be received with thanksgiving of them which 
beHeve and know the truth. For every creature of God is 
good, and nothing to be refused, if it be received with thanks- 
giving : for it is sanctified by the word of God and of prayer. " 
These are all the words of Paul. And what could be more 
clearly said? He says that God's Spirit spoke this as a 
warning, that they might withstand this, who had no fixed 
strong belief, and who did not put trust in God, but in their 
own works which they themselves chose as good. And that 
such things are placed in them by seducing spirits and devils, 
that inspire men with hypocrisy, that is, with the outward 
form, lead men away from trust in God to confidence in 
themselves. And yet the same will always surely realise 
in themselves, that they act dishonourably toward God, 
and they always feel the pain of it, and know their disgrace- 
ful unfaithfulness in that they see only their own advantage 
or desire and greed of heart. Still they are willing to sell 


Liberty Respecting Food in Lent 77 

themselves, as though they did it not for their own sakes, 
but for God's. That is having a conscience branded on 
the cheek. Then he recounts what they will forbid to do as 
bad. They shall not enter into marriage or wed. Know 
too that purity so disgracefully preserved had its original 
prohibition from the devil, which prohibition has brought 
more sin into the world than the abstinence from any food. 
But this is not the place to speak of that. Likewise it is 
forbidden that one should eat this or that food, which God 
created for the good and sustenance of men. Look, what 
does Paul say? Those that take from Christians such free- 
dom by their prohibition are inspired by the devil. "Would 
I do that?" said the wolf, as the raven sat on the sow's 
body. Now God placed all things under man at the head 
of creation, that man might serve him alone. And although 
certain foods are forbidden in the Old Testament, they are 
on the contrary made free in the New, as the words of Mark 
vii., 15, clearly show, quoted in the first article above, as 
also Luke xvi., 15. "For that which is highly esteemed 
among men is an abomination in the sight of God." The 
law and the prophets were only a symbol, or have lasted 
only to John. ' Hear now, that which seemed great to men 
was detested by God (the word is ahominatid), and as far 
as the law is ceremonial and to be used at court, it has been 
superseded. Hear then that whatever a man eats cannot 
make him evil, if it is eaten in thankfulness. Notice that 
proper thankfulness consists in this, that a man firmly 
beheve that all our food and living are determined and con- 
tinued by God alone, and that a man be grateful for it ; for 
we are more worthy in the sight of God than the fowls of 
the air which he feeds : us then without doubt he will feed. 
But the greatest thanks is a conscientious recognition that 
all our necessities are provided by him. Of these words 
nothing further. 

Eighthly, after Paul shows Titus (i., 15) that there are 
many disobedient, many vain talkers and deceivers, which 

' Luke xvi: l6. 


78 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

one must overcome, he adds: "Unto the pure all things 
are pure : but unto them that are defiled and unbelieving is 
nothing pure; but even their mind and conscience is defiled. " 
Here you see again he did not desire Jewish wiles heeded; 
this is plainly shown by the words next preceding, where he 
says: "Wherefore rebuke and punish them sharply (of course 
with words), that they may be sound in the faith, not lis- 
tening to Jewish fables and human commandments, that 
pervert the truth," But they desired to draw the new 
Christians into abstinence from food, pretending that some 
food was unclean and improper to eat ; but Paul showed that 
they were wrong, and said: To those of a pure belief, all 
things are pure, but to the unbelievers nothing is pure. 
Cause: their hearts and consciences are defiled. They are 
unbelievers that think the salvation, mercy, and freedom of 
Christ are not so great and broad as they really are, as Christ 
chid his disciples, saying that they were of little faith, 
Matthew xvi., 8, and vi., 30. In these passages we are 
certainly taught that we are not only fed each day by him, 
but also controlled and instructed with fatherly fidelity, 
if we console ourselves confidently alone in his word and 
commands. Wherefore every Christian should depend alone 
upon him and believe his words steadfastly. Now if you 
do that, then you will not believe that any food can defile 
a man; and if you surely believe it, then it is surely so, 
for his words cannot deceive. Accordingly all things are 
pure to you. Why? You believe, therefore all things are 
pure to you. The unbeliever is impure. Why? He has a 
doubting heart, which either does not believe the greatness 
and freedom of God's mercy, or does not believe these to be 
as great as they are. Therefore he doubts, and as soon as 
he doubts, he sins, according to Romans xiv., 23. 

Ninthly, Paul says to the Hebrews (xiii., 9): "Be not 
carried about with divers and strange doctrines. For it 
is a good thing that the heart be established with grace; 
not with meats, which have not profited them that have 
been occupied therein." In these words see first that we 


Liberty Respecting Food in Lent 79 

should not be carried about with many kinds of doctrines, 
also that without doubt or suspicion the Holy Gospel is a 
certain doctrine, with which we can console ourselves and 
on which we can surely depend. Accordingly it is best to 
establish the heart with grace. Now the Gospel is nothing 
but the good news of the grace of God ; on this we should rest 
our hearts — that is, we should know the grace of the Gospel 
to be so certain and ready, and trust it, so that we may 
establish our hearts in no other doctrine, and not trust to 
food, that is, to eating or abstaining from eating (so also 
Chrysostom^ takes these words) this or that food; for that 
such oversight and choice of food was not of profit to those 
that have clung thereto is clear enough. 

These announcements seem to me to be enough to 
prove that it is proper for a Christian to eat all foods. 
But a heathen argument I must bring forward for those 
that are better read in Aristotle than in the Gospels or in 
Paul. Tell me which you think more necessary to a man, 
food or money? I think you will say that food is more 
useful than money, otherwise we should die of hunger with 
our money, as Midas died, who, according to the poets, 
desired that everything he touched be turned to gold. And 
so food is more important to preserve life than money; for 
man lived on food before money was invented. Now Aris- 
totle says that money is indifferent — that is, it is neither 
good nor bad in itself, but becomes good or bad according 
to its use, whether one uses it in a good or bad way. ^ Much 

' Be not carried about with divers and strange doctrines, "strange," that 
is, different from those ye heard from us; "divers," that is, of all sorts; for 
they have no stability, but are different one from another. For especially 
manifold is the doctrine of meats. "For it is a good thing that the heart be 
established with grace; not with meats." These are the "divers," these the 
" strange " doctrines: especially as Christ hath said, "Not that which entereth 
into the]mouth defileth the man, but that which cometh out" (Matt, xv., ii.). 
Homily xxx., iii., on Hebrews, Eng. trans. "Works of St. Chrysostom," Nicene 
and Post-Nicene Fathers, vol. xiv., 516. 

^ Egli and Finsler ed. give the reference: Nicomachean Ethics, iv., i, §3. 
The passage may be thus rendered: "Whatever has use can be used either 
well or badly. Money is one of the things which have use. Now he uses 


8o The Works of Huldreich Zwingii 

more then is food neither good nor bad in itself (which I, 
however, for the present omit) , but it is necessary and there- 
fore more truly good. And it can never become bad, except 
as it is used immoderately ; for a certain time does not make 
it bad, but rather the abuse of men, when they use it with- 
out moderation and belief. 

No Christian can deny these arguments, unless he 
defends himself by denying the Scriptures: He is then, 
however, no Christian, because he does not believe Christian 
doctrine. There are nevertheless some who take exception 
to this, either to the times, or the fasting, or human pro- 
hibitions, or giving oflence. All these I will answer from 
the Scriptures later with God's help. 

At first then they object to the time: Although all 
things are pure, still they are not so at all times; and so 
during the fasts, quarter fasts. Rogation-day week, Shrove- 
Tuesday, Friday, and Saturday, it is improper to eat meat. 
During fasts also eggs, milk, and milk products are not 
proper. Answer : I do not say that these are not forbidden 
by men; we see and hear that daily. But all of my efforts 
are directed against this assumption, that we are restrained 
at this and that time by divine law. Let each one fast as 
often as the spirit of true belief urges him. But in order to 
see that according to the law of Christ we are free at all 
times, consider as follows : 

First, Mark ii., 23, once when Christ was going through 
the cornfields, his disciples began to pluck the ears (and 
eat). But the Pharisees said to him: '*Lo, what are thy 
disciples doing that is not proper on the Sabbath day.?" 
And Christ said to them: "Have ye not read what David 
did when he had need, when he and they with him were 
hungry; how in the days of Abiathar, the high priest, he went 
into the house of God and ate the bread that was offered to 
God, which it was improper for any one to eat but the priests, 

anything best who has the virtues which go with it, and so he will make the 
best use of money who has the accompanying virtues. He is the liberal 
man." 


Liberty Respecting Food in Lent 8i 

and gave also to those with him, saying to them , ' * The Sabbath 
was made for man, and not man for the Sabbath : Therefore 
the Son of man is also Lord of the Sabbath." Notice here 
that need is superior not only to human but also to divine 
law; for observing the Sabbath is divine law. And still 
the hunger of the disciples did not observe the Sabbath. 
Notice again that no place withstands need, and that David 
in need might go into the temple. Notice also that the mat- 
ter of persons is not respected in need; for David and his 
followers were not priests, but ate the food proper only for 
priests to eat. This I show you now that you may learn 
that what is said of one circumstance is said in common of 
all circumstances in the Scriptures, if anything depends on 
circumstances or is deduced from circumstances. Circum- 
stances are where, when, how, the person, or about whom. 
Thus Christ says, Matthew xxiv., 23 : "Then if any man shall 
say unto you, Lo, here is Christ, or there; believe it not," 
See, this is the circumstance where, or the place. The 
meaning is that God is not revealed more in one place than 
in another. Indeed, when the false prophets say that, one 
is not to believe them. In this way you should understand 
the circumstance of time, and other circumstances, that not 
more at one time than at another God is revealed as merci- 
ful or as wroth, but at all times alike. Else he would be 
subject to the times which we had chosen, and he would be 
changeable who suffers no change. So also of the matter 
of persons ; for God is not more ready or open in mercy and 
grace to a person of gentle birth than to the base born, as 
the holy Paul' says, Acts x., 34: " Of a truth I perceive that 
God is no respecter of persons." But we do not need this 
proof here, where we wish to prove that all time is free to 
men. For the words of Christ are of themselves clear enough, 
when he says : the Sabbath is made for man and not man for 
the Sabbath ; the Sabbath is in the power of man, not man in 
the power of the Sabbath. In a word, the Sabbath and all 
time are subject to man, not man to the Sabbath. Now if 
' It should be Peter, of course. 


82 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

it is true that the Sabbath which God established is to be 
subject to us, then much more the time which men have 
imposed upon us. Indeed, not only the time but also the 
persons, that have thus fixed and established these particular 
times, are none other than the servants of Christ and co- 
workers in the secret things of God, not revealed to men. 
And these same co-workers should not rule Christians, com- 
manding as over-lords, but should be ready only for their 
service and for their good. Therefore Paul says, I. Cor. vii., 
35: "I say this for your good, not that I would put a noose 
about your necks" — that is, I would not seize and compel 3^ou 
with a command. Again he speaks, I. Cor. iii., 21: "All 
things are yours; whether Paul, or Apollos, or Peter, or the 
world, or life, or death, or things present, or things to come; 
all are yours." Here you see that all things are intended 
for men or for the service of men, not for their oppression, 
yes, the Apostles themselves are for men, not men for the 
Apostles. 

O overflowing spring of God's mercy! how well Paul 
speaks when he says, that these things are known but 
through the Spirit of God. Therefore w^e have not received 
the spirit of this world, but the spirit that is from God, 
because we see what great things are given us by God. You 
know your liberty too little. Cause : the false prophets have 
not told you, preferring to lead you about rather as a pig tied 
with a string ; and we poor sinners cannot be led to the love 
of God any other way but by being taught to summon unto 
oiu-selves the Spirit of God, so that we may know the great 
things which God has given us. For who could but be 
thankful to God, so kind, and who could but be drawn into 
a wonderful love of him? Here notice too that it is not 
the intention of Christ, that man should not keep the Sab- 
bath (for us Christians Sunday is ordained as the Sabbath), 
but where our use or need requires something else, the 
Sabbath itself, not only other times, shall be subject to us. 
Here you are not to understand either the extreme neces- 
sity, in which one would be near death, as the mistaken 


Liberty Respecting Food in Lent 83 

theologists dream, but ordinary daily necessity. For the 
disciples of Christ were not suffering extreme necessity, when 
on the Sabbath day they plucked the ears, else they would 
not have answered Christ as they did, when he asked them, 
Luke xxii., 35: "When I sent you without purse and scrip, 
lacked ye anything?" For the disciples answered: "Noth- 
ing." From this we understand that Christ never allowed 
his disciples to fall into such dire extremity, but that the 
need, which they felt on Sunday, was nothing but ordinary 
hunger, as also the word "need" as we use it does not mean 
the last stages of necessity, but has the usual meaning; as 
when one says, "I have need, " he does not refer to the last 
or greatest want, but to a sufficiency of that which daily 
need demands. Then as far as time is concerned, the need 
and use of all food are free, so that whatever food our daily 
necessity requires, we may use at all times and on all days, 
for time shall be subject to us. 

Secondly, Christ says, Luke xvii., 20: "The kingdom 
of God Cometh not with observation : neither shall they say, 
Lo ! here, lo ! there. " This word observation, Latin observatio, 
has this meaning, as if one carefully watched over something 
that had its time and moment, and if one did not take it 
then, it would pass away, as fishermen and fowlers usually 
watch, because fish and fowl have certain times and are 
not always to be caught. Not thus the kingdom of God, 
for it will not come with observation of time or place. Since 
now the mistaken theologists say that we ourselves deserve 
the kingdom of God with our works, which we choose of our 
own free will and complete according to our powers, the 
words of Christ, who cannot lie, answer: if the kingdom of 
God cometh not with observation or watching (of time, or 
place, or of all circumstances, as is proved in the above 
paragraph), and if at any time the prohibiting of the food 
which God has left free is nothing else but observation, 
then the kingdom of God will never be made ready by the 
prohibition of food. Now it must be that abstinence can- 
not avail anything as to time, and you are always to under- 


84 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

stand that it is not our intention to speak here of amount, 
but only of kind, neither of the times which God hath set, 
but of those which men have established. 

Thirdly, Paul writes to the Galatians (iv., 9): "But 
now after ye have known God, how turn ye again to the weak 
and beggarly elements, whereunto ye deserve to be again in 
bondage? You have expectation, or you keep day and 
month, time and year." Here you hear the anger of Paul 
at the Galatians, because after they had learned and known 
God (which is nothing else but being known or enlightened 
of God), they still returned to the elements, which he more 
closely describes in Colossians ii., 20. But since we must 
use these words later more accurately and must explain 
them, we shall now pass them over, satisfying ourselves 
with knowing what the weak elements are. In Latin and 
Greek the letters were called elements, for the reason that 
as all things are made up and composed of elements, so also 
each word was made of letters. Now the Jews and heathen 
have always clung closely to the letter of the law, which 
oppresses much, indeed kills, as Paul says.' Not only in 
the Old Testament, but also in the New, it oppresses much. 
Is that not a severe word which is found in Matthew v., 22} 
"But I say unto you, that whosoever is angry with his 
brother shall be in danger of the judgment." So it is, if 
taken literally, indeed impossible for us weak mortals to 
keep. And therefore Christ has given it to us that we might 
recognise our shortcomings therein, and then take refuge 
alone in him, who mercifully pitied our shortcomings when 
he said, Matthew xi., 28: "Come unto me, all ye that 
labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. " 

But whosoever does not know and will not know this 
narrow way to the mercy of God through Christ, under- 
takes with his own powers to fulfil the law, sees only the 
letter of the law and desires with his might to fulfil that, 
prescribing for himself this and that chastisement and 
abstinence at certain times, places, and under other circum- 

' II. Cor. iii., 6. 


Liberty Respecting Food in Lent 85 

stances, and after all that he still does not fulfil the law, 
but the more he prides himself on having fulfilled the law, 
the less he has fulfilled it, for in his industry he becomes 
puffed up in himself. As the Pharisee, that boasted of the 
elements — that is, of the works which he had literally fulfilled, 
said, "I thank thee, O God, that I am not as other men 
are; I fast," etc.^ Consider the over- wise piety that exalts 
itself at once above other men, from no other reason than 
that according to his advice or opinion, and powers, he is 
confident to have fulfilled the law; and, on the other hand, 
consider the publican hoping for nothing but the rich mercy 
of God, and counting his own works nothing, but only saying: 
"O God, be merciful to me, a sinner!" Is not, then, the 
publican considered more righteous before God than the 
Pharisee? From all this you see that the weak elements are 
nothing else than human wisdom and conception of happi- 
ness, for man either purposes to wish and to be able to keep 
the letter of the law or else prescribes for himself some work 
to do, which God has not commanded but left free, and 
therefore likes to think the works prescribed by himself to 
be a sure road to blessedness, and clings to his opinion to his 
own injury. And for just this reason Paul complains of the 
Galatians, that having been mercifully enlightened of God 
they turned again to their own devices, that is, to the weak 
elements, to which the Jews and heathen held, and had not 
so strong a belief in God, that they trusted alone in him and 
hoped alone in him, listened alone to his ordinances and will, 
but foolishly turned again to the devices of men, who, as 
though they desired to improve what had been neglected by 
God, said to themselves: "This day, this month, this time, 
wilt thou abstain from this or that," and make thus ordi- 
nances, persuading themselves that he sins who does not 
keep them. This abstaining I do not wish to condemn, if 
it occurs freely, to put the flesh under control, and if no- 
self-confidence or vainglory, but rather humility, results.. 
See, that is branding and injuring one's own conscience 

' Luke xviii., ii, et seq. 


86 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

capriciously, and is turning toward true idolatry, and is, 
as David says, Psalm Ixxxi., 12, "walking in one's own 
counsels." But this God desired to prevent by the words of 
David, who says': "Hear, O my people, I will testify unto 
thee, Israel (that is, he sees God and trusts him so thoroughly 
that he is possessed of him) , if thou wilt hearken unto me ; 
there shall no strange god be in thee; neither shalt thou 
worship any strange god. I am the Lord thy God, which 
brought thee out of the land of Egypt: open thy mouth, 
and I will fill or satisfy it. But my people did not hear my 
voice, and Israel (that is, that which should be Israel) did 
not hearken to me, and I left them to their own desires, and 
they will walk in their own counsels. " O Christian of right 
belief, consider these words well, ponder them carefully, 
and you will see that God desires that we hearken to him 
alone ! If now we are thoroughly imbued with him, no new 
god will be honoured within our hearts, no man instead of 
God, no feeling of our own instead of God. But if we do 
not hear the true warnings of God, he will let us walk accord- 
ing to the desires and devices of our own hearts. Do we not 
see that consolation oftener is sought in human hearts than 
in God ; that they are more severely punished who transgress 
human laws than those who not only transgress but also 
despise and reject God's laws ? Lo, these are the new idols 
which we have cast and chiselled in our hearts. Enough has 
now been said about these words of Paul, and it is authority 
enough to prove that we are as little forbidden by God to 
eat at certain times as we are now forbidden by him to eat 
certain sorts and kinds of food. 

They will now raise as objections the fasts, or all fast 
days, saying that people will never fast if they are allowed 
to eat meat. Answer: Have you heretofore fasted because 
you were not allowed to eat meat, as naughty children that 
will not eat their broth, because they are not given meat? 
If any one desires to fast, has he not as much the power to 
do so, when labourers eat meat, as when they are forced to 

^ In the same Psalm, w., 8-12. 


Liberty Respecting Food in Lent 87 

fast with the idle, and are thus less able to do and to endure 
their labours? In a word, if you will fast, do so; if you do 
not wish to eat meat, eat it not ; but leave Christians a free 
choice in the matter. You who are an idler should fast often, 
should often abstain from foods that make you lustful. But 
the labourers' lusts pass away at the hoe and plough in 
the field. You say, the idle will eat meat without need. 
Answer: The very same fill themselves with still richer 
foods, that excite more than the highly seasoned and spiced. 
And if they complain of the breaking up of the custom [of 
fasting], it is nothing but envy, because they dislike to see 
that considered proper for common men, for which they can 
well find a substitute without difficulty and without weaken- 
ing the body, on the contrary, even with pleasure; for fish 
eating is surely everywhere a pleasure. You say that many 
cannot endure this liberty in eating, not from envy, but 
from fear of God. Answer: O you foolish hypocrites, do 
you think that there is danger and injury in what God has 
left free ? If there were in it danger to the soul God would 
not have left it unforbidden. Likewise, if you are so con- 
cerned about others, as to what they should not eat, why 
will you not note their poverty and aid it? If you would 
have a Christian heart, act to it then. If the spirit of your 
belief teaches you thus, then fast, but grant also your neigh- 
bour the privilege of Christian liberty, and fear God greatly, 
if you have transgressed his laws, nor make what man has 
invented greater before God than what God himself hath 
commanded, or again I will turn out a hypocrite of you, if 
you are such a knotty block, twisted in yourself and depend- 
ing upon your own devices. 

Concerning the Commandment of Men. 

Here the first difficulty will occur, when one speaks to 
those who complaining ask: Is one to let go the ordinances 
of our pious fathers? Where have the Fathers or the Coun- 
cils forbidden the use of meat during fasts ? They can show 


y 


88 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

no Council, but they come forward with the fasts: referring 
to canonical law. De Con. di., v., 40. 

Is one not to keep the feasts? Answer: Who says or 
teaches that? If you are not content with the fasts, then 
fast also Shrovetide. Indeed, I say that it is a good thing 
for a man to fast, if he fasts as fasts are taught by Christ: 
Matthew vi., 16, and Isaiah Iviii., 6. But show me on 
the authority of the Scriptures that one cannot fast with 
meat. Even if it could be shown, as it cannot, still you 
know very well that labourers are relieved of the burden of 
fasting, according to your laws. Here I demand of you to 
show me where meat is forbidden to him not under obliga- 
tion to fast. Thus they turn away from the observance 
of the fast, and at last they all come to the canonical law, 
fourth chapter, "Denique," etc., and when you ask for a 
waggon, they offer you a chopping-knife. The chapter 
beginning "Denique" does not command you to forbid 
laymen to eat meat; it shows that at these same times the 
laymen fill themselves with meat on the Sundays in the 
fast more than on other days. You hear, more than on 
other days: Thus they eat meat on other days, but that 
they keep it up on Sundays till midnight, troubles Gregory^; 
still he says that they are not to be forced from this custom, 
lest they do worse. But the priests and the deacons he 
recommends to abstinence from meat, eggs, and cheese — 
read this well and with judgment and you will find this rather 
against you than for you. After that they come with Thomas 
Aquinas,^ as though one single mendicant monk^ had 
power to prescribe laws for all Christian folk. Finally they 
must help themselves out with custom, and they consider 
abstinence from food to be a custom. How old the custom 
is supposed to be, we cannot really know, especially with 
regard to meat, but of abstinence from eggs the custom 
cannot be so very old, for some nations even to-day eat eggs 
without permission from Rome, as in Austria and elsewhere. 

' Gregory the Great, pope, 590-604. 

' 1227-1274. 3 He was a Dominican. 


Liberty Respecting Food in Lent 89 

Milk food became a sin in the Swiss Confederation in the last 
century and was again forgiven. And since I have chanced 
upon this matter, I must show you a pretty piece of business, 
so that you may protect yourselves thus from the greed of 
the powerful clergy. Our dear fellow Swiss purchased the 
privilege of using milk food from the Bishop of Rome in the 
last century: Proof, the documents about it at Lucern.^ 
Go back now before the time of these letters and think what 
our forefathers ate before the indulgence, and you cannot 
say that they ate oil, for in the Bull the complaint was made 
that people in our country are not accustomed to eat oil, 
that they ate the foods usual there, milk, whey, cheese, and 
butter. Now if that was a sin, why did the Roman bishops 
watch so lazily that they allowed them to eat these fourteen 
hundred years? If it is not a sin, as it is not, why did they 
demand money to permit it? Say rather this, I see that it 
is nothing but air, see that the Roman bishops announced 
that it was a sin, when it became money to them: Proof, 
as soon as they announced it as a sin, they immediately 
sold it for money, and thus abused our simplicity, when 
we ought fairly to have seen that, if it was sin according 
to God's law, no man can remit it, any more than that one 
might murder a man, which is forbidden by divine law, 
could be permitted by any one, although many distasteful 
sins of this kind are committed. From all these remarks 
you notice also that abstinence from meat and drink is an 
old custom, which however later by the wickedness of some 
of the clergy came to be viewed as a command. So if 
the custom is not bad or dishonourable, one is to keep it 
properly, as long and as thoroughly as the greater part 
of men might be offended by its infringement. Answer: 
This will take a longer time, therefore I shall speak now of 
offence or vexation. 

Of Offence or Vexation. 

Offence or vexation, Greek, skandalon, is understood 

^ See the Swiss editor's note in loco. 


90 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

in two ways: first, when one offends others, so that they^sin 
in judgment or decision, and become worse ; and of these we 
desire to speak first ; second, offence occurs, although not in 
the Scriptures, but here as accepted by us, when a man in 
himself becomes more sinful or worse, or when a whole parish 
is purposely brought into a worse condition. 
^' First, Christian love demands that every one avoid 

^ that which can offend or vex his neighbour, in so far, how- 
ever, as it does not injure the faith, of course you are to 
understand. Since the Gospel has been preached frequently 
/' in these years, many have therefore become better and more 
God-fearing, but many on the contrary have become worse. 
And since there is much opposition to their bad opinion and 
plans, they attack the Gospel, which attacks the good can- 
not endure but oppose. From which reason the bad cry 
out saying: "I wish the Gospel were not preached. It 
sets us at variance among ourselves." Here one should not 
yield for that reason, but should keep close before his eyes 
what Christ says, Matthew x., 32: "Whosoever therefore 
shall confess me before men, him will I confess also before 
my Father which is in heaven. Think not that I am come 
to send peace on earth (understand by this, peace with the 
godless or sinful) : I came not to send peace, but a sword. 
For I am come to set a man at variance against his father, 
and the daughter against her mother, and the daughter- 
in-law against her' mother-in-law. And a man's foes shall 
be they of his own household." 

In these words Christ gives us strength not to consider 
the vexation of those who will not be convinced of the truth ; 
and, even though they are our nearest and dearest, we are not 
to be worried, if they separate from us, as he says later. Matt. 
X., 37: "Whosoever loves father and mother more than me, 
he is not worthy of me; whoever loves his son or daughter 
better than me, he is not worthy of me, and whoever does 
not take his cross and follow me, he is not worthy of me." 
And also Luke xiv., 26. So wherever it is a matter of God's 
honour, of the belief or of hope in God, we should suffer all 


Liberty Respecting Food in Lent 91 

things rather than allow ourselves to be forced from this. 
But where a thing cannot harm the belief, but offends one 's 
neighbour, although it is not a sin, one should still spare 
his neighbour in that he should not injure him; as eating 
meat is not forbidden at any time by divine law; but, where 
it injures or offends one's neighbour, one should not eat it 
without cause. One should make those of little faith strong 
in the faith. 

But when one (thirdly) will not be referred to the divine 
truth and the Scriptures, when one says: "I firmly believe 
that Christ has never forbidden me any food at any time," 
and when the one of little faith will not grant it or believe 
it, although one shows him the Scriptures about it, then the 
one who believes in liberty shall not yield to him, although 
he should yield the matter of eating meat in his presence, 
if it is not necessary ; but he should cleave to the Scriptures 
and not let the sweet yoke of Christ and the light burden 
become bitter, so that it may not be unpleasant to men or 
please them less, and thereby show that it is a human and not 
a divine prohibition. Thus a burgomaster gives an answer, 
in the name of the Council, and after the answer adds 
something harsh and hard, which the Council did not com- 
mand him to say and did not intend. He says: "This I 
say of myself; the Council has not commanded it." This 
also, all those that teach in God's name should not sell 
their commands, ordinances, and burdens as God's, so that 
the yoke of his mercy should not become unpleasant to 
any one, but should leave them free. That I shall prove by 
the opinion of Christ: Matthew xxiv., 49, and Luke xii., 
45, where he does not want one to trouble one's fellow ser- 
vants— that is, one's fellow Christians. " But if that servant 
say maliciously in his heart, ' My Lord delayeth his coming,' 
and shall begin to beat his fellow servants and to eat in 
excess and to drink with drunkards, the Lord of that servant 
will come on a day when he looketh not for him, and at an 
hour when fie is not watching, and will cut him in sunder, 
and will appoint the share of the bad servant to the Phari- 


92 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

sees." Here open your eyes and see whether the servant, 
to whom it was given to pasture the sheep of Christ, has not 
now for a long time beaten his fellow servants — that is, fellow 
Christians; whether he has not eaten and drunk excessively, 
and, as though there was no God, run riot, and troubled 
Christians with great burdens (I speak of bad bishops and 
priests — take it not of yourself, pious man) so that the sweet 
yoke of Christ has become to all Christians a bitter herb. 
On the other hand, see how the Lord has come with his 
light and illuminated the world with the Gospel, so that 
Christians, recognising their liberty, will not let themselves 
be led any more behind the stove and into the darkness from 
which a schism has come about, so that we really see that 
God has uncovered the Pharisees and hypocrites and has 
made a separate division of them. Yes, in that case I 
venture to command you to fight against those who pre- 
fer to keep the heavy yoke of the hypocrites rather than 
to take the sweet yoke of Christ upon themselves, and in 
thus doing to be careful to offend no one, but, as much 
as is in them, to keep peace with all men, as Paul says. ^ 
Not every one can do this, or knows how far to yield or 
to make use of Christian liberty, therefore we will hear 
the opinion of Paul about offence. 

Secondly, Paul teaches in the Epistle to the Romans 
xiv. and xv., how one should avoid giving offence; these 
words I translate into German and give more according 
to the sense than the letter. Him, he says, ^ that is weak 
in the faith, help, but do not lead him into the trouble of 
still greater doubt. One believes that it is proper for 
him to eat all things; but the other, weak in faith, eats 
only herbs. Now the one who is certain that he may eat 
all things, shall not despise him who does not venture to do 
such (understand, from little faith); and he who ventures 
not to eat all things shall not judge the eater, for God 

• Rom. xii., i8. — " If it be possible, as much as lieth in you, live peaceably 
with all men." 

'Rom. xiv., I, et seq. 


Liberty Respecting Food in Lent 93 

has accepted and consoled him. You weak man, who 
are you that you judge another man's servant? He will 
stand upright or fall for his own master, still he will be 
supported or held up, for God can well support or hold 
him up. One man esteems one day above another, an- 
other esteems all days alike. Let every man be fully 
persuaded in his own mind, that he who regards one day 
above another may do so to the honour of God, and that 
he who regards not one day above another does the same 
to the honour of God (understand that he has so strong a 
faith that he certainly does not believe himself at any 
time freed from God's rule, for the greatest honour to God 
is to recognise him aright and those things which are 
given us by him: John xvii., 3, and I. Corinthians ii., 
12); also that he who eats all kinds of food, does the same 
to the honour of the Lord, for he gives the Lord thanks, 
and he who does not eat, does it also to the honour of God, 
and is also thankful to God, for no one among us lives for 
himself or dies for himself. Whether we live, let us live 
for the Lord, or whether we die, let us die for the Lord ; and 
therefore whether we live or die, we are the Lord's. For to 
that end Christ died, arose, and lived again, that he might 
be Lord of the living and the dead. But, you weak man, 
why do you judge your brother? Or, you stronger man who 
eat, why do you despise your brother? For we shall all 
stand before the judgment seat of Christ. For it is written 
in Isaiah xlv., 23: "As I live, saith the Lord, to me shall 
all knees bow, and all tongues shall confess me, who am 
God." Therefore shall each one of us render God an 
account. Thus let us not judge one another, but be this 
our judgment, that no one displease or offend his brother. 
I know and am taught in Jesus Christ that nothing is un- 
clean of its nature, except that it is unclean to him who 
considers it unclean. But if your brother is offended or 
injured on account of food, you do not act according to 
love (that is, you do not give up the food which injured 
your brother before he has been correctly instructed). 


94 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

Vex and injure and offend not with food your brother, for 
whom Christ died, and in return your goodness (that you 
do all things in your faith, you eat, you keep fast, or not) 
shall not be despised. For the kingdom of God is not 
food or drink, but piety, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost. 
Whoever serves Christ in these things, is pleasing to God 
and approved before men. Let us then strive to do the 
things which lead to peace; and that we may edify one 
another (that is, properly instruct), do not make God's 
work (piety, peace, and joy, as is written above) of no 
avail on account of food. All things are clean, but it is 
bad that a man eat with vexation and offence as a result. 
It is proper and good that a man eat no meat and drink 
no wine, indeed eat nothing, whereby your brother is 
vexed or offended or whereby he is made ill. You who are 
stronger, if you have faith, have it in you before God. 
Happy is he who does not doubt that which he considers 
certain; but whoever doubts and, in doubt, eats the meat 
about which he doubts, he is condemned, for the reason 
that he did not eat from belief; for what is done not in 
belief, is sin. Also thus should we, who are strong in 
belief, be patient with the timidity of the weak, and not 
please ourselves, but each of us please his neighbour by 
edifying and doing him good; "for even Christ pleased 
not himself; but, as it is written, '"The reproaches of them 
that reproached thee fell on me. ' " ' All these are words of 
Paul, from which you will shortly conclude three things. 
First, that he who firmly believes that it is proper for 
him to eat all things, is called strong; and secondly, that 
one who has no belief is called timid or weak; thirdly, 
that the strong should not let the weak remain always 
weak, but should take him and instruct him, that he be- 
come also strong, and should yield a point to the weak 
and not vex him maliciously. How we are to yield a 
point to the weak, you shall hear. 

Thirdly, Paul says of vexation, I. Corinthians viii., i, 

' Rom. XV., 3. 


Liberty Respecting Food in Lent 95 

to those who were present : They might eat of that which 
had been offered to the idols, for this reason: they well 
knew they believed not in the idols, and therefore with- 
out soiling their consciences they might eat such food, in 
spite of those who were badly offended by it; indeed to 
them he speaks thus: "We know that we all have under- 
standing or knowledge of the food which is offered to the 
idols. Knowledge puffeth up and maketh conceited, 
but love edifieth." Here Paul means, that you, although 
you, a man firm in faith, know you do not sin, when you 
eat the food of the idols, should, if you love your neigh- 
bour, favour him fairly, so that you offend him not; and 
when in time he is better instructed, he will be greatly 
edified, when he sees that your Christian love overlooked 
his ignorance so mercifully. After Paul has said that 
those well taught in the faith know well there is no idol 
but only one true God and one Lord Jesus Christ, it is 
further mentioned that not every one is so well taught as 
the first mentioned; for some eat the food of the idols 
in such manner that they still hold to them somewhat, 
and also that food does not commend us to God (as is 
shown above in the first part of the fourth division). In- 
deed after all that he says further : ' ' See that your power 
or freedom does not vex the weak, for if one of them sees 
you sitting knowingly at a table where the food of idols is 
eaten, will not his conscience be strengthened or encouraged 
to eat the food of idols? And then your weak brother 
through your knowledge and understanding perishes, for 
whom Christ died." See how strongly Paul opposes wanton 
treatment of the weak. It follows further on that when you 
thus sin against your brethren, frightening and striking 
their weak consciences, you sin against Christ; therefore, 
if food offends my brother I will rather never eat meat than 
that I make my brother offend. Here notice that, al- 
though the foregoing words are spoken of the food of idols, 
they still show us in a clear way how we should conduct 
ourselves in this matter of food, namely, that we should 


96 The Works of Huldreich Zwineli 


&' 


abstain in every way from making to offend, and that he is 
not without sin, who acts against his brother, for he acts 
also against Christ, whose brother each Christian is. But 
you say, "What if my brother from stubbornness will not at 
all be taught, but always remains weak?" The answer will 
follow in the last part. 

Fourthly, Paul writes in the above mentioned epistle, 
I. Corinthians x., 23: "All things are lawful for me, but 
all do not result in usefulness." Let no one seek his own 
good, let each seek, that is, strive for, the advantage of 
the other. Eat all that is sold in the shambles, not hesi- 
tating for conscience' sake; for the earth is the Lord's 
(as it reads in Psalm xxiv., i), and all the fulness of the 
earth, or all that is in the earth. If an unbeliever invites 
you and you want to go with him, eat all that is placed 
before you (that is, as far as the kind of food is concerned ; 
otherwise he would be a faithless glutton, if he ate all) 
not doubting for conscience' sake. But if one said to you: 
"That is from the sacrifice to the idols," eat it not for the 
sake of him who thus points it out to you, and for con- 
science' sake. I say not for your conscience' sake but for the 
sake of another's conscience. For why is my liberty judged 
by the conscience of another, if I eat with gratitude? There- 
fore, whether you eat or drink or whatever you do, do it to 
the honour of God; do not offend Jews or heathen and God's 
Church, just as I endeavour to please all men, not regarding 
myself, but the many, that they be saved; they are my 
followers as I am a follower of Christ. Here you see, 
first, that we should avoid for the sake of another what 
otherwise would be proper; secondly, that all things are 
proper for us to eat, that are sold in the shambles, with- 
out violence to the conscience; thirdly, how one should 
act about eating forbidden food after the manner pre- 
scribed for the food offered to idols ; for although our propo- 
sition and the one here in Paul are not wholly alike, still 
a good rule is to be derived therefrom; fourthly, that al- 
though your liberty cannot be judged according to another's 


Liberty Respecting Food in Lent 97 

conscience, nor you yourself condemned, still you should J 
always consider the honour of God, which honour, however, ^ 
grows the greater among men, if they see you for the sake ^ 
of the honour of God not using your liberty; fifthly, that , 
all things can take place to the honour of God, indeed the 
daily custom of eating and drinking, of working, trading, 
marrying, if a man cleaves to God in all his doings, and 
trusts that he is called to, and chosen for, the work by 
God. And do not let this idea, which may occur to you, 
trouble you: "Then I will blaspheme, gamble, commit 
adultery, do other wrongs, and think I am called to this 
by God." For such things do not please the man who 
trusts in God. The tree is now good, let it produce only 
good fruit. And if one lives not in himself, but Christ 
lives in him so thoroughly that, although a mistake 
escapes him, he suffers from that hour for it, he is 
ashamed of his weakness. But those who thus speak are 
godless, and with such words insult God and those who 
have the Spirit of God. Listen to a striking example. 
No respectable and pious wife, who has a good husband, 
can allow one to report that which is dishonourable to her 
husband or let a suspicion arise of a misdeed, v/hich she 
knows is displeasing to him. So man, in whom God rules, 
although weak, still cannot endure to be shamefully spoken 
of against his will. But a wanton likes to hear the disgrace 
of her husband and what is against him. Thus also those, 
who speak thus, are godless; otherwise, if they had God 
in their hearts, they would not willingly hear such dis- 
graceful words. 

Fifthly, Paul had Timothy circumcised, although the 
circumcision was of no service, that he might not offend 
the Jews, who at that time still believed that one must 
keep the Old Testament with its ceremonies together with 
the New Testament ; and so he had it done, as it is written 
in Acts xvi., 3. 

Sixthly, Christ himself did not wish to offend any one; 
for, when at Capernaum Peter was asked, Matthew xvii., 


98 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

24, whether his master paid tribute, Peter answered, "Yes. " 
And after they had entered the house, Christ anticipated 
Peter (who doubtless was about to ask him something 
about tribute) and said: "Simon, what thinkest thou? 
Do the kings of this world take tribute and custom of their 
children or of strangers?" Peter answered him: "Of 
strangers." Jesus said to him: "Then are the children 
free. But lest we should offend them, go to the sea and 
cast a hook, and the first fish that comes up take ; and when 
thou hast opened his mouth, thou shalt find a coin (it was 
a penny, that could pay for them both, but was worth 
much more than the real tax pennies, wherefore I think it 
was a tribute which they collected from Christ), take it and 
give it for thee and me." Thus Christ did not desire to vex 
the authorities, but rather to do what he might otherwise 
refuse. This paragraph I would not have added, had not my 
opponents represented it thus: Christ, they said, desired 
himself to avoid taxation. For this article is more against 
them than for them; thus, if you spiritual teachers in the 
fiesh are all so inclined to avoid vexation, why do you not 
then also help to bear the common burden, when you see 
that the parish is badly vexed about it and cries out: "You 
go lazily away from our work. Why do you not help us 
carry the burden?" Hear also that Christ gave the tribute 
money, in order not to arouse any one to anger. Loose 
the knot. There are more places still in the Gospel in 
which the word skandalon is written; but it means there 
either disgrace, or if it means offence, it is used in the 
following sense: disgrace and contempt, Matthew xviii., 
7. "Woe unto the world because of offences" — that is, 
woe unto the world on account of disgrace and contempt, 
since one despises, refuses, and rejects the simple (who is, 
however, as much God's as the highest), which the following 
words mean, when he says: "Take heed lest ye offend 
one of the least of these." Thus it is also to be under- 
stood, Luke xvii., I, which also is clear from what pre- 
cedes about the rich man, who did not let poor Lazarus 


Liberty Respecting Food in Lent 99 

have the crumbs. Thus also Mark ix., 42. But skand- 
alon or vexation, so taken, does not fit our purpose, there- 
fore from the first I did not wish to divide it into three 
parts. 

Of Avoiding Vexation. 

From the above mentioned arguments one can readily 
learn that one should carefully avoid offence. But still 
I must think that, as one should forgive the weak, one 
should also in forgiving teach and strengthen him, and 
not always feed him with milk, but turn him to heartier 
food; for Christ says, Matthew xiii., 41: "The Son of 
man shall send forth his angels (that is, messengers), and 
they shall gather out of his kingdom all things that offend 
and them which are not God-fearing and do iniquity, and 
shall cast them into a furnace of fire." Are his angels to 
do that? Yes. Then it is better that we should do it 
ourselves; then it will not be done by God and punished 
so severely, as Paul teaches us, I. Corinthians xi., 31: 
''For if we would judge ourselves, we should not be judged. " 
If we ourselves take the offence, it must not be taken with 
the judgment of God, to which now St. Paul arouses us. 

First, Christ says, Matthew v., 29: "If thy right 
eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast it from thee: for 
it is profitable for thee that one of thy members should 
perish, and not that thy whole body should be cast into 
hell. And if thy right hand offend thee, cut it off, and 
cast it from thee: for it is profitable, " etc., as above. The 
same is also said in Matthew xviii., 8, except that he 
adds the foot. Who is now the eye, the hand, the foot, 
which, offending us, shall be cast away? Every bishop 
is an eye, every clergyman, every officer, who are noth- 
ing more than overseers; and the Greek word episkopos 
is in German an overseer, to which the words of St. Paul 
refer, Acts xx., 28, where he says to the bishops of Ephesus: 
"Take heed therefore unto yourselves, and to all the flock. 


100 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

over which the Holy Ghost hath made you bishops (that 
is, overseers or shepherds), to watch and feed the Church 
of God, which he hath bought with his own blood." Here 
you see briefly what their duty is: overseeing the sheep, 
feeding, not flaying and shearing too closely and loading 
them with unbearable burdens, which is nothing else than 
giving offence, pointing out sins that are not present, so 
that weak consciences are troubled and made to despair; 
this is offending God's little ones: Matthew xviii., 6. But 
you see yourself, according to the words of Isaiah Ivi., lO, 
that his watchmen have become blind, all ignorant, stupid 
dogs, that cannot bark, taught in loose things, lazily sleep- 
ing and dreaming, indeed, preferring dreams to the truth, 
the most shameless dogs, which cannot be satisfied: shep- 
herds which have no reason, each following his own way or 
capricious desires, all avaricious, from the highest to the 
lowest, saying: "Let us drink good wine and become full, 
and as we do to-day, so shall we do to-morrow, yea, still 
more." These all are the words of Isaiah, and little is to 
be added. Do you not see that such eyes offend men 
much, and, although Christ tells us to pluck them out, we 
suffer them patiently? Understand also hand and foot 
which are so nearly related to you, as your own members; 
indeed, even if they are necessary to you for support and 
strength as a hand or a foot, still one is to remove them 
if they abuse their superiority. Now this paragraph is 
placed here by me to prove that offence should be avoided, 
and that one should not always endure it, but that every- 
thing should take place with timely counsel and reason, 
not with any one's own assumption and arrogance. If 
they do not do that, who ought to do it? We should 
recognise that our sins have deserved of God this, that such 
blind eyes lead us, the blind, astray and rule us. Nehemiah 
ix., 30: "Thou hast warned them in thy spirit through 
thy prophets, and they have not followed, and thou hast 
given them into the hand of the people of the earth" — that 
is, into the hands of the unbelievers. Also Isaiah iii., 4: 


Liberty Respecting Food in Lent loi 

"And I will give children to be their princes (note this well) , 
and old women shall rule them. " 

Secondly, the words of Paul are to be considered, Ro- 
mans xiv., I, where it is mentioned above in the second 
article on giving offence, in which place he says: "Him 
that is weak in faith receive ye, but not to doubtful dispu- 
tations." See you, the weak is not to be allowed to re- 
main weak, but is to be instructed in the truth, not with 
subtle arguments, by which one becomes more doubtful, 
but with the pure, simple truth, so that all doubt may be 
removed. Therefore I could well endure that those who 
are considered steadier and stronger in belief, also un- 
derstood how to make Christians strong in belief, and 
gave them really to understand what has been given and 
left to them by God; but they do exactly the contrary. 
If anything is strong, they wish to make the same again 
weak and timid. Woe to them, as Christ spoke to the 
Pharisees, Matthew xxiii., 13: "For they closed the king- 
dom of God to men, for they neither go in themselves 
nor let other people go in." By means of these words 
of Christ and of Paul, I think I have excused my arrogance, 
of which certain hypocrites accused me — that is, of having 
preached upon freedom concerning food on the third Sun- 
day of this fast, when they thought that I ought not to do 
it. Why? Should I snatch from the hand of those who 
cling to the Scriptures, which I myself have preached, 
their means of defence, and contradict the Scriptures and 
say they lie? And should I have in my hands the key of 
God's wisdom, as Christ says, Luke xi., 52, and not open 
to the ignorant, but also close it before the eyes of the 
knowing? Do not deceive yourself that you have per- 
suaded me to this, you vain, loose hypocrite. I will rather 
take care of my soul, which I have laden with enough 
other misdeeds, and will not murder it outright with a 
suppression of the truth. 

Thirdly, it is true that Paul had Timothy circumcised, 
Acts xvi., 3. But on the other hand, as he says. Gala- 


102 The Works of Huldreich Zvvingli 

tians ii., 3, he did not have Titus circumcised: "Titus, 
who was with me, did not want to be forced to circum- 
cision. He had this reason: False brethren have sHpped 
unseen among us, who are come into our midst to spy 
out our Hberty, which we have in Jesus Christ, that they 
might make us again slaves and subjects, to whom we 
yielded not a moment, that the truth of the Gospel might 
continue with you." Those who protect the liberty of the 
Gospel put this up before the ceremonies as a shield and 
bulwark. If Paul circumcised Timothy, still he did not, 
on the contrary, have Titus circumcised, although much 
reproach came to him on that account. What is to be 
done with him? Is Paul inconsistent with himself? No. 
If he had Timothy circumcised, it was because he could not 
keep him from it on account of the great disturbance of 
the Jews who were Christians. But afterwards, those of 
the Jews who had become Christians were better taught, 
so that he was able to spare Titus and protect him without 
great uproar; and, although some demanded his circum- 
cision, and, when it did not happen, were greatly offended 
at it, he considered the truth and Christian liberty more 
than any strife that arose against it from bad feeling. 
Notice also in these words from Paul how everywhere the 
false brethren had undertaken to take liberty from Christians. 
Fourthly, Paul writes, Galatians ii., 12, that Peter ate 
with the Christians, who had become believers from heathen- 
dom; indeed, he ate with the heathen. But when some 
came from Jerusalem to Antioch who were also Christians 
but converted from Judaism, he fled from the heathen, 
so that the Jews might not be offended. Paul did not 
desire him to do that, but chid him in these words: "You 
teach the heathen to live as Jews, because you are a Jew 
by birth"; that is, if you flee from the heathen on 
account of the Jews, you raise a suspicion against the 
heathen, that they were not really Christians, or they 
would have to keep human fasts, as the Jews, or else sin. 
And about this he said: "When I saw that he did not walk 


Liberty Respecting Food in Lent 103 

uprightly, I withstood him to his face." At this place you 
find Paul, who teaches diligently, not offending, not caring 
if a few want to be offended, providing he could keep the 
greater multitude unaffected and unsuspicious. For if 
even the Jews, on whose account Peter fled from the hea- 
then, became offended, still Paul gave them no attention, 
so that the heathen Christians (thus I call them that were 
converted fron heathendom) could remain free and would 
not be brought under the oppression of the law by Jewish 
Christians. 

When Christ spoke to the Pharisees, Matthew xv., il, 
"Not that which goeth into the mouth defileth a man," 
his disciples said to him : ' ' Knowest thou that the Pharisees 
who heard these words were offended and angered? " Christ 
answered them: "Let them go, they be blind leaders of 
the blind." See that here Christ's meaning is, as it seems 
to me, that the disciples should let the Pharisees go and 
should live according to their liberty and custom in spite 
of them; for they were blind and saw not the truth of 
liberty; were also leaders of those who erred as they did. 
Since now in the above two articles, I have spoken enough 
of offence and of the doing away with offence, it seems to 
me good to bring together in short statements all that 
touches upon offence, so that each may know where he shall 
yield and where not. 

I. What clearly affects the divine truth, as the belief 
and commandments of God, no one shall yield, whether 
one is offended or not. Psalm cxlv., 18; I. Corinthians 
ii., 2; Matthew v., 10: "Blessed are they which suffer 
for righteousness' sake." II. Corinthians xiii., 8: "For 
we can do nothing against the truth, but for the truth. " 

II. The liberties, which are given to man by God, 
touching the law of food and other such things, should 
be considered with regard to God and man. 

III. When one speaks of the liberty now under dis- 
cussion, that we are released by God from all such burdens, 
one shall not yield in respect to truth and belief, whether 


104 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

one offend or not. For Paul says: "All things are proper 
for me." (I Cor. vi., 12.) 

IV. But when the practice of liberty offends your 
neighbour, you should not offend or vex him without 
cause; for when he perceives it, he will be offended no 
more, unless he is angry purposely, as when the Jews 
became angry at the disciples' eating with unwashed hands 
and on the Sabbath: Mark ii., 24. 

V. But you are to instruct him as a friend in the be- 
lief, how all things are proper and free for him to eat. Ro- 
mans XV., i: "We who are stronger in the faith shall receive 
the weak" — that is, comfort and instruct them. 

VI. But when forgiving avails not, do as Christ said, 
Matthew xv., 14: "Let them go." 

VII. And use your liberty, wherever you can without 
public disturbance, just as Paul did not have Titus cir- 
cumcised: Gal. ii., 3. 

VIII. But if it causes public uproar, do not use it, 
just as Paul had Timothy circumcised: Acts xvi., 3. 

IX. Gradually teach the weak with all industry and 
care, until they are instructed, so that the number of the 
strong is so large that no one, or still only a few, can be 
offended; for they will certainly let themselves be taught; 
so strong is the Word of God, that it will remain not with- 
out fruit: Isaiah Iv., 10. 

X. Take this same view in other things, which are only 
adiaphora: as eating meat, working on holy days after 
one has heard the Word of God and taken communion, 
and the like. 

Of Being Offended at Innocent Customs. 

On account of all this they complain very bitterly who 
have learned the acceptance of virtues rather from Aris- 
totle than from Christ: saying that in this way all good 
works, as not eating meat, abstaining from labour, and 
other things which I shall not mention, are done away 


Liberty Respecting Food in Lent 105 

with. To these I answer as follows: Many mistakes are 
made as to the choice of good works, although we might 
well hear what St. James says, i., 17, that all good gifts 
and presents come from above from the Father of lights. 
From this we can conclude that all good which pleases 
God must come from him; for if it came from any other 
source, there would be two or more sources of good, of 
which there is however only one; Jeremiah ii., 13: ''They 
have forsaken me the fountain of living waters, and hewed 
them out cisterns, broken cisterns, that can hold no water. " 
Notice the fountain; notice the broken cistern. Thus 
Christ speaks to the young man who called him good, in 
order to do him eye-service: "God alone is good." If he 
alone is good, without doubt no good fruit can come from 
any soiu^ce except from the tree which alone is good. Then 
notice the angels and you will find that, as soon as they 
depended somewhat upon themselves, they fell. Thus 
also man, as soon as he depended somewhat upon himself, 
fell into the trouble that still follows us. See, those are 
the bad, false, broken cisterns, which are dug and thrown 
up only by men, not real natural fountains. Thus they 
thought that that would seem good to God and please 
Him, which they had attempted and which resulted in great 
disadvantage to them, from no other reason, as I think, 
than that they had assumed to know the good or the right, 
and did not depend alone on God and trust alone in him. 
Not that I mean to say that abstinence from food is bad; 
indeed, where it comes from the leading and inspiration 
of the Divine Spirit, it is without doubt good; but where it 
comes simply from fear of human command, and is to be 
considered as a divine command and thus trusted in, and 
where man begins to please himself thereby, it is not only 
good but also injurious; unless you show me from the Holy 
Writ that our inventions must please God. I shall also 
not be worsted, if you say to me: "Still the assembly of a 
church may set up ordinances which are kept also in heaven. " 
Matthew xvi., 19, and xviii., 18: "Verily I say unto you 


io6 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

whatsoever ye shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven ; 
and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth shall be loosed 
in heaven." That is true, but the observance is not made 
by the whole Christian Church, indeed only by certain 
bishops, who had for a time undertaken to place upon 
Christians certain laws, without the knowledge of the 
common people. Also if you should say that silence is 

\ a form of consent, I answer: The pious simplicity of Christ- 
ians has kept silence in many things from fear, and that 
no one has told them of their liberty coming from the 

N  Scriptures. For example, whom did it ever please that 
the Pope conferred all benefices on his servants? Indeed, 
every pious man everywhere has said, "I do not believe 
it is right," But the people kept still about it with much 
pain, till the Gospel truth gave forth light, when for the 
first time the mask was taken from it. Thus also here the 
clergy have taken a hand to control everything, after they 
have seen Christians willingly following them. Why? 
They fear us for the reason lest he who transgresses the 
command be obliged to give us money. Yet it all would 
have had no success, if such oppressive regulations were 
not given out as being divine. We sold them for that, 
and where the agreement was of that kind, after the truth 
had come to light, you can see what kind of an agreement 
it was. But we will hear what Paul says of works. 

To the Colossians, ii., i6 (which passage I have quoted 
above), he writes: "Let no man judge you in meat, or 
in drink, or in respect of a holyday, or of the new moon, 
or of the Sabbath days: which are a shadow of things to 
come; but the body is of Christ. Let no man beguile you 
of your reward in a voluntary humility and worshipping of 
angels, intruding into those things which he hath not seen, 
vainly puffed up by his fleshly mind, and not holding the 
Head, from which all the body by joints and bands having 
nourishment ministered, and knit together, increaseth 
with the increase of God. Wherefore if ye be dead with 
Christ from the rudiments of the world, why, as though 


Liberty Respecting Food in Lent 107 

living in the world, are ye subject to ordinances (touch not, 
taste not, handle not : which things are all to perish with 
the using) after the commandments and doctrines of men? 
Which things indeed have a showing of wisdom in will- 
worship, humility, and neglecting of the body; not in any 
honour to the satisfying of the flesh." All these are the 
words of Paul, which in Latin are not at all intelligible, 
but in Greek are somewhat clearer. But that each may 
well understand them, I shall briefly paraphrase them. 

No one shall reject you or consider you good on ac- 
count of any food, or holyday, whether you rest or not 
(always excepting Sundays, after God's Word has been 
heard and communion administered). Let the new moon 
fast and the Sabbath go; for these things have become 
only symbolical of a Christian holiday, when one is to 
cease and leave off sinning, also that we, repenting such 
works, become happy only in the mercy of God; and, as 
Christ has come, the shadows and symbols are without 
doubt done away with. One thing more, notice as to the 
time: It surely seems to me (I cannot help thinking so) 
that to keep certain times with timidity is an injury and 
harm to unchanging and everlasting justice, thus: simple 
people think that everything is right, if only they confess 
the fasts, fast, enjoy God {i. e., take the sacrament), and let 
the whole year pass away thus; whereas one should at all 
times confess God, live piously, and do no more than we 
think is necessary in the fast. And Christ says again, 
Matthew xxv., 13: "Watch therefore, for ye know neither 
the day nor the hour." 

Further, he reminds them that they shall not allow 
themselves to be beguiled by those who pretend humility. 
What is beguiling but disregarding the simple meaning of 
God and wanting to find or show to the simple another 
shorter way to happiness, and to seek therewith wealth, 
name, and the reputation of a spiritual man? Therefore 
Paul advises against this and warns us that we should not 
allow ourselves to be beguiled — that is, not allow ourselves 


io8 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

to be deceived. For the same hypocrites will falsely assert 
that angels spoke with them and revealed something to 
them, and will elevate themselves on that account. Listen, 
how well he paints them in their true colours, and yet we 
do not want to recognise them. Why do you dream here 
of the doctrines and ordinances which are chattered out at 
the pulpit in the cloisters? And why of the crows which 
nip the ears of some of you? Do you not now hear that 
all such things are suggested by the flesh, and not by the 
spirit? For the same depend not on the head of Christ, 
from which all other members being arranged, co-ordinated, 
and united, receive their nourishment or support of heav- 
enly life, and progress in a growth that pleases God. 
Notice here in the spiritual growth and increase a different 
method than in the bodily. In the body all members grow 
from the sustenance of the belly, but in the spirit from the 
head of Christ. Consider now human doctrines: if they 
are like the opinion of the head, they are sustained by the 
head; if they are not like it, they come from the belly: 
O ventres, O ye bellies! But if we are dead with Christ to 
the rudiments of the world — that is, if Christ by his death 
made us free from all sins and burdens; then we are also in 
baptism — that is, in belief, freed from all Jewish or human 
ceremonies and chosen works, which he calls the rudiments. 
If we are now dead to the rudiments, why do we burden 
ourselves with fictitious human ordinances? Just as though 
God did not consider and think enough, did not give us 
sufficient instruction and access to blessedness and we 
make ourselves ordinances, which oppress us saying: 
"Touch not, taste not, handle not"; which touching or 
eating does not serve to injure or disturb the soul. For 
only for this purpose have the false teachers pretended 
that this was injurious, that with simple-minded people 
they might have the name of being wise and godly, indeed 
also with those who prescribe for themselves their own re- 
ligion, saying: 'Ts not such abstinence and purification of 
the body a good thing? Is it not a good thing to prevent sin 


Liberty Respecting Food in Lent 109 

by good ordinances?" Hear how much weight Paul gives 
this folly. He says these things have only the form of the 
good. If they have only the form of the good, they are 
themselves not good in the sight of God, for they arise 
from ethelothriskeia. It is a Greek word, and means the 
honour or fear of God, which one has chosen for himself 
and to which he stubbornly clings: as, for example, many 
will not cut the beard on Friday and think they greatly 
honour God thereby; and, when they transgress this, they 
greatly sin in thus doing, and consider the rule that they 
themselves have set up so important, that they would three 
times sooner break their marriage vows, than to do anything 
against their reputation for wisdom. Indeed, deceive not 
yourself that things are with God as you have persuaded 
yourself; that is true superstition, a stubborn self-chosen 
spirit. Here in the words of Paul consider the greater 
part of the ordinances and rules, and you will find pretty 
things. Such are the most of human ordinances, of which 
Christ says, Matthew xv., 9: "But in vain do they wor- 
ship me, teaching for doctrines the commandments of 
men." He says licke\ Greek for impossible, in vain; 
that tells the very truth. Then this follows: But they 
are worth nothing, if you consider them according to the 
need and wants of the body. All food is created for the 
support of man; as far as it only affects bodily use it is of 
no moment, whether you eat this or that food. Go rather 
again to the clearer words of Paul and read them again, and 
they will be much clearer to you and worthier in your heart. 
Pious servants of Christ, these are the opinions, which 
I have preached from the Holy Writ, and have again col- 
lected for no other purpose than that the Scriptures might 
be forcibly brought to the notice of those ignorant of the 
same, and as Christ commands that they might rather 
search them, and that you and your people may be less 
reviled by them. For as far as I am concerned, it was 

' The text so reads in some editions, but the better text has matin. The 
words are synonyms. 


no The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

entirely against my will to write of these things, for the 
reason that, even if winning by the aid of the Scriptures, 
as without doubt I shall win with God's help, still I have 
gained nothing, except that according to divine law no 
kind of food is forbidden to man at any time; although 
among the right and humbly thankful this writing of 
mine causes great joy of conscience, in which they rejoice 
in freedom, even if they never eat meat at forbidden times. 
And as a result I must have a worse time avoiding offence 
than if I had left the world in the belief that it was a divine 
ordinance, which, however, I could not do. You know 
that the Gospel of Matthew, the Acts of the Apostles, the 
Epistles to Timothy, to the Galatians, both Epistles of 
Peter, on which you all heard me preach, are full of 
such opinions. But one must clear the dear face of Christ 
of such spots, unseemly things, and of the foulness of hu- 
man commands; and he will become again dear to us, if 
we properly feel the sweetness of his yoke, and the lightness 
of his burden. God bless this his doctrine ! Amen. 

What has been written above, I am responsible be- 
fore God and man to account and answer for, and I also 
desire of all who understand the Scriptures, in case I have 
misused the same, to inform me of this either orally or 
by letter, not disgracing the truth by shameless clatter 
behind one's back, which is dishonourable and unmanly. 
I desire to be guided everywhere by the New and Old 
Testaments. But what follows, I only wish to view as 
submitted, still with proof from the Scriptures, and let 
each one judge of it in secret for himself. 

Whether Anyone Has Power to Forbid Foods. 

I. The general gathering of Christians may accept for 
themselves fasts and abstinence from foods, but not set 
these up as a common and everlasting law. 

II. For God says, Deut. iv., 2: "Ye shall not add 
unto the word which I command you, neither shall ye 


Liberty Respecting Food in Lent in 

diminish aught from it." And also xii., 32: "What thing 
soever I command you, observe to do it: thou shalt not 
add thereto, nor diminish from it." 

III. If one could not and should not add to the Old 
Testament, then much less to the New. 

IV. For the Old Testament has passed away and was 
not otherwise given except that it should pass away in 
its time; but the New is everlasting, and can never be 
done away with. 

V. This is shown by the sanctification of both Tes- 
taments. The Old is sprinkled and sanctified by the 
blood of animals, but the New with the blood of the ever- 
lasting God, for Christ thus spake: "This is the cup of my 
blood of a new and everlasting testament, " etc. 

VI. If now it is a testament, and Paul, Galatians iii., 
15, says it is: "Though it be but a man's covenant, yet 
if it be confirmed, no man disannulleth, or addeth thereto, " 

VII. How dare a man add to the testament, to the 
covenant of God, as though he would better it? 

VIII. Galatians i., 9, Paul curses what is preached 
otherwise concerning the Gospel, thus: "If any other 
gospel is preached to you than ye have heard, let him 
that preached it be accursed." 

IX. Paul says, Romans xiii., 8: "Owe no man any- 
thing, but to love one another." 

X. Again, Galatians v., i: "Stand fast therefore in 
the freedom wherewith Christ has made us free, and be 
not entangled again with the yoke of bondage." 

XI. If he is to be cursed who preaches beyond what 
Paul preached, and if Paul nowhere preached the choice 
of food, then he who dares command this must be worthy 
of a curse. 

XII. If we are not bound by any law but the law of 
love, and if freedom as to food injures not the love of one's 
neighbour, in case this freedom is rightly taught and un- 
derstood, then we are not subject to this commandment 
or law. 


112 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

XIII. If Paul commands us to remain in the liberty 
of Christ, why do you command me to depart from it? 
Indeed, you would force me from it. 

XIV. When Christ said to his disciples, "I have yet 
much to say to you," he did not say, "I have much yet 
to teach you how ye shall lay commands on men," but 
he spake of things which he held up before them and 
which they, however, scarcely understood. But when the 
Spirit of Truth shall come, it will teach you all the truth, 
that they will understand all things according to the light 
of the Holy Ghost — that is, providing they do not at that 
time understand, either from ignorance or trouble and fear. 

XV. For if such commands are to be understood in 
this matter, then the disciples have sinned, in not having 
forbidden labour and the eating of meat, running to the 
saints, putting on cowls. 

XVI. Finally, God spake to Peter, Acts x., 15: "What 
God hath cleansed, that call thou not common." And 
the Sabbath is subject to us, not we to the Sabbath, as 
it is written above. 

These points have forced me to think that the church 
officers have not only no power to command such things, 
but if they command them, they sin greatly; for who- 
ever is in office and does more than he is commanded, 
is liable to punishment. How much more then when 
they transgress that which is forbidden them; and Christ 
forbade the bishops to beat their fellow servants. Is it 
not beating, when a command is placed upon a whole 
people, to which command the general assembly has not 
consented? Therefore, in these articles I leave to each, 
free judgment, and still hope I have to those thirsting for 
Christian freedom made this clear, in spite of the enmity 
to me that will grow out of it. It is those who fear the 
spit [on which their meat roasts] will bum off. God be 
with us all ! Amen. I have written all this hastily ; therefore 
may each understand it as best he can. Given at Zurich, 
in 1522, on the i6th of April. 


X 

Letter of Huldreich Zwingli to Erasmus Fabricius 
ABOUT the Proceedings, on the 7th, 8th, and 9TH 
OF April, 1522, of the Delegates Sent to Zurich 
BY THE Bishop of Constance 

(April 1522) 

[Epistola Huldrici Zuinglii ad Erasmum Fabricium de actis legationis ad 
Tigurinos missae diebus 7, 8, 9, Aprilis 1522. Translated by Mr. Henry- 
Preble. In Schuler and Schulthess ed., iii., 8-16; in Egli and Finsler ed., 
i., 142-54. 

Beginning with denial of the Scriptural obligation of tithes, then passing 
to the denial of the Scriptural support of fasting in Lent, Zwingli had wrought 
up the people of Zurich to the point of rebellion against the Church upon 
two almost vital matters. It was high time for some action on the part of 
the Church. Hence the visiting delegation from the bishop of Constance, 
the ecclesiastical over-lord of the city, and canton of Zurich. It was ordered 
not to bring Zwingli in, much less to debate with him. So his name was 
not mentioned and if it had not been for his persistence the delegation would 
have met only the Small Council and gone away with merely an admonition. 
Zwingli forced it to listen to him and also exhibited the support he had in the 
Great Council. The letter is racy reading.] 

HOW the Reverend Lord Bishop of Constance [Hugo von 
Hohenlandenberg], through his delegates, the suffragan 
Melchior [Fattlin], John Wanner (who, however, I know 
took part in the affair against his will), and N[icholas] 
Brendlin, dealt with Huldreich Zwingli, preacher at Zurich, 
before the Board of Ecclesiastics and the Senate' on the 7th, 
8th, and 9th days of April. 

^ I. e., City Council, hence the members in it are called councillors, but 
the Latin form Zwingli used has been allowed to stand. This body was in two 
parts: the Small Council, which contained only 50 members, and only half of 
these were on duty at any one time; and the Great Council, also called the 
Council of the Two Hundred, which included the Small Council. The Great 
Council was the deciding body on all legislative matters of importance, the 

* 113 


114 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

ZWINGLI TO ERASMUS FABRICIUS. 

On the seventh day of April the before mentioned Fa- 
thers came to our city pretty eariy, and I, knowing that they 
were coming, was trying to discover what their design 
was, and yet could not until late at night, when our be- 
loved assistant, Henry Liiti, came and gave me warning 
that the clerk, as they call him, was getting together the 
whole body of priests for a meeting early next morning 
at the usual place of assembly of the canons. I regarded 
it as a happy omen that the thing had been thus neatly set 
on foot by a courier both lame and without grace, and 
began to consider in my mind how they were likely to 
begin their job. At length I understood, as I thought, 
and when day dawned and we had come together the 
suffragan began in the fashion that will follow when I 
come to describe how the matter was carried on before the 
Senate. His whole speech was violent and full of rage and 
arrogance, though he took pains to hide the fact that he 
had any quarrel with me. For he avoided mentioning my 
name as scrupulously as if it were sacred, though meanwhile 
there was nothing that he did not say against me. When 
the tragedian had finished shrieking out his part, I stepped 
forward, feeling that it was unbecoming and disgraceful to 
allow a speech which might do so much damage to go un- 
rebutted, especially as I saw from their sighs and their pale 
and silent faces that some of the feebler priests who had 
recently been won for Christ had been troubled by the 
tirade. Therefore I made answer upon the spur of the 
moment to the words of the suffragan, with what spirit or 
feeling the good men who heard me may judge. The 
general gist of what I said, however, you shall hear when 
we come to the proceedings before the Senate. The dele- 
gates abandoned this wing as routed and put to flight, and 

Small was the executive committee, and both were representative bodies. 
The chief officer was the burgomaster, here called the President of the Senate. 
See my biography of Zwingli, pp. 42-44. 


The Delegation from Constance 115 

hurried quickly to another, to the Senate, namely, where, 
as I have learned from Senators, the same harangue was 
delivered and my name was avoided in the same way, and 
the Senate was persuaded not to have me summoned. 
For they said they had no concern whatever with me. 
After this the opinions varied for some time, but finally 
they decided that the Commons (that is, two hundred men 
called the Greater Senate) should meet in full assembly on 
the following day, and that the bishops' of the city, of 
whom there are three of us, should be warned not to be 
present. For nothing was going to be said in reply to 
our friends, no one could contradict so sound a speech, 
and so on. When I discovered this, I devoted all my energy 
to getting us admitted to the meeting of the Senate to be 
held on the following day. For a long time I turned every 
stone in vain, for the chief men of the Senate said it could 
not be done, inasmuch as the Senate had voted otherwise. 
Then I began to cease my efforts and to plead with sighs 
to him who heareth the groans of those in bondage not to 
abandon the truth, but to come to the defence of his gospel, 
which he had willed to have us preach. At length on the 
ninth the citizens assembled, and loudly vented their 
indignation at their bishops not being admitted, but they 
of the Senate which from its number is called the Less 
resisted because they had voted otherwise previously. 
The Greater Senate, however, compelled them against their 
will to put the matter to vote, and it was decided that their 
bishops should be present and hear everything, and if need 
be make answer. Thus, not, as Livy says, ^ did the greater 
part prevail over the better; for here both the greater and 
the better part prevailed. And this I have allowed my- 
self to write, not for the sake of laying any blame upon the 
Lesser Senate, but to show what plotting and underhand 
action can accomplish. For what else were the delegates 

' Zwingli uses this term of the people's priests or preachers of the three 
parish churches in Zurich, viz., the Great Minster, Minster of Our Lady, 
and St. Peter's. He explains it below. ^ Lib. xxi., 4. 


ii6 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

of the Bishop of Constance after but to say without witnesses 
whatever came into their mouths before the simple-minded 
Commons? Thanks be to God. For when the delegates were 
brought into the Senate, we bishops of Zurich were also 
admitted, Henry Engelhard, of Our Lady Minster Abbey, 
Rudolph Roschlin, bishop of St. Peter's, and I, Huldreich 
Zwingli.^ Then when they had been given permission to 
speak, and the suffragan had extended to the assembly 
greeting and blessing from his Most Illustrious Leader and 
Bishop (for this must now at least be admitted), he began 
with that wonderfully sweet voice of his, than which I have 
scarcely ever heard one sweeter in speech. Indeed, if his 
heart and brain were as good, you might say that he could 
excel Orpheus and Apollo in sweetness, Demosthenes and 
the Gracchi in persuasive power. I should like to set down 
his speech in its entirety, but I cannot, partly because he 
spoke in an involved and jumbled together style, without 
order, and partly because so long a speech could not, I 
think, be remembered even by a Porcius Latro.^ But 
since I had my note-book at hand and took down the main 
headings, in order to be able to meet and answer them more 
fitly, I will first put down these headings and then subjoin 
what I said in reply to each of them. 

With the manner of a consummate actor he said 
that (i) certain persons were teaching new, obnoxious, and 
seditious doctrines (in German wiederwartig und aufriihrig 
lehren), to wit: that (2) no human prescriptions and no 
ceremonials ought to be regarded. If this doctrine pre- 
vailed, it would come to pass that not only the laws of the 
state but even the Christian faith would be done away with, 

' Henry Engelhard had been people's priest at the Minster of Our Lady 
since 1496. He had also been a canon of the Great Minster, but in 1521 
resigned so that Zwingli might be appointed. This act of disinterestedness 
shows what a fine character he was. He remained ever one of Zwingli 's 
friends. He diedin 1551, a very old man. Rudolph Roschlin, people's priest 
at St. Peter's, was very slow in accepting the Reformation, was at the time 
of this episcopal visit an old man, and a few weeks after it resigned his place 
and was succeeded by Zwingli's bosom friend, Leo Jud. 
' Teacher of Ovid. 


The Delegation from Constance 117 

although (3) ceremonies were a sort of manuductio or "lead- 
ing by the hand" to the virtues, for he was pleased to use 
this word manuductio even before people who did not under- 
stand Latin, because, no doubt, the German term eine 
Einleitung, "an introduction," did not seem to him strong 
enough (or, if you will, fine enough). Ceremonials were in 
fact, he said, a source (ein Ursprung) of virtue, though he 
afterwards had the boldness to deny before all those wit- 
nesses that he used the word; (4) they were also teaching 
that Lent ought not to be kept, for certain persons in this 
city had ventured to withdraw from other Christians and 
from the Christian Church, though this statement also he 
afterwards denied with as much shamelessness as stubborn- 
ness. My lord Brendlin bore witness that he had not used 
that expression, though the whole Senate still bears witness 
that he used it. So persistently do these people fancy that 
they are free to say off-hand whatever they please and to 
deny off-hand what they have said, almost at the moment 
of saying it. He said (5) that they had eaten meat in Lent 
to the scandal of the whole republic of Christ; though (6) 
this was evidently not permitted by the Gospels, they yet 
ventured to declare that they might do it in accordance with 
the writings of the Evangelists and Apostles; they had 
violated (7) the decrees of the Holy Fathers and the coimcils, 
and (8) a most ancient custom which (9) we never could 
have kept so long if it had not emanated from the Holy 
Spirit. For Gamaliel in the Acts of the Apostles had said:' 
"Let them alone; for if this work is of God," etc. Then 
he urged the Senate (10) to remain with and in the Church, 
for outside of it no one had salvation. For (11) the things 
which were being taught so wrongheadedly were being 
taught without grounds. And not having satisfied himself 
in what he had said before about ceremonials, he fell (12) 
to speaking of them again, saying that they were the only 
means by which the humbler Christians were brought to  
the recognition of salvation, and that it belonged to the 

'Acts v., 34-42. 


ii8 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

duties of the people's priests (for that is the way bishops 
and preachers are named now-a-days by those counterfeit 
bishops, to keep their name sacred) to teach the simple- 
minded populace that there were certain symbols which 
denoted certain things, and that it was their function to 
explain and set forth the meaning and value thereof. At 
length, after the above turn in his speech, John' began to dis- 
course (13) upon grounds of offence, not unleamedly, I con- 
fess, only I wish that he had cited as happily the things 
against himself as those for him. He added that Christ en- 
joined with as much emphasis as he put upon any precept, 
that offences be avoided, for he added that most clear mark 
of indignation, "Woe!" "Woe to the world because of of- 
fences!"^ Going back also to Paul, from whose epistles he 
had quoted many things before he discoursed upon "Woe, " ' 
he called to witness (14) that in order not to offend the Jews he 
had suffered Timothy to be circumcised. ^ And what he ought 
to have said among his first remarks about seditious teach- 
ings, he talked on after everything else, saying (15) that 
no one ought to trust his own ideas; for that even Paul had 
been unwilling to depend upon his own notions, and had 
gone to Jerusalem to compare his gospel with the Apostles, 
etc. ■* And after a very beautiful peroration to his remarks 
he rose, and was on the point of going away with his allies, 
when I addressed them in the following terms: 

"My Lord suffragan" (and in this I made an indiscreet 
and ignorant enough blunder; for they tell me I should 
have said "most merciful Lord," but being unskilled in 
polished ways I take hold like a clodhopper) "and fellow- 
ecclesiastics," I said, "wait, I pray, until I make explanation 
in my own behalf." For that my fellow-bishops allowed 
me to do. To this he said: "It has not been enjoined upon 
us to engage in discussion with anyone." "And I," 
said I, "have no intention of entering into discussion, but 
what I have thus far been teaching these excellent citizens 

' "It should be Melcbior (Fattlin), and not John (Wanner). 

»Matt. xviii., 7. sActsxvi., 3. 1 Gal. ii., i. 


The Delegation from Constance 119 

I would willingly and gladly set forth to you who are both 
learned men and delegates sent here, so to speak, with full 
powers; that the greater faith may be had in my teachings 
if you shall have voted them right, and if not, that the 
opposite may take place." ''We have said nothing," 
said he, "in opposition to you, and therefore there is no 
need for you to make explanation. " But I said: "Though 
you have refrained from mentioning my name, yet all the 
force and power of your words were aimed and hurled at 
me." For, as a matter of fact, they were dealing with me in 
the style of the old gladiatorial combats between Mirmillons 
and Gauls, wherein the Mirmillon cried: "It is not you I am 
aiming at, Gaul, it is the fish I am aiming at. " So my name 
was kept out of sight and not mentioned, in order that most 
serious charges, if it please the gods, might be developed 
against me, whose name is Zwingli. While we were thus 
contending together, Mark Roust, President of the Senate, 
tried by entreaty to persuade the men of Constance to 
listen, to which entreaty the suffragan replied that he knew 
with whom he should have to deal if he listened. Huld- 
reich Zwingli was too violent and choleric to make any duly 
and moderately carried on discussion possible with him. 
I answered: "What wrong have I ever done you? And what 
kind of a way of doing is this, to worry so harshly and 
bitterly a guiltless man who has done his duty by Christ- 
ianity, and to refuse to hear any explanation? I have 
always felt myself bound to hope, unless I am mistaken 
(but perhaps I am mistaken), that if anyone ever came 
forward to contradict the truth and teachings of the Gospel, 
it would come to pass that the High Prelate of Constance 
would rush to its aid before all others and hear the whole 
case, and this by your help especially, whom he has even 
now employed as delegates because of your pre-eminent 
learning. For what would ye do if I wanted to go to him 
without your knowledge? If I feared to meet you? If I 
refused to have your opinion in the matter? Now, when 
I do nothing of the kind, but ask your presence in order 


120 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

to give an account of my faith and teachings, how have you 
the face to venture to refuse it? It could not have failed 
to rouse suspicion if I had allowed you to go away, even 
though you desired it; now when I appeal of my own ac- 
cord to your judgment and justice, how do you dare to aban- 
don me?" Then said they: "Our Reverend Master did not 
wish us to enter into a dispute with anyone, so it is im- 
possible for us to hear you. If you wish to take any point 
of doctrine to the bishop you are free to do so; if you need 
anything apprise him of it. " But I said : " I beg of you if you 
are not willing from any other consideration to vouchsafe 
me this favour, yet grant me this wish for the sake of our 
common faith, our common baptism, and for the sake of 
Christ the giver of life and salvation, and if you may not 
listen as delegates, you still may as Christians. " When I 
had thus adjured them the citizens began to murmur in 
their indignation, so that at last, driven by the urgent 
request of the president and the unworthiness of their 
course, they went back to their seats. Thereupon I began 
to speak in defence of the teachings of Christ to the best of 
my ability, and made answer to their main heads in about 
this fashion: 

I. My Lord suffragan has stated that certain persons 
were teaching seditious and obnoxious doctrines, but I 
cannot be persuaded that he means this to be taken of me, 
who for nearly four years now have been preaching the 
gospel of Christ and the teachings of the Apostles with so 
much energy. And yet it savours somewhat of this, in- 
asmuch as he made the statement before the Senate. For 
what concern were it of mine if such teachings were preached 
elsewhere, provided they were not preached at Zurich? 
Therefore, since it is not likely that the suffragan spoke of 
the affairs of outsiders, it is clear that his remarks were 
aimed at me. However much they disguise it, it is evident 
that here is the David to whom this Nathan imputed the 
wrong. But as to the gospel, it is no wonder that in one 
place or another there should be differences between those 


The Delegation from Constance 121 

who cling doggedly to evrdXcDaTa, that is, human prescrip- 
tions, and those who are unfriendly to the same. For 
Christ prophesied most cleariy that this would come to pass, 
saying: "I came not to send peace on earth, but a sword. 
For I am come to set a man at variance against his father, 
and the daughter against her mother, and the daughter- 
in-law against her mother-in-law, and it shall come to pass 
that a man's foes shall be they of his own household. " ' 
Yet there was no need of this answer either. For Zurich 
more than any other of the Swiss cantons is in peace and 
quiet, and this all good citizens put down to the credit of 
the gospel. 

2. As to the reproach, in the next place, that it is 
taught that no human prescriptions nor ceremonials ought 
to be kept, I will acknowledge frankly that I desire to see 
a fair portion of the ceremonials and prescriptions done 
away with, because the things prescribed are in great part 
such as also Peter in the Acts says can not be endured. ^ 
Nor am I going to listen to those who say that Peter spoke 
of the old ceremonials and prescriptions. Be it imder- 
stood, though, that if I should grant them this it is still 
clear that Peter was of opinion that Christians ought to be 
free from burdens and bitterness of the kind. But if 
Peter deprecated that old yoke so greatly, which was yet 
much lighter than that which we bear to-day, what think 
ye he would have done if there had been question of a heavier 
one? Now that the old yoke would have been more en- 
durable to Christians than ours (to say nothing for the 
nonce of the decrees of the pontiffs, which are much more 
numerous and onerous than the commands of Moses) is 
shown well enough by the excessive observation of fasts, 
the careful selection of foods, and the enforced leisure of 
feast days. For how trifling will the fasts of the Jews 
become which they ordained at times for those in great 
sorrow, if you compare them with these stated forty days' 
fasts of ours, institutions fit for serfs, and those that are 

I Matt. X., 34-36. ^Acts XV., lo. 


122 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

ordained in a sort of unbroken and continuous row in honour 
of the saints! Furthermore, if you compare the selection 
of foods, its observation is more onerous among the Christ- 
ians than among the Jews. They abstain from certain 
kinds of food, but not at a fixed period, with the exception 
of the Passover. We abstain from numerous kinds and 
for long seasons. And in the enforced leisure of feast days 
we surpass the Jews very greatly. But if Peter did not 
want the Christians worried by the lighter yoke much less 
would he approve the heavier. I denied, however, that 
I was of opinion that no human prescriptions at all ought 
to be kept or enacted. For who would not joyfully accept 
what was decided by the concurrent opinion of all Christ- 
ians? But, on the other hand, the decrees of certain most 
unholy spirits, who after the manner of the Pharisees would 
lay unbearable burdens upon the necks of men and not touch 
them themselves even with the tip of their fingers, were an 
abomination. And as to his having said, with a view to rouse 
the Senate to anger, that we should fail to obey the laws of 
the state, I said this was not the spirit of Christ or of the 
Apostles. For Christ had said, "Render unto Caesar the 
things that are Caesar's,'" etc., and had paid the tribute 
or tax. Nay, at his birth his parents reported his name 
according to the proclamation of Csesar ; while the Apostles 
taught : "Render unto all their dues, tribute to whom tribute 
is due," etc.,^ "and obey them who are set in authority over 
you, and not only the good, "^ etc. Hence it was evident 
that he had spoken more vigorously than truly, as would 
be made still clearer by an illustration. For all the peoples 
of the whole world had obeyed the laws most rigorously, 
even before the man Christ was bom. Nay, Christianity 
was the most powerful instrument for the preservation 
of justice in general, and the faith of Christ could not be 
done away with even if all ceremonials were done away with 
altogether. Nay, ceremonials achieved nothing else than 
the cheating of Christ and his faithful followers and doing 

' Matt, xjcii., 21. ^Romans xiii., 7. 3 Heb. xiii., 17. 


The Delegation from Constance 123 

away with the teachings of the Spirit, caUing men away 
from the unseen to the material things of this world, but 
this could not be described and explained in short compass. 

3. Then I showed that the simple-minded people 
could be led to the recognition of the truth by other means 
than ceremonials, to wit, by those by which Christ and the 
Apostles had led them without any ceremonials, as far as 
I had been able to learn through the sacred writings, and 
that there was no danger that the people were not capable 
of receiving the gospel, which he who believes can under- 
stand. They can believe, therefore they can also under- 
stand. Whatever takes place here is done by the inspiration 
of God, not by the reasoning of man, as Christ also thanked 
the Father, saying: "I thank thee, O Father," etc., "because 
thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and 
hast revealed them unto babes. Even so, Father, for so 
it seemed good in thy sight."' And Paul (I. Cor. i., ij) 
says that "God hath chosen the foolish things of the world 
to confound the wise." 

4. I had nowhere taught that Lent ought not to be 
kept, though I could wish that it were not prescribed so 
imperiously, but were left free to the individual. But he 
for whom Lent was not enough might fast for the rest of 
the year also; there would not be wanting men to advise 
fasting, and I presaged that they would be likely to effect 
more than those who thought that at the frown of their 
power and the threat of excommunication, everything 
would fall to pieces with a crash as at the frown of Jove. 

5. Certain persons, and they by no means bad ones, 
had ventured to eat flesh, and they were not tainted, but 
since they had not been forbidden by the divine law to eat 
flesh, they seemed rather to have eaten it in witness of 
their faith than to any one's reproach. And this was clear 
from the fact that presently when told by me that they 
ought to take into account the possible cause of offence 
they stopped, so that there was no need of this fine dele- 

I Matt, xi., 25. 


124 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

gation, inasmuch as the evil died out of itself, granting 
that it was an evil. Still I wondered exceedingly that I 
had been a minister of the gospel in the diocese of Con- 
stance for sixteen years and had thus far never known of 
the men of Constance having sent anywhere so magnificent 
a delegation to investigate how the affairs of the gospel 
were going on, but now when they had found a very trifling 
observance not broken as much as they seemed to wish, 
they filled everything with their lamentations, and accused 
the people of Zurich of being the only ones who had the 
effrontery to meditate withdrawing from the Christian 
communion. Yet when the suffragan denied that expres- 
sion, as I have said, and Brendlin supported his denial, 
though the whole Senate cried out in rebuttal, I allowed 
their denial in somewhat these terms : Since you deny the 
expression, show that it escaped you unawares and I will 
easily pardon it; as far as I am concerned you shall be free 
to correct any utterances you please. But the republic of 
Christ has suffered no offence and no disgrace if some few 
persons have failed to keep human tradition. 

6. And I showed that it was an unsound contention 
that the gospel writings nowhere clearly allowed the eating 
of flesh. For Mark (ch. vii. [15]) speaks in this fashion: 
"There is nothing from without a man that entering into him 
can defile him. " Here I showed by the argument from the 
preceding (in the way they manipulated the sacred writ- 
ings) that the argument of the following held good in this 
way: Therefore, whatever is outside of a man cannot by 
entering into him defile him. Words are signs to me. A 
general negative is no sign. If he had said "no food," 
he would have left out the category of drinks; if he had 
said "no drink, " he would have left out that of food. There- 
fore, it pleased him who is the Truth to say "nothing." 
Then he added: "cannot even defile." Hear! The Voice 
of Truth declares it cannot ; man, who is a liar, for all men 
are liars, says it can. Here the man squirms and says these 
words are not so clear, and must be interpreted in this way, 


The Delegation from Constance 125 

but the preceding words must be regarded and the words 
that follow, though this is what follows: "Do ye not per- 
ceive that whatsoever thing from without entereth into 
the man it cannot defile him, because it entereth not into 
his heart, but into the belly, and goeth out into the draught, 
purging all meats?" What can be said more clearly, if 
you please, even though you regard the preceding and 
the following? 

7. They added the words: "contrary to the decrees of 
the Holy Fathers and the councils." I answered that 
Engelhard, the ornament of our city, had carefully weighed 
with me those in which our friends placed greatest con- 
fidence, and that no such asseveration could be made from 
those which they treated as a sacred anchor. For the 
question was not whether Lent ought to be done away 
with, but whether it was permissible by the law of Christ 
to eat meat at that time. While I forbid no man's fast- 
ing, I leave it free to him. 

8. They had also added: "and contrary to very ancient 
custom." Here I frankly granted that it was the custom, 
and not a bad one. But if it were the custom, why was a 
proclamation added? I promised that I would certainly 
see to it that the custom should not be wantonly interrupted. 

9. And if this custom (he continued) had not been 
inspired by the Divine Spirit it would not have lasted so 
long, in accordance with the words of Gamaliel.' I an- 
swered that this and other things which were not from 
the mind of God would be done away in their own good 
time. For "every plant," says Christ in Matthew, "which 
my heavenly Father hath not planted shall be rooted up. " ' 
But selection of foods neither Christ nor the Apostles had 
prescribed. Therefore no one ought to be surprised if 
unhappy mortals are turning their eyes towards freedom, 
since Christ in his loving kindness has now illumined the 
world more brightly with his gospel by a sort of second 
revelation. 

'Acts v., 35 ff. » Matt. XV.. 13. 


126 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

10. After this the weighty speaker made his turn to the 
Senate, appealing to them to stay with and in the Church, 
for outside of it none was saved. This I met thus: "Let 
not this exhortation move you, most excellent citizens, as 
if you had ever abandoned the Church of Christ. For I 
am persuaded of you that you hold in fresh remembrance 
what is said in the narrative of Matthew, that the founda- 
tion of the Church is that rock which gave his name to 
Peter the faithful confessor. No one lays other foundation 
than this, nor can do so. Nay, in every nation and place, 
everyone who confesses the Lord Jesus with his tongue 
and believes in his heart that God raised him from the dead 
shall be saved, whether he be among the Indians or the 
Scythians, and it is fixed beyond controversy that outside 
of that Church none is saved, within which we all believe 
ourselves to be the more firmly as we glory the more cer- 
tainly in the hope of the glory of the sons of God. " Here I 
might have dragged the man forth and laid bare his notion 
of the Church, but I preferred to spare him, that he might 
repent at length of having said before the whole Senate 
that I was too rough spoken to make it possible to discuss 
with me. When he had thus made his exhortation I began 
to look to the end of his remarks, but things turned out 
differently from what I hoped. For he turned back to 
this other point and said: 

II. That rubbish (for thus, if I mistake not, that 
crowd call the gospel teaching) was taught without founda- 
tion in Scripture. Here again I fled to the protection of 
the words of Mark vii., as a sort of Achilles' shield, and 
shot forth these shafts: Do you want clearer proofs pre- 
sented to you? Is not Christ worthy of belief.? Or Mark.? 
I have gathered many passages together, but I abstain from 
giving the rest now in order not to nauseate the Fathers. 
Here my lord Engelhard opportunely drew a New Testa- 
ment from his pocket and bade me interpret the passage of 
Paul's Epistle to Timothy i., 4. I took the book and trans- 
lated the passage into German, and it is wonderful how they 


The Delegation from Constance 127 

all breathed a sigh of relief, recognising the passage, most 
of them, from the exposition of that epistle that I had made 
the year before. So much difference does it make at what 
point things are said. 

12. Immediately leaving these points he brought the 
ceremonials out into battle line again, wounded however, 
and I attempted to rout them completely again thus: His 
point that it was the duty of the people's priests to set 
forth the meaning of the ceremonials I upset in this way: 
The gospel of Christ had been committed to me to preach 
assiduously; what the ceremonials indicated those would 
set forth who lived by them. I admit that I purposely, 
though quietly, meant to touch the man's sore point in 
this. For what else do those suburban bishops do but 
stuff their purses with illusions of consecrating things? 
But if any master of ceremonials ventured to preach other 
than the truth to the sheep entrusted to me, I declared 
I would not stand it. 

13. Now what he had said about offences I should 
have approved in general, if all his words had not seemed to 
point toward keeping those who were weak always weak, 
though it is the duty of the stronger, as those fellows wish 
and ought to be regarded, npoSXaiAJSavsGdai, that is, to take 
up and comfort and help the weak, that they may also be 
made strong. Yet this one thing I added: Since he had 
spoken much of the anxious care of the High Prelate of 
Constance to avoid or guard against offence to the Church, 
had he no exhortation to his priests at last after Christ's 
fashion, bidding them to put their own immunity behind 
them and bear the general burdens with the rest of the 
Christian brethren, and to pay tax and tribute? For 
Christ, in order not to give ground of offence to those who 
exacted the tribute money, paid it and performed a miracle 
besides, but it could not be denied that all the people in 
every nation were complaining because the priests and 
monks and nuns were supported in idleness, contributing 
neither labour nor money for the uses of the State. They 


128 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

complained bitterly after they had left the Senate that 
this had been brought in outside the subject, as they say, 
but it seems to me that nothing could have been said more 
appropriately at this point, when they were talking of the 
High Prelate of Constance being so anxious about grounds 
of offence. 

14. In the next place, though I was aware that Paul 
had suffered Timothy to be circumcised, yet I maintained 
that he could not be persuaded by any means to allow Titus 
to be circumcised, and I tried to give the reason for both 
acts, namely, that with Timothy, while Christianity was 
still in the green blade, he had suffered the Macedonians 
to be circumcised that no breach of the peace might arise, 
but after the new doctrine had grown somewhat more 
vigorous, and Paul had learned by his perception of this 
that Titus could be saved without any disturbance, he 
saved him. ' Here I put forth all my strength to persuade 
the Senators to abide by the ancient custom until either 
the bonds of that yoke were loosened for us or the world 
itself consented together more clearly for the taking up 
again of freedom. 

15. Finally I said that those could rightfully be said 
to rely on their own notions and ideas who struggled against 
the accepted Scriptures and put human traditions before the 
teachings of heaven, not those who protected themselves 
by no other weapons or defences than the sacred writings, 
for the former trusted in flesh and blood, the latter in the 
truth of heaven alone, not one jot of which could ever pass 
away. Though I was aware that Paul had compared his 
gospel with the Apostles finally, I also knew that he did 
not do it for fourteen years. ^ And though I perceived what 
they were after with that illustration, their side was weakened 
rather than propped up by it. For I had insisted a little 
while before so obstinately that they should be present at 
my explanation for no other reason than that they might see 
clearly how I handled the sacred writings; nay, that I was 

•Gal. ii., 3. ^Ibid., i. 


The Delegation from Constance 129 

ready to give an account of the faith that was in me before 
the dwellers in heaven, or on earth, or in hell. And finally 
having begged the Senate to take in good part all that I 
had said, I stopped speaking, except that when the suffragan 
began to snap out something more and to drive it in vigor- 
ously, that it had been decreed by the Holy Fathers and 
the councils that meat should not be eaten in Lent, I also 
began to contend more recklessly and to deny that it had 
been decreed by any councils, at least by any general ones. 
At last when he had finished his appendix we adjourned 
the Senate. 

These, dear Brother Erasmus, are the wounds I re- 
ceived and inflicted in the assembly of the Ecclesiastics 
and Senators; these the means with which I ran to the aid 
of the feeble. It has all been written down off-hand as 
it was spoken, for the suffragan had brought a prepared 
speech with him, but I was forced to fight and defend 
myself as I stood. If I have said anything more briefly 
or more fully than it occurred, I think this should be at- 
tributed to human weakness, which hardly recognises how 
little power it has in remembering. Yet the main drift of 
the proceedings in general I have touched upon, whether 
in the Senate or in the body of Ecclesiastics or in private 
discussion. For the evening after the morning they had 
spoken before the body of Ecclesiastics, I stumbled upon 
them by accident and talked much with them. Thus 
I learned just where their sore point was. 

Good-by, and if you write to my friend [Hans] Oechsli, ' 
greet him for me. 

' He was pastor at Burg, just across the Rhine from Erasmus Fabricius. 

9 


XI 

A Solemn Warning by Huldreich Zwingli, a Simple 
Preacher of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, Ad- 
dressed TO the Honourable, Wise, Steadfast, 
Senior Confederates at Schwyz, that they should 
Beware of, and Free themselves from, the Con- 
trol OF Foreign Lords 

(May i6, 1522) 

[Ein gottlich vermanung an die ersamen, wysen, eerenvesten, eltisten 
Eydgnossen zfl Schwytz, das sy sich vor fromdenherrenhutind und entladind, 
Huldrichi Zwinglii, einvaltigen verkiinders des euangelii Christi Jhesu. 

In Schulerand Schulthess ed., ii., 2, 287-298. In Egli and Finsler ed., i., 
165-188. Translated by Walter Lichtenstein, Ph.D., librarian of North- 
western University, Evanston, Illinois. 

Egli in his specialintroduction to this treatise (i, 155-158) attributes to 
Erasmus's Quer ale pads theinaugurationof that movement against war which 
is now one of the most civilised agitations of our modern philanthropy. It 
was the abbot of Kappel, Wolf gang Joner, who incited Leo Jud, the bosom friend 
of Zwingli, to translate into German the brochure of Erasmus and it was 
published by Froschauer, the famous printer of Zurich, in 152 1. But though 
Erasmus was the protagonist, Zwingli is entitled to the honour of an independ- 
ent follower, and what he says about war is worthy of republication by our 
Peace Societies, and they are entirely at liberty to use this translation. 

Zwingli produced a profound though passing impression. Under the in- 
fluence of his words Schwyz resolved to abstain, for at least twenty-five 
years, from forming alliances of the kind he condemned, but alas! the power 
of the French gold was too great and in a couple of months she rescinded her 
resolution and entered again into the degrading alliance. But the transitory 
effect of Zwingli 's words is no proof of their weakness. He was a faithful 
witness to the evils of his times in his country and to-day his exposure of the 
insensate folly and devilish cruelty of war is good reading. It is nigh four 
hundred years since he wrote. Happily great progress has been made of 
late in impressing the common man with the wastefulness and fatuity of 
war. Once war was the amusement of princes, but the common soldier was 

130 


Warning against Control of Foreign Lords 131 

the sufferer. He was the loser whichever side won. When this fact is uni- 
versally, as now it is generally, perceived, then wars will cease and lo! peaceful 
means will be found always much more efficient in producing the desired 
results.] 

I HULDREICH ZWINGLI, a simple and plain preacher 
*j of the gospel of Jesus Christ, send greeting, my 
obedience, service, and love in Christ our Lord, to the pious, 
honourable, etc., senior confederates of Schwyz. 

Gracious and dear Lords, Amman [Governor], Council, 
Assembly of Schwyz. Your Honours may wonder how I 
dare presume to instruct a whole country at once. But 
this is only done in accordance with the saying of Solomon: 
"Give instruction to a wise man, and he will be yet wiser" 
[Prov. ix., 9], and so I was moved to make known to you 
my views so that by setting before you a model you may 
take counsel together all the more diligently, for when 
weighed down by a sad and painful loss' (such as has un- 
fortunately come to you; may God comfort you in your 
sorrow and guard you from the same in the future. Amen) 
not everyone is able without advice to find the right way 
himself. Besides, from your very sorrow there might arise 
serious quarrels and dissensions among you, by which, 
however, may God have mercy upon you! the damage 
will not be made good. In order that by means of the Scrip- 
tures and the opinion of worthy men you may be rid of all 
damage, I have been constrained by that great love toward 
you, which I have cherished since childhood (for I am a 
native of the county of Toggenburg and hence feel myself 
somewhat indebted to you), to make known my views. 
This I do in order that the damage done to such wise men 
may not result in still greater disaster, and while it is still 
an easy matter and the disease has not spread we may 
correct our mistakes. Otherwise it is to be feared that 
those princes, who have never been able to subdue us 

• The reference is to the crushing defeat of the French Army by the Im- 
perial troops in the battle of Bicocca in Italy. The Swiss mercenaries con- 
stituted part of the French forces and 3000 of them were slain. 


132 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

with sword and pike, may do so with soft gold, which may 
God forbid and may he never deprive you of his counsel 
and wisdom! Therefore I beg of your wisdom to pardon 
me for having the presumption to write to you, which 
I did not in . order to curry favour with any lord, but on 
account of fear of God and love for a worthy Confederacy. 
May God's wisdom shine upon you! I had to have every- 
thing completed within three days, the conception, the 
writing, the printing, for I learned only on Wednesday 
that the next assembly would be held as early as the coming 
Sunday. Zurich, May i6, 1522. God be praised! 

A divine warning by Huldreich Zwingli, a proclaimer 
of the gospel of Jesus Christ, addressed to the honourable, 
wise, steadfast, senior confederates at Schwyz, that they 
should beware and free themselves of the control of foreign 
lords. 

God created man of earth, as is written in the second 
chapter of Genesis, for no other reason (as it seems to me) 
than that he might be made humble by having been created 
out of matter, and that the common mother of all, namely 
the earth, might prevent her children from striving to 
raise themselves one above the other and also from quarrelling 
with each other. For the children see themselves bom 
of one and the same mother and nourished in one and the 
same manner. Aye, the reason why the heavenly Father 
caused all men to be descended from one man, Adam, was 
also for the sake of peace, otherwise he might have filled 
the whole world at once with people, or created men from 
stones thrown backward, as the poets tell of Deucalion and 
Pyrrha. So God also created man in his own image, 
[Gen. i., 2y], so that just as the three persons. Father, 
Son, and Holy Ghost are one God, who cannot disagree 
or quarrel with himself, thus also men's lives might be 
led in a spirit of concord, peace, and unanimity. This 
was also a prayer of Christ, for which see the 17th chap- 
ter of the Gospel of St. John [John xvii., 11]: "Holy 


Warning against Control of Foreign Lords 133 

Father, keep through thine own name those whom thou 
hast given me, that they may be one, as we are, " 

From all the above it is clear that in his eternal wisdom 
God not only represented unity in the creation, but also in 
the regeneration, which Christ gives us. Thus, that 
though in our carnal birth and origin we be not joined 
together in harmony, we become one by the spiritual regen- 
eration and renewal in one spirit, in one faith, in one baptism, 
in one Saviour Jesus Christ, as St. Paul writes in the 4th 
chapter of his letter to the Ephesians [Eph. iv., 1-6]: "I 
therefore, the prisoner of the Lord, beseech you that ye 
walk worthy of the vocation wherewith ye are called, with 
all lowliness and meekness, with longsuffering, forbearing 
one another in love, endeavouring to keep the unity of the 
Spirit in the bond of peace. There is one body, and one 
Spirit, even as ye are called in one hope of your calling; 
one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and Father of 
all, who is above all, and through all, and in you all. " Here 
God admonishes us with great care and pains through the 
mouth of the captive Paul to unity and peace: for we are 
one body, of which Christ is the head, and one spirit or 
soul, for all men are sustained by the one comfort that we 
all trust in him, by whom we have been called, Jesus 
Christ, true God and man. We have one Lord, one faith, 
one baptism, one God, who is our Father and whose spirit 
dwells in us. About all this much more could be said, but 
let us get nearer to the subject in hand. 

How does it happen that we Christians who are united by 
such powerful agencies have much greater quarrels than 
unbelievers? And how does it happen that in a Confederacy 
in which until now a fraternal love prevailed, for the sake 
of foreign lords violent quarrel has arisen? Answer: Real 
piety, by which is meant true worship and prayer to God, 
has disappeared among us, as St. Paul writes to the Romans 
[Rom. i., 28-31]: "And even as they did not like to retain 
God in their knowledge, God gave them over to a reprobate 
mind, to do those things which are not convenient; being 


134 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

filled with all unrighteousness, fornication, wickedness, 
covetousness, maliciousness; full of envy, murder, debate, 
deceit, malignity; whisperers, backbiters, haters of God, 
despiteful, proud, boasters, inventors of evil things, dis- 
obedient to parents, without understanding, covenant- 
breakers, without natural affection, implacable, unmerciful." 
From these words of Paul we learn that all these evils 
which he enumerates arise when we desert God, do not 
fully recognise Him, do not look up to Him, do not 
place our whole trust in him, but on the countrary despise 
Him and regard him somewhat as we would an old sleep- 
ing dog. But I shall not now consider the question whose 
fault it is that we have forgotten him. That matter I 
shall discuss at the proper time. 

Note well, worthy and beloved sirs, that wherever the 
above mentioned vices appear, God has been previously 
forsaken. And, vice versa, wherever people forsake God 
and trust in themselves, the vices named above are bound 
to follow as a punishment and penalty for the desertion 
from God. But whoever places all his hope in God, as- 
cribes to him all good and worthy deeds, estimates nothing 
higher than the knowledge and love of God, such a one God 
does not allow to succumb to the numerous vices mentioned 
by St. Paul. And even where such a man is allowed to 
fall, God protects him so that the fall may not injure him. 
This Christ shows us in chapter xv. of the Gospel according 
to John [John xv., 9, 7.] "Continue ye in my love." 
And in the same place: "If ye abide in me and my words 
abide in you, ye shall ask what ye will, and it shall b^ done 
unto you." And Peter says [H. Peter i., 10]: "For if ye 
do these things, ye shall never fail." The things re- 
ferred to would take up too much time to mention, but 
Peter mentions them just before. And I. John iii. 
[I.John iii., 6]: "Whosoever abideth in him sinneth not: 
whosoever sinneth, hath not seen him, neither known him. " 
But that a lapse cannot injure a truly devout person is 
proved by the fall of Peter [Matt, xxvi, 6^) ff. and parallels] 


Warning against Control of Foreign Lords 135 

and of David [II. Sam. xi. and xii.], both of whom humbled 
themselves after their fall and remained more devout than 
ever before for the rest of their days. Thus St. Paul writes 
in the eighth chapter of his letter to the Romans [Rom. viii., 
28] : "And we know that all things work together for good 
to them that love God." Therefore Peter after his denial 
of Christ, and David through his scandalous murder of Uriah 
and adultery with Bathsheba, were led to repentance and 
reformation. 

The people of our time, who do not recognise the fact 
that God has deserted us on account of our sins, are almost 
not to be counted, so numerous are they. They do not 
notice our many sins, for we are in fact free of none of 
those enumerated by Paul above, nor do these people realise 
how our physical strength is being undermined. Our 
forefathers defeated their enemies and won their independ- 
ence only by means of the strength derived from God, 
and they always gratefully and lovingly gave God credit 
for his aid no less than did the children of Israel after 
their escape from Pharaoh and passage of the Red Sea, 
when they sang [Exod. xv., i, 2]: "I will sing unto the 
Lord, for he hath triumphed gloriously: the horse and his 
rider hath he thrown into the sea. The Lord is my strength 
and song, and he is become my salvation." Furthermore, 
our ancestors did not kill Christians for pay, but fought 
only for independence, so that their bodies, lives, wives, 
and children might not be subjected to the wantonness 
of an insolent aristocracy. God favours such independ- 
ence, as he proved when he led the children of Israel 
out of Egypt because the Egyptian kings and people mal- 
treated them. For this read Exodus. Furthermore, later 
when the Jews demanded a king he informed them of the 
power and abuses of kings [I. Sam. viii., 10-27], undoubt- 
edly warning them to beware of such rule. See also St. 
Paul's letter to the Corinthians [I. Cor. vii., 21]: "But 
if thou mayest be. made free, use (strive for) it rather." 

Thus God continuously increased the honour and 


136 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

property of our ancestors in such bountiful fashion that 
no prince was ever sufficiently strong to defeat them. 
There can be no doubt that such was not due to human 
strength, but only possible by means of divine aid and grace. 
Thus they were assisted wherever they fought for country 
and liberty: at Morgarten, at Sempach, at Nafels in Glacis 
where 350 men attacked a force of 15,000 eleven times and 
finally routed them completely. At this battle there were 
also thirty men from Schwyz present. Many other locali- 
ties, where they attacked, and came back joyfully and 
with honour, have now for nearly two hundred years re- 
mained quiet and unmolested. 

But now that we begin to be well satisfied with ourselves 
and on account of things, which are purely from God, think 
ourselves most intelligent, which unfortunately is decidedly 
the lot of all human kind; and since we have fattened and 
become great in temporal riches and honours, now, I say, 
we draw away from God and pull in another direction 
[Deut. xxxii., 15]; also 526. Psalm [Psalm lii., 7]: "Lo, 
this is the man that made not God his strength ; but trusted 
in the abundance of his riches, and strengthened himself in 
his wickedness" (vanity), which is his great courage and 
renown. But he is no more than empty air; for nothing 
righteous, strong, or good is to be found supporting us. 
We poor human beings desire to be continuously strutting 
about, which is very distasteful to God, as we can see by 
II. Sam. xxiv. [II. Sam. xxiv., i ff], where David took a 
census of the children of Israel in order to see how power- 
ful he was, doubtlessly ascribing all credit for the might 
of the nation to himself. Therefore God became angry 
and offered David the choice of three plagues [II. Sam. 
xxiv., II ff], one of which he must select as punish- 
ment for having counted the people. David selected the 
bubonic plague, so that he himself might be stricken. Note 
that when David wished to brag and count his force, he 
showed that he desired to know the extent of that power 
which was not his, but God's. For this David was severely 


Warning against Control of Foreign Lords 137 

punished, so that he might remember the words of Moses, 
as given in the 32d chapter of Deuteronomy [Deut. xxxii., 
30]: "How should one chase a thousand, and two put ten 
thousand to flight, except their Rock had sold them, and 
the Lord had shut them up ? " 

Why might not then God also punish us, since we are 
continuously boasting of our power in some such fashion: 
we have done this; we shall do so and so; we can act thus; 
no one can withstand us? Just as if we had made a cove- 
nant with death and with hell, therefore as Isaiah says in 
his 28th chapter [Isaiah xxviii., 15]: "when the overflow- 
ing scourge shall pass through, it shall not come unto us: 
for we have made lies our refuge and under falsehood have 
we hid ourselves." Just as if we were made of iron and 
other people were pumpkins. Just as if no one could in- 
jure us, like those heroes, who wished to guard themselves 
against the Deluge by means of the enormous tower of 
Babel, as you may read in the eleventh chapter of Genesis 
[Gen. xi., 1-9]. Yea, he will certainly not let our pride 
go unpunished, and if he has shown much patience, it 
has been in the hope that we might reform. If we do not 
better our conduct, it shall happen to us as it did to Sodom 
and Gomorrah and to those who would not reform until 
the Deluge came, as Peter writes in his second letter [II. 
Peter ii., 4 ff]. 

Some time ago there were several among us who were so 
childish as to forget themselves and God and allowed their 
greed to mislead them, so that the devil, the enemy of all 
good men, sent just as he did the serpent to the first man, 
so sent in our time the pious people, who said to us: Men 
and heroes, why do you remain in this country and among 
these hills? Why do you hold on to this rough country? 
Serve us, we shall pay you well. Your name and posses- 
sions will become great in the land, and your might will 
become known to all men and will be feared by them. 
Just so the serpent said to Eve [Gen. iii., 5]: "Ye shall 
be as gods." Solomon warns in Proverbs xi. to beware 


138 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

of such promises [Prov. xi., 9]: "The hypocrite with his 
mouth destroyeth his [friend] neighbour." And Christ 
also says [Matt, vii., 16]: "Ye shall know them by their 
fruits. Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles.'^ " 
By which Christ means to say that these people, mentioned 
above, attach themselves only to those from whom they 
expect to continue to derive much profit. Hence they 
treated a foolish Confederacy in such a fashion, seeking 
merely their own gain, that without regard to our native 
country we cared more for maintaining their power and 
empire than we did for protecting our own homes, women, 
and children (of this good man beware). And how we 
have suffered from all this! Within the memory of man 
we have sustained greater losses at Naples, Novara, and 
Marignano in the service of these lords than we had since 
the Confederacy has existed; and while when waging our 
own wars we have always been victorious, in foreign service 
we have always been badly defeated. 

But it is to be feared that all these evils are counter- 
balanced in the minds of people to whom selfish aims are 
more important than the common weal. Nevertheless the 
commonwealth is suffering more and more, and is increasing 
daily in direct proportion to the spread of greed, incon- 
tinence, wantonness, and disobedience. Our only hope 
consists in a complete reversal of our behaviour and a reali- 
sation of the danger which we are running into. 

The greatest danger that we are risking is the divine 
anger, as expounded in the second chapter of Micah [Micah 
ii., 2, 8, 9, 3]: "And they covet fields and take them by 
violence; and houses, and take them away: so they oppress 
a man and his house, even a man and his heritage." And 
later: "Ye pull off the robe with the garment from them 
that pass by securely as men averse from war. The women 
of my people have ye cast out from their pleasant houses." 
"Therefore, thus saith the Lord: Behold, against this fam- 
ily (people) do I devise an evil, from which ye shall not re- 
move your necks ; neither shall ye go haughtily : for this time 


Warning against Control of Foreign Lords 139 

is evil." These words of the prophet, which show the rav- 
ages of war and the threat of the divine anger, are sufficiently 
clear. Everyone should think well of what war might mean 
to him if he were done to as he did to other Christians. Let 
us suppose that foreign mercenaries invaded the country, 
devastated your meadows and fields and vineyards, led 
away your cattle, gathered together your household effects 
to take away; had previously killed your sons in the act of 
protecting themselves and you; insulted and outraged 
your daughters; kicked your good wife, while she was on 
her knees, begging them to have pity on her beloved ones; 
and dragged you, pious old man, out of your hiding-place 
in your own house and killed you in the presence of your 
wife, regardless of your trembling and honourable age and 
the lamentations of your wife; and finally reduced your 
house and home to ashes: if all this happened and the 
heavens did not open and pour down fire, and the earth 
were not cleft asunder to swallow such rascals, you would 
say there is no God. But if you did all these things to 
another, you would maintain that such is the right of war. 
But let us see who is regarded a brave soldier, as judged 
by the deeds of war seen by the Greek poet Euripides 
who says in Hecuba .• ^ "In war he is regarded as evil who 
does no wrong, and who does not consider man the same as 
a frog." But unfortunately in war many gather great 
wealth, disregarding the anger of the Lord, which is fore- 
shadowed so terribly in the fifth chapter of Isaiah [Isaiah 
v., 8, 9]: "Woe unto them that join house to house, that 
lay field to field, till there be no place, that they may be 
placed alone in the midst of the earth. In mine ears said 
the Lord of hosts. Of a truth many houses shall be desolate, 
even great and fair, without inhabitant. " Furthermore, we 
must not let ourselves be shaken in our belief by the state- 
ment that war is a means of divine punishment, and that 
therefore there must be someone to make war upon some- 
one else. In the Old Testament many wars are described. 

' Verse 608. 


140 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

In answer to the first part of the argument let us hear 
what Christ says according to the i8th chapter of Matthew 
[Matt, xviii., 7] : "Woe unto the world because of offences! 
for it must needs be that offences come; but woe to that 
man by whom the offence cometh!" Thus many deserve to 
be punished and God inflicts war upon them ; but woe unto 
them who wage the war ! God punishes the evil by the hands 
of the evil, as may be seen by a perusal of the 29th chapter 
of Ezekiel [Ezek. xxix., 17-21], in which is described how God 
punished the city of Tyre by the hand of Nebuchadrezzar, 
and then later punished these same Babylonians, though 
they had been, in accordance with the divine will, the means 
of punishing the children of Israel by captivity and im- 
prisonment which is known to this day as the Babylonian 
captivity. Concerning this all see the 51st chapter of Jere- 
miah [Jer. li., 1-5] : "Behold, I will raise up against Babylon, 
and against them that dwell in the midst of them that rise up 
against me, a destroying wind ; and will send unto Babylon 
fanners, that shall fan her, and shall empty her land: for 
in the day of trouble they shall be against her round about. 
Against him that bendeth let the archer bend his bow, and 
against him that lifteth himself up in his brigandine, and 
spare ye not her young men ; destroy ye utterly all her host. 
Thus the slain shall fall in the land of the Chaldeans, and 
they that are thrust through in her streets. For Israel 
hath not been forsaken, nor Judah of his God." We see 
that God takes away victory in the same manner that he 
grants it. The former he does whenever a people wish to 
gain an advantage by their own unaided strength or seek 
to abuse their power. No nation has ever become great by 
war that has not ultimately been cast down by war. This 
is proved by the history of Israel, Sparta, Athens, Persia, 
Macedonia, Assyria, Medea, and finally by Rome, whose em- 
pire was greater and more powerful than that of any other. 
But what are they other than the conquered now? All the 
people they ever conquered could easily turn the tables now. 

In answer to the second part of the argument, I say : The 


Warning against Control of Foreign Lords 141 

children of Israel waged war either against sinful races, 
who would not permit them to enter the promised land, or, 
after they had arrived at their goal, against such as would 
not leave them in peace. These wars of the Jews merely 
symbolise the spiritual war that we bom in Christ and 
resurrected ought to wage against vice and unbelief, as 
St. Paul says in the loth chapter of his first letter to the 
Corinthians [I. Cor. x., 11]: "Now all these things hap- 
pened unto them for ensamples; and they are written for 
our admonition. " Or to put it another way : God used them 
as agents to punish the wicked. But that does not mean 
that the agents in such cases are good. God can turn evil 
to good. So I hope that our present misfortunes are sent 
by him for our improvement. When words no longer 
avail, the rod must be used; and if this also does not help, 
the headsman must finally be called in. Where God 
punishes there is still hope for grace, as Solomon tells us 
[Prov. iii., 11, 12]. Let us see to it that we learn to fear and 
know that such boasting, pride, and warfare, as we have 
been guilty of, do not please him, as is written in the 
147th Psalm [Psalm cxlvii., 10, 11]: "He delighteth not 
in the strength of the horse: he taketh not pleasure in 
the legs of a man. The Lord taketh pleasure in them that 
fear him, in those that hope in his mercy." He inveighs 
against those who believe that everything depends upon 
their advice and counsel: Isaiah in the eighth chapter 
[Isaiah viii., 9, 10]: "Associate yourself, O ye people, and 
ye shall be broken in pieces; and give ear, all ye of far 
countries : gird yourselves, and ye shall be broken in pieces : 
Take counsel together, and it shall come to nought ; speak 
the word, and it shall not stand. " In short [Prov. xxi., 30] : 
' ' There is no wisdom nor understanding nor coimsel against 
the Lord." So much concerning the first danger which 
is incurred by carrying on war and depending upon one's 
own counsel, thus sinning against God and making no head- 
way, but calling down divine punishment, accompanied by 
disgrace and misfortune. 


142 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

The second danger that threatens us from the princes and 
warfare in their behalf is that ordinary justice and equity 
will disappear. Thus an old proverb says [Cicero, Pro 
Milone, cap. iv., §io]: silent leges inter arma, which means 
that where armed forces are in control ordinary law is 
suspended. The word martial law is merely a euphemism for 
force. Use it as you will, turn it and twist it as you please, 
it signifies force. It is said that the disobedient must be 
brought to reason by force of arms if they will not submit 
to the law. Answer: Since you raise objections derived 
from secular matter, I shall reply in human fashion: Yes, 
if in war one only injured the disobedient, or war were only 
waged to make one's own people obey proper demands, 
we could put up with it. But how do you explain the fact 
that you take money from a foreign lord to aid him wan- 
tonly destroy, damage, and ravage countries innocent of 
all guilt? Aye, help lords who ought not to be waging 
war at all, such as bishops, popes, abbots and other clergy- 
men— all for the sake of money ? But if instead of speaking 
in human fashion, we spoke as Christians, we would say that 
in any case it does not become us to wage war. In accord- 
ance with Christ's teachings [Matt, v., 39, 44, 45], we should 
pray for them which despitefully use us, and persecute us, 
and if someone smites us on one cheek we ought to turn 
him the other also. Thus we may be children of the 
heavenly Father, Concerning this no more just now. 

Furthermore, these lords do harm, because by their 
gifts they lead men, however wise they be, from the path of 
reason and righteousness, just as Moses teaches in the 
sixteenth chapter of Deuteronomy [Deut, xvi., 19]: "for 
a gift doth blind the eyes of the wise, and pervert the words 
of the righteous." Oh! what thoughts may not come to 
us in this connection! Undoubtedly this thought, that 
many a good man among us has become blinded, so that he 
devotes all his energy and eloquence to further the praise 
and interests of some lord, so that the simple-minded, 
misled by his sweet but harmful words, might be induced 


Warning against Control of Foreign Lords 143 

to follow his lead. It is also greatly to be feared, that many 
of these people support and help each other, be it in court, 
in the council, or in the parish, in such fashion that many 
a worthy transaction will be subject to falsification and dis- 
tortion. Of this we are warned in the fifth chapter of 
Isaiah [Isaiah v., 20]: "Woe unto them that call evil 
good, and good evil; that put darkness for light, and light 
for darkness." If some say that we need some lord for 
we are a poor people in a bleak country, it must be ad- 
mitted that such is true for those who are not satisfied with 
simple fare and raiment, for what they want must of course 
originate somewhere. But if people did not try to stretch 
higher than the ceiling allows there would be no call 
for all these words. Julius Caesar after he had con- 
quered the Helvetians (from whom we in this Confeder- 
acy are to a large extent descended) commanded that 
they till their land again, because it was fertile'. How can 
that be that this land is no longer fruitful, but was so fifteen 
hundred and fifty years ago? Yes, our country has more, 
finer, and braver people than any land on the face of the 
earth, and there is enough produced to nourish us if we 
will only be content. No, the trouble with us is that we 
are so blinded by the money of the princes that we think 
little of the loss of our own flesh and blood, as long as only 
the prince is satisfactorily served. We care little also for 
the government, regardless of the fact that disobedience 
increases and law and order are disregarded ; regardless that 
in time all protection of the upright and all punishment of 
the guilty will cease. It will come about as a result of all 
this that the mercenaries will gain control of the government 
and abuse it in any way that they may wish. Also they 
will compel us, though we hold ourselves not to be responsi- 
ble, to say that we are doing something, and we shall be 
blinded so that we shall not be able to recognise ourcom- 

' The exact command was that the Helvetians should return to their 
lands, be supplied with grain for food, and rebuild the towns and villages 
which they had burnt. — Caesar, Bell. Gall., I, chap, xxviii. 


144 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

mon interests, and we shall not be allowed to consider and 
act in accordance with our rights and preferences. Under- 
stand me correctly : If a prince engages in negotiations with 
a council or community, and though it is not proper to 
offer pay or gifts, the transaction is concluded satisfactorily 
only by means of secret bribes; if then later on it becomes 
known that corruption was prevalent and it is realised that 
there was malfeasance in office and the like, I maintain 
that in such a case we owe the lord in question nothing, 
and in fact we are entitled to punish him for such deceit in 
accordance with human laws. And do not be surprised 
by this statement, the same is to be found even in canon 
law, and even if the pope himself acts as described above, 
nothing is due him. Read the chapters [in the Corpus 
Canonici] entitled " De Fraude, " " De Falsariis, " " De Prodi- 
tione, " and you will find in the papal writings them- 
selves confirmations of my statements. Your Excellencies 
will see from this that I spoke the truth, though I was 
bitterly reproached for having said that I wished a hole 
were made in the agreement with the pope and the messenger 
had been given something to carry home on his back. 
That seemed to everyone a very unjust way to proceed. 
But I spoke as I did on account of the aforesaid reasons, 
for I knew that the pope had been secretly bribing and there- 
fore nothing was due him. The same principle should ap- 
ply in the case of every other lord. If it is found that he 
has gained his ends fraude egisse, i.e., by fraud, one owes him 
no more than the Romans did Jugurtha, who by means of 
bribes sought to have the murder of his own brothers 
entirely disregarded, of which he boasted openly when 
leaving Rome, saying: "Oh this venal city! A merchant 
could attain anything he pleased if he only had enough 
money"; and in fact Jugurtha could have proved the truth 
of his own words if the upright Metellus Numidicus had 
not defeated and overthrown him on several occasions and 
thus seriously injured his cause; for too long a period had 
Jugurtha bred treachery in Rome by means of his money. 


Warning against Control of Foreign Lords 145 

And finally he fell into the hands of the Romans. Thus, 
in accordance with the proverb, " deceit turns upon its own 
creator," and it is well thus when someone attempts to 
commit treachery and does something behind the back of 
upright people. 

The third danger is that evil ways are brought home 
and perpetuated by foreign money and wars. This we 
certainly can all notice, for our people have never come 
home from foreign wars without bringing new clothes for 
themselves and their women folk ; also they have introduced 
new kinds of food, have become accustomed to larger 
quantities of drink, and employ new forms of swearing and 
cursing; in short, whatever sinful our people see, they 
readily learn, so that it is to be feared that unless we cease 
following foreign lords even more serious vices will be in- 
troduced. Furthermore, the bearing of women is made 
less modest and satisfactory. A woman is weak by nature 
and eager to have new and pretty things in the shape of 
ornaments, dresses, and jewels, as is proved by Dinah, 
who from mere curiosity went into the land of Shechem and 
there was defiled, as is told in the 34th chapter of Genesis 
[Gen. xxxiv., 1,2]. And does it not seem that if something 
glittering is offered to a woman she will at least be moved 
thereby, if not even ruined? It is also to be feared that 
in time much manly strength may be lost, though this has 
not been noticed so far. Easy life weakens and makes 
cowardly, for no one wishes to give up comfort and luxury. 
Who has a love — one says — does not like to die. Hannibal, 
the most dangerous enemy of the Romans (except covet- 
ousness, which was the worst enemy of the Romans and 
proved their undoing), could not be conquered until he 
allowed the soldiers to become effeminate. But after he 
had been at Capua for a winter' and permitted the soldiers 
to disport themselves in wantonness and lust, in the next 
spring Hannibal began to be defeated, and it was generally 
said that Hannibal had led an army of men to Capua and 
* The winter of 216-215 B.C. 


146 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

was taking a crowd of women away. What do you suppose 
finally results from all these golden undervests, rings, and 
silken clothing? Hector reproached his brother Alexander 
bitterly that he had always lived so luxuriously, main- 
taining that it had led to his flight from his enemy Menelaus. ' 

The fourth danger is that the gifts of the great lords 
will breed hate and deceit among us. For envy is the com- 
panion of good fortune, so that wherever great comfort 
prevails, envy immediately is created. And the envy 
grows apace, whenever one has much more than another. 
But when want prevails one honest man is as good as another, 
and the lowest often fight more bravely for their country 
than the upper classes. And after envy comes also the 
discord and disgust of those who say: You go ahead, you 
do this or that; if you gather more money, you ought to 
gather more of the blows also. In short, war of pious men 
and money is a school for all sins and a mother which 
bears us in old age (provided we attain it at all) only bad 
consciences. 

The last danger is that it is to be feared that we may 
fall into the power of princes, either of those who are in al- 
liance with us or into the power of those who are our enemies. 
For what is not all to be feared when pride, lack of energy, 
envy, and discord prevail everywhere? And if we should 
reach a stage where we are measured by a standard with 
which we have measured others, we could not bewail suf- 
ficiently our lot, but would say like Jeremiah in the ninth 
chapter [Jer. ix., i]: "Oh that my head were waters, and 
mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep day and 
night for the slain of the daughter of my people." May 
God forbid that it should happen to us as to the Israelites, 
who would heed no warning until finally they were in cap- 
tivity and stealthily sat by the rivers and bemoaned their 
fate [Psalm cxxxvii., i]. 

Therefore, pious, wise, faithful, beloved men of Schwyz, 
I call upon you by the suffering and redemption of our 

'Iliad, III., 39/. 


Warning against Control of Foreign Lords 147 

Saviour Jesus Christ, by the honour shown by the Aknighty 
to our worthy ancestors, by the exertion and hardships 
that they underwent for the sake of our Hberty, beware while 
there is still time; of the money of these clerical lords, 
which will destroy us and do not follow those who say: 
It cannot be done ; the Confederacy still stands ; the display 
of temper which has arisen is only such as occurs often in a 
quarrel between husband and wife or in a quarrel among 
brothers and is not due to any feeling of enmity. Further- 
more, we have as many inhabitants as ever; may God 
protect them ! And everything can be easily adjusted if you 
go about it in good faith and sensibly. At your side you 
will have our good people of Zurich, the city as well as the 
countryside, whom I surely hope that in future no lord will 
be able to induce to make any of these dangerous and 
harmful agreements. May God confirm them in their 
good intentions! Furthermore, you have your worthy 
dependents whose honesty also causes them to shrink 
from foreign lords. And if you will only walk again in the 
footsteps of our God-fearing ancestors, I have no doubt 
that a united Confederacy will be behind you. For if we 
do not change our present habits, I fear me that we shall 
suffer severely; yea, I can say in the words of Christ that 
as others have perished so shall we also perish. See the 
13th chapter of St. Luke, where it was told him of some 
whom Pilate had slain while they were sacrificing, where- 
upon Jesus said [Luke xiii., 1-3]: "Suppose ye that those 
Galileans were sinners above all the Galileans, because 
they suffered such things? I tell you. Nay: but, except 
ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish." What shall we 
think, except that a large part are to blame ? since we can- 
not hope that Christ will say in the same way that he does 
not refer to us. Therefore we should see to it that we 
reform. For if Christ cited a foreign people as an example 
to show the Israelites that they must reform, how much 
more are we, who are warned by the harm done to our 
own flesh and blood, in need of reform? otherwise the rest 


148 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

will come true [Luke xiii., 3]: "except ye repent, ye shall all 
likewise perish." Do not worry about the loss of riches. 
Those are worthless riches in order to obtain which one 
must perish. Such wealth is nothing more or less than bait 
by which people are caught like birds in a trap. Nor must 
you worry about lack of foreign assistance, but say with 
St. Paul [Rom. viii., 31]: "If God be for us, who can be 
against us?" Our forefathers were worse off in this respect 
than we and still got along. The fortifications at Arth and 
Nafels are no longer needed, the Rhine is a sufficient defence. 
All such fortifications are useless, unless God protects his 
people, which, however, he promises to do, saying [Hoseai., 
7]: "But I will have mercy upon the house of Tudah 
(those who recognise God), and will save them by the Lord 
their God, and will not save them by bow, nor by sword, 
nor by battle, by horses, nor by horsemen." Bethink 
yourselves of the beginnings of our Confederacy, how he 
helped our simple ancestors in exactly the manner related 
above. Just as he said to the children of Israel [Lev. 
'^vi., S ff]: "If ye walk in my statutes, and keep my 
commandments and do them. ... I will give peace in 
the land. And ye shall chase your enemies, and they shall 
fall before you by the sword. And five of you shall chase 
an hundred, and an hundred of you shall put ten thousand 
to flight," etc. [Lev. xxvi., 14 ff]: "But if ye will not 
hearken unto me, and will not do all these commandments ; 
and if ye shall despise my statutes, ... I will set my face 
against you, and ye shall be slain before your enemies: 
they that hate you shall reign over you and ye shall flee 
when none pursueth you." See you what he promises 
and what he threatens? He will surely keep his word; he 
does riot lie. If we do not follow him, when he is warning us 
quietly and gently, the time will come when we shall be 
ashamed on account of our pride. All God-fearing people 
should call earnestly upon the Lord that he may answer 
our prayers and cause us to improve. It does not matter 
that there are many who resist; God is more powerful 


Warning against Control of Foreign Lords 149 

than all of them. Let us not cease imploring him by 
earnest prayer; he will grant us an upright mind and good 
understanding, and lead us from evil ways into paths of 
righteousness. Such are the ways of the Lord. Amen. 

Schwyz, beware of foreign lords, they will only cause 
you disgrace. 


XII 

Petition of Certain Preachers of Switzerland to the 
Most Reverend Lord Hugo, Bishop of Constance, 

THAT HE will NOT SUFFER HIMSELF TO BE PERSUADED 

TO Make any Proclamation to the Injury of the 
Gospel, nor Endure longer the Scandal of Har- 
lotry, BUT Allow the Priests to Marry Wives or 
at least would wink at their marriages^ 

(July 2, 1522) 

1~0 the Most Reverend Father and Lord in Christ, Hugo 
of Hohenlandenberg, Bishop of Constance, the under- 
signed offer obedient greeting. 

' [Suplicatio {sic) quorundam apud Helvetios euangelistarum ad R. D. 
Hugonem episcopum Constantiesem ne se induci patiatur, ut quicquam in 
preiudicium euangelii promulget neve scortiationis scandalum ultra ferat, sed 
presbyteris tixores ducere permittat aut saltern ad eorum nuptias conniveat. 
In Schuler and Schulthess ed., iii., 17-25. In Egli and Finsler ed., i., 197- 
209. Translated by Mr. Henry Preble. 

This and the succeeding treatise are almost identical in contents, but the 
first was in Latin and addressed to the bishop of Constance, and the second 
in German and addressed to the Diet. The suppliants were perfectly aware 
that they would receive no answer. The bishop had no authority to grant 
any such request and the Diet would surely not presume to mitigate an 
ecclesiastical ordinance. What they hoped to effect was the creation of a 
popular sentiment in favour of allowing the preaching of the new views, and 
especially, for this is what they really most desired, the marriages which they 
intended to make or had made. 

The enforced celibacy of the clergy has always been a ground of com- 
plaint by both clergy and laity, and the source of much immorality. But 
the idea underlying it is noble. An ideal clergy is one wholly devoted to the 
Church, finding in her the complete satisfaction of their intellectual and 
spiritual nature and in her service their joy and peace. This devotion is 
more easily obtained in the celibate state, as the Apostle Paul declares (I 

150 


Petition anent the Marriage of Priests 151 

Your Excellency will perhaps wonder, Most Reverend 
Father, what this unusual action of writing a letter to 
yourself means, and not without reason. For nature has 
ordained that the unexpected should create not only wonder, 
but at times even a feeling of dumfoundedness. Yet we 
would have you to be entirely free and undisturbed in regard 
to this matter which we are laying before you. For we 
do not come to your Excellency in regard to anything very 
troublesome, but to find help. For we are so sure that you 
are both a most pious lord and a most loving father that 
there is nothing we do not promise ourselves from you. 
And this the fact itself shows, for we should never have 
ventured to write to your Fatherhood unless we had had 
thorough confidence in it. We desire, therefore, humbly 
to beg you to Hsten kindly to what we are going to disclose a 
little later, to hear it graciously, and to take it in good part. 
This is demanded both by the matter itself, which drives 
us to this appeal, and by the office which you fill as a loving 
father. The matter itself, to come to it at last, is this: 
Your Most Reverend Fatherhood knows how for a long 
time the heavenly teachings which God, the Creator of 
all things, willed to have made plain unto the poor race of 
men by one no way inferior to himself, by his Son, in all 
things his equal, have, not without the utmost loss to the 
cause of salvation, been lying hidden through the ignorance, 
not to say evil intentions, of certain persons, and how rudely, 
when he had determined to recall and renew those teachings 
in our day by a sort of second revelation, certain persons 
attack or defend them. For all the efforts of these de- 
fenders are aimed at putting an end to the whole conflict 
by the first onset, and if they fail in this they collapse 
utterly, but the attacking party are so shamelessly per- 
sistent in their contention that though thrown upon their 
backs by the boss of the shield of Holy Writ and pierced 

Cor., vii., 32). But the history of those churches whose clergy are obUgated 
to live celibate lives abundantly testifies to the impossibility of getting these 
clergy to be chaste.] 


152 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

by the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God, they 
will not yield, but would rather contend against Christ 
than abandon their pretensions, until they be compelled 
to abandon both Christ and their own pretensions, after 
the fashion of the Jews of old, who having fought against 
the living Christ till they had slain him, pursued him even 
when dead, till they all likewise perished themselves. And 
though we do not by any means willingly predict this same 
ill-omened end for the present misguided lot, we cannot 
help fearing that it may come to pass sometime, and for 
that we are not without reasons. For as in the old days 
the Jews cast out in vain from the S3niagogue those who 
believed in Christ (for the faith grew more and more each 
day), so in these days of ours, if any continue to frighten 
away or even to destroy the real heralds of Christ, they will 
meet with the same result. Therefore must the words of 
Gamaliel ' be pounded into them often, that they may keep 
their hands off of those who bring us the commands of 
heaven. For if it be of God it cannot be destroyed, for 
it were foUy for any to try to fight against God; but if it 
be of men it will perish of itself. Meanwhile most w^atchful 
care should be taken lest, as those poor wretches perished 
miserably in their doomed city, some disaster overwhelm 
us unawares. For the word of God has never been dis- 
regarded with safety. Therefore, Most Reverend Father, 
we beseech you by our Lord Jesus Christ, not to join those 
who aim at putting under a bushel, nay, at extinguishing, 
the light that came into the world to illumine all men, and 
who call evil good and good evil, turning sweet into bitter 
and light into darkness, ^ but rather to join those who have 
this one desire, that the whole concourse of Christians 
return to their head, which is Christ, and form one body in 
him, and, having received the Spirit of God, recognise the 
blessings bestowed upon them by God. •* And this we see is 
by no means the case with those who promise themselves 

* Acts v., 34 #. ' Isa. v., 20. 

3 Col. i., 18; I Cor. xii., \2 ff.\ Eph. iv., 16. 


Petition anent the Marriage of Priests 153 

some sort of peace, if human prescriptions be set before 
Christ even. In God we ought to be made one, for He Him- 
self is one. In man, who is constantly divided against 
himself, how is it possible that we be made one? Christ 
prayed to the Father to make us one in him, and shall 
man dare to promise us unity in him?' In one God, in 
one faith, in one baptism we shall certainly be made one, 
for these are one. In some one man, when there are so 
many laws contradicting each other and such divergent 
opinions, so far are we from being made one that in no 
surer way can we be led astray into error and disagreement 
than in this. Nay, we see one and the same man often 
at variance with himself in these points. 

Those things that we have just set forth and all other 
things that urge us to unity, whence can they be more clearly 
and purely got than from their very fountain head? He that 
draweth from that shall abound in the water that springs 
forth into everlasting life. But the well is deep, and we have 
nothing to draw with, unless he who is eager to be drawn 
brings us rope and bucket and windlass, and after the man- 
ner of Moses, graciously opens a well for our feeble souls, at 
which the thirsty sheep may drink and be led back to the 
heavenly pastures, which surely are found in no other 
comer of the universe than in the Gospel. ^ For what other 
fountain head is there than Christ himself, who invites 
us to himself freely, saying: "If anyone thirsteth, let him 
come to me and drink. ' ' •* For he desires that we all receive 
of his abundance, we who are in need of all things. For 
we have neither silver nor gold wherewith to satisfy him, 
but he urges us to hasten to him with joyftilness, to drink 
freely. Who has ever shown himself so liberal an inn- 
keeper among men as to suffer his wine to be poured out 
and distributed without charge save Christ alone, who 

'John xvii., 20^. 

» It would seem that Zwingli here made a slip. He meant Jacob (see 
John iv., 6), not Moses. 
3john vii., 37. 


154 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

bestows his blessings free so plentifully? And if we shall 
not seize the favour that offers itself to us thus freely, what 
hope awaits us? What excuse, pray, shall we make? 
Of what tortures shall we not judge ourselves worthy if 
we repel from us him who desires to become so near a friend? 
We are aware that our life differs all too widely from the 
pattern of the Gospel, but is the Gospel on that account 
to be abolished and done away with? Ought we not 
rather to devote ourselves vigorously to correcting our 
faults according to its standard and to subduing our feeble- 
ness, since it is the one thing, could we only believe it, 
from the inspiration of which salvation will come to us, 
according to the command of Christ when he sent forth 
his Apostles to preach the Gospel with these words : "Preach 
the Gospel (not your own theories or decrees or the regu- 
lations which some chance shall happen to dictate) to 
every creature," And he added: "Whosoever belie veth" 
(the Gospel which has been preached, that is), "and is 
baptised, shall be saved," and on the other hand, "Who- 
soever believeth not, shall be damned."^ Since therefore, 
as we have said, God, as of old he used to warn Israel 
time and again by the mouth of his prophets, now deigns in 
our day to illumine us with his Gospel, in order to renew his 
covenant which cannot be annulled, we have thought that 
this opportunity ought by no means to be neglected, nay, 
that we ought to strive with unremitting effort that as 
many as possible may share in the glory of this salvation. 
And inasmuch as meanwhile a report reaches us that by 
the wickedness of certain persons your heart has been so 
hardened that you mean shortly to put forth a proclama- 
tion warning us to turn aside from the Gospel if in any part 
it shall prove at variance with human tradition, though the 
report hardly deserves credence among us, yet we are moved 
somewhat, not indeed to hesitate in slothful fear, but to 
pity your lot, if things are as they are commonly reported, 
that this pestiferous class of men, who confound all things 

'Mark xvi., 15/. 


Petition anent the Marriage of Priests 155 

to serve their own purposes, have been able to extend their 
influence even to yourself. But heaven forbid! For we 
place such high hope in you that we doubt not we shall 
do a thing acceptable to you if we shall show the utmost 
faithfulness in the interests of the Gospel. For we cannot 
in any way be persuaded that you desire to see the duty 
that belongs peculiarly to your office neglected and aban- 
doned. For Christ sent you not to baptise nor to anoint, 
but to preach the gospel. May heaven bless our under- 
taking! We have determined to spread abroad the know- 
ledge of the Gospel with uninterrupted effort, and to do it 
so seasonably that none shall have a right to complain that 
we have done him any injury. But if we shall not attain 
a prosperous issue in this according to the judgment of 
men, there is no cause to wonder. For it is a rock of offence 
and a stumbling-block and a sign that is proving false. 
For he came unto his own, and his own received him not. 

For these reasons it is becoming that your Fatherhood 
should look with favour upon our vigorous efforts, which 
though perhaps uncommon are by no means unconsidered, 
and that you should not only permit but help and advance 
this business, which is Christ's, not ours. That will be 
above all things honourable and worthy of a bishop. Nay 
it will belong to you, not to take upon your shoulders some 
part merely of the work undertaken, but, like Moses, 
to lead the way and to beat back or destroy the obstacles, 
so far at least as you can; and you can by encouraging and 
urging men to this task, or, if that is too much, by approving 
and favouring it, and removing grounds of offence. 

For among the things that threaten most to harm the 
budding teachings of Christ are grounds of offence. For 
how, by the everlasting God, will the simple-minded com- 
mons believe in him who even while he preaches the Gospel 
is thought by them to be licentious and a shameless dog? 
Can anything happen more disastrous to our sacred calling? 
We beg you, therefore, to show yourself as indulgent to- 
wards the second part of our petition as we believe you to be. 


156 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

We think that your most Reverend Fatherhood is not 
unaware how unsuccessfully and scantily the prescriptions in 
regard to chastity that have come down to our times from our 
predecessors have been kept by the general run of priests, 
and oh, that they could have vouchsafed us strength to 
keep their commands as easily as they gave them ! Yet God 
willed not that this be granted to man, that this gift of 
gods and angels might not be put down to the credit of man, 
but of God only. For this is plainly shown by the words of 
Christ (Matthew xix., 10-12) when, after much discussion 
had taken place between himself and the Pharisees with 
regard to marriage, and his disciples said that, if the case 
were such as the discussion showed, it were better not to 
marry, he answered that not all men were capable of chastity, 
but only those to whom it had been given, wishing to show 
that it was a gift of God that was given to some men in 
such wise that they might recognise that the divine good- 
ness and not their own strength was of avail in this thing. 
And this is evidently indicated by what follows a little 
later, when, having made particular mention of eunuchs, he 
leaves it free to every man to keep or not to keep the law of 
chastity, saying, "He that is able to receive it, let him receive 
it. " He meant, no doubt, that they to whom it was granted 
from above were bound to keep the law. For otherwise none 
could hold out under it. We, then, having tried with little 
enough success alas ! to obey the law (for the disease must be 
boldly disclosed to the physician), have discovered that the 
gift has been denied unto us, and we have meditated long 
within ourselves how we might remedy our ill-starred at- 
tempts at chastity. ' And turning the matter over on all 
sides, we found nothing encouraging or propitious until 
we began to chew the cuds, as it were, like the cattle, over 
those words of Christ just quoted. For then a sort of 
loathing of otirselves began to creep over us from the odour 
of it until we began to be disgusted that through careless 
thinking we had made a law unto ourselves of that v^hich 

' CJ. letter of Zwingli to Heinrich Utinger, Dec. 5, 1518. (vii., iiojf). 


Petition anent the Marriage of Priests 157 

Christ had left free, as if the maintenance of chastity de- 
pended upon our own strength. Then presently a blush of 
shame overspread our faces, just as Adam, when he was going 
to be like the gods, found first nothing but his own naked- 
ness, ' then an angry God, and shortly after a whole cart-load 
of ills. For who would not repent when he had looked upon 
the pitiable result of his own carelessness? For what else 
is it, by the everlasting God! than absolute folly, nay even, 
shamelessness, to arrogate to one's self what belongs to 
God alone? To think one's self able to do that than which 
there is nothing one is less able to do? But after that loath- 
ing of ourselves through which we recognised at once our 
rashness and our weakness, the hope of a remedy began to 
show itself, though from afar. For weighing more carefully 
Christ's words and the custom of our predecessors in this 
matter, we found that the whole question was far easier 
than we had thought. For when he says, "All men cannot 
receive this saying," and again, "He that is able to receive 
it, let him receive it," he prescribes no punishment for 
them that cannot receive it. Nay, either because of the 
vastness of the thing which he did not wish enjoined upon 
each and all, or on account of our weakness, which he knows 
better than we ourselves, he did not want this thing laid 
up against us, and so left it free. Therefore our souls 
which had been nigh unto despair were mightily refreshed 
when we learned those who were unable to receive the saying 
were threatened with no punishment by him who can send 
both body and soul into hell. 

But the fathers seemed to have cast an anxious eye in 
this direction too, when they showed themselves unwilling to 
enjoin chastity upon all without exception, or to require a 
vow of chastity from others — the priests, at least — and even 
shielded human weakness with clever words, as was proper, 
in this way : When the sponsor who was accustomed to make 
answer for all who were to be confirmed was asked, "Are they 
righteous, these whom you present? " he was wont to answer: 

' Gen. iii., lo. 


158 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

' ' They are righteous. " " Are they well trained ? " " They 
are well trained, " etc. When, however, they came to chas- 
tity— "Are they chaste?" he answered, "As far as human 
frailty allows." Thus it appears that neither our predeces- 
sors nor the fathers in our own day wanted that boimd hard 
and fast which Christ had suffered to be free, lest they might 
smear the sweet yoke of the Lord with bitter wormwood. 

Having, I say, thus balanced these considerations, to 
wit, that we are held to the maintenance of chastity by 
neither divine nor hiiman law, we considered nevertheless 
that though chastity go free, yet animal passion ought not 
to roam promiscuously, but to be bounded by rule and 
constancy, and forced into reasonable limits, like the rest 
of the course of our life, which though free becomes wildness 
and confusion, unless it be restrained by moderation, that we 
sink not to the level of swine. And this we see the Maker 
of all things willed from the beginning of creation, when he 
fashioned for Adam from his rib one woman only as a 
helpmeet and not a group or crowd of women, and joined 
her presently by so firm a bond that a man leaves father 
and mother sooner than his wife, for the two unite to form 
one flesh. Futhermore if we run through the whole of the 
New Testament we find nowhere anything that favours free 
concubinage, but everything in approval of marriage. 
Therefore it appears to us most true and most right that 
for a Christian no third possibility besides chastity or 
marriage is left, and that he should live chastely if that is 
given unto him from above, or marry a wife if he be on fire 
with passion, and this we shall show more clearly in a little 
while from the truly sacred writings. Hence we beseech your 
mercy, wisdom, and learning, illustrious Leader, to show 
yourself the first to lay hold upon the glory of taking the 
lead over all the bishops of Germany in right thinking upon 
Christianity, since you see Christ bestowing especial favour 
upon this age of ours and revealing himself more clearly 
than for several ages since, while from the whole great 
body of bishops scarcely one or two thus far have shown 


Petition anent the Marriage of Priests 159 

themselves fairly on the side of the revivified Christianity, 
and while others continue to thrust ill-feigned chastity upon 
the unfortunate general body of our fellow bishops, do you 
suffer those who are consumed with passion to marry wives, 
since this, as has been shown, will be lawful according to 
Christ and according to the laws of men. From the whole 
vast crowd we are the first to venture to come forward, 
relying upon your gentleness and to implore that you grant 
us this thing, not, as we think, without due consideration. 
For when on one side we were being crushed by human 
ordinances, struggling in vain against the weakness of the 
flesh (for the law stimulates to sin rather than restrains it)  
and on the other. Scripture was smiling upon us with ap- 
proval, we thought it no wrong to bring forward the passages 
on which we rely, that it might be evident to you whether 
we treated them intelligently or not, and when it appeared, 
as we hoped, that we had employed the Scriptures righteously, 
that you would grant what we ask for in all humility. 

The first passage of all that makes us free and that we 
trust to as to a sacred anchor is Matthew xix. For we 
reason thus from it: If Christ willed that chastity be free 
to us, good-by to the man who tries to make a law of it. 
The demonstration of the second is: If at the voice of God 
Peter feared to call that common which God had purified, ' 
we may boldly declare that it is not right for any man to 
declare that that is not lawful which God has suffered to be 
lawful. For if in that which is of little account God was 
unwilling to accept the judgment of Peter, how much less 
in a matter of much greater moment will he accept the 
judgment of one inferior to Peter? Our feeling on this 
point is clear enough from what has gone before, when we 
add that the words of Christ on the subject we are speaking 
of are the words of him who is the way and the truth and the 
life.^ For he says in another place, "The words which I 
have spoken are spirit and life. "^ How then were it not 
lawful and safe to trust to them? Nay we shall believe 

'Acts X., 15. ^John xiv., 6. 3 John vi., 63. 


i6o The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

accursed rather than merely wicked anything that shall 
have been sought out to contradict the words of God. 
They are spirit and life, the things that he has said. There- 
fore what we say is flesh and death. The second passage 
is Paul to the Corinthians I., ch. vii., i and 2: "It is good 
for a man not to touch a woman. Nevertheless, to avoid 
fornication, let every man have his own wife, and let every 
woman have her own husband. " Here first we concluded 
that he would be blest to whom it had been given of God 
to be able to do without a wife. And while we willingly 
yield this glory to those who live chastely, we are grieved 
that it has been denied unto us, though we bear it patiently 
with God's help. Next as to the point that, to avoid fornica- 
tion, every man should have his own wife. He who said 
"every man" made exceptions of none, neither priest nor 
monk nor layman. Hence it is clear, as we hinted above, 
that for a Christian there is nothing between chastity and 
marriage. He must either live chastely or marry a wife. 
The third passage is in the same chapter, verse 9: "If 
they cannot contain, let them marry: for it is better to 
marry than to bum," Therefore if one cannot contain 
one's self, if one burns, let him marry. We have been so 
on fire from passion — with shame be it said! — that we have 
done many things unseemly, yet whether this should not 
be laid upon those to some extent who have forbidden mar- 
riage we refrain from saying now, thinking it enough that 
the fire of passion alone (and that so frequent and violent 
as to threaten the mind) is pronounced sufficient reason for 
marriage. The fourth passage is verse 25 in the same 
chapter: "Now concerning virgins I have no command- 
ment of the Lord; yet I give my judgment," etc. Paul, 
the teacher of the nations, the chosen instrument of God, 
with whom Christ had spoken intimately from heaven more 
than once, says that he has no commandment of the Lord 
in regard to virginity, and has an unpurified man such 
commandment? Then too Paul had said much of the 
value of virginity and its advantages, and much of the 


Petition anent the Marriage of Priests i6i 

trials and unhappiness of marriage, and he added, verse 35, 
' 'And this I speak for your own profit ; not that I may cast 
a snare upon you," wishing, though he had greatly praised 
the state of virginity, not to seem of opinion that it ought 
to be commanded. The fifth passage is I. Timothy iii., 
iff.: "This is a true saying. If a man desire the office of a 
bishop, he desireth a good work. A bishop then must be 
blameless, the husband of one wife," etc. And a little 
later he adds, "having his children in subjection with all 
gravity. " Here we noted that though it is a thing of high 
repute to be a bishop, yet he bids a bishop have a wife, 
whether one only, or one at a time we will not now discuss. 
We noted also that the name bishop is the name of an office, 
not one of arrogant pride, and therefore we had no fear 
to call ourselves also bishops, that is, watchers, because 
the other terms which are in common use to-day either 
seem over-ambitious or are foreign words. With the name 
of watcher, however, how can anyone be pufifed up? Can 
he think it a state of high dignity and not a position of 
duty when the only function of a watcher is to watch? 
The sixth passage is from the same Paul to Titus, i., 5 and 6: 
"For this cause left I thee in Crete, that thou shouldest 
set in order the things that are wanting, and ordain elders 
in every city; if any be blameless, the husband of one wife, 
having faithful children," etc. And this passage is as like 
unto the passage above as one pea is like another. The 
seventh is likewise from I. Timothy, ch. iv., 1-3: "Now the 
Spirit speaketh expressly, that in the latter times some shall 
depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits and 
doctrines of devils, speaking lies in hypocrisy, having their 
conscience seared with a hot iron, forbidding to marry," etc. 
Here we would have those prick up their ears who make a fine 
show of chastity and keep it ill ; for what they do secretly is 
wicked even to think of. The Spirit speaking in Paul says 
that in the latter days, in which we are no doubt also in- 
cluded, it shall come to pass that some will turn away from 
the faith unto their own works which are not of God. Also 


i62 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

that this shall happen at the instigation of evil spirits who 
shall speak things good in appearance only, and shall 
commend them especially by the mouths of those who go 
about in sheep's clothing raging like wolves, and therefore 
they have ever been singed in their own eyes and con- 
demned by their own judgment. And they shall forbid 
marriage. Behold, Most Reverend Father, the origin of 
their feigned chastity! The eighth passage is Heb., ch, 
xiii, 4: "Marriage is honourable in all, and the bed unde- 
filed; but whoremongers and adulterers God will judge." 
This passage seems so clearly to confirm our contention 
that we think it the duty of bishops (granted that they be 
watchers) to drive into marriage those whom they have 
detected in fornication. For fornication must be met, 
because besides exposing one to judgment it also offends 
one's neighbour. 

Influenced then by these passages we are at length per- 
suaded that it is far more desirable if we marry wives, that 
Christ's little ones may not be offended, than if with bold 
brow we continue rioting in fornication. To this your 
Highness will no doubt agree when you reflect that the sin 
of him who offends one of the little ones of Christ can scarcely 
be atoned for, even though a millstone be himg about his 
neck and he be cast into the depths of the sea. And what, 
pray, is a stumbling-block of offence, if the shameless 
fornication of priests is not a stumbling-block of offence? 
And let your Highness not deign to listen to those who snap 
out like this : Behold, Most Reverend Fathers, the religion 
of these men ! What else are they after than turning the 
freedom of Christ into the lust of the flesh, according to the 
judgment of Paul to the Galatians, v., and of I Peter ii., 
16? For to make no mention now of how the cohabitation 
of marriage is regarded by God, although we do not deny that 
the act proceeds distinctly from the flesh, yet we know that 
it is far from harmful, since Paul says (I. Corinthians vii., 
28): "And if a virgin marry she hath not sinned," because 
God no doubt looks without anger upon this thing on account 


Petition anent the Marriage of Priests 163 

of our weakness, or rather the sin dwelling in us. And the 
same Paul (Galatians v., 19) reckons it not among the works 
of the flesh. Yet this answer is not necessary, since it is 
clearly evident that if we had wished to indulge in this thing 
for pleasure's sake, we should never have allowed ourselves to 
be tied up with the halter of wives when thus, besides 
suffering countless arrogances, we are cut off from the oppor- 
tunity of making good the unpleasantness and other draw- 
backs of a long married life. But since most of us fill the 
office of bishops, in which above all things there should be 
no room for grounds of offence (for a bishop ought to be 
blameless, as has been made clear above), we have all 
tried to see how we could cease from the offence, while 
in other respects (if we may speak freely without boasting) 
we are not of such untutored morals as to be in ill repute 
among the flock entrusted to us for any other failing save 
this one alone. For the sake of Christ the Lord of all of us, 
therefore, by the liberty won by his blood, by the fatherly 
affection which you owe to us, by your pity of our feeble 
souls, by the wounds of our consciences, by all that is 
divine and all that is human, we beseech you mercifully 
to regard our petition and to grant that which was thought- 
lessly built up be thoughtfully torn down, lest the pile 
constructed not in accordance with the will of our heavenly 
Father fall some time with a far more destructive crash. 
You see what the world threatens. 

Therefore your Fatherhood ought to regard it as wise 
foresight and not unreasonableness that we come to petition 
you. For unless wise aid be applied in many places it will 
be all up with the whole body of ecclesiastics. And please 
do not refer us to the decrees of the predecessors of your 
Fatherhood. For you see how they fail to meet the case, 
and delay in the hope that though we have been first beaten 
with rods we can then presently endure the sting of scor- 
pions.' Our weakness must be indulged, nay, something 
must be ventured in this matter. O happy the invincible 

' I Kings xii., il. 


i64 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

race of Hohenlandenberg, if you shall be the first of all 
the bishops in Germany to apply healing to our wounds and 
restore us to health ! For what historian will ever pass over 
the achievement unmentioned? What scholar will not 
trumpet it abroad? What poet will not sing it to coming 
generations? What embalming will not protect it from 
decay and destruction? The door of well doing is surely 
open before you. You have only to take care lest you do 
not hold your hands firmly clasped and so let the offered 
opportunity sHp through them. For we presage that 
things are going to put on a new face whether we will or 
no, and when this happens we shall lament in vain having 
neglected the opportunity of winning glory. We have on 
the side of our request that Creator who made the first 
human beings male and female ; we have the practice of the 
Old Testament, which is much more strict than the New, 
under which, however, even the highest priests took upon 
their necks the gentle yoke of matrimony; we have Christ, 
who makes chastity free, nay, bids us marry, that his little 
children may not be offended, and our petition meets with 
loud approval on all sides. Nay, even Paul, speaking with 
the spirit of God, enjoins marriage. All the company of the 
pious and judicious are with us. If you disregard all this 
we know not how you can embrace your race with affection, 
for you will surpass their brave deeds, and win more than 
their laurels and statues, if you only grant us this favour. 
If, however, you cannot possibly be persuaded to grant it, 
we beseech you at least not to forbid it, according to the 
suggestion of another than ourselves. For we think you 
are brave enough to do right without fear of those who can 
even slay the body. And in fact you will have to refrain 
at least from interfering. For there is a report that most 
of the ecclesiastics have already chosen wives, not only 
among our Swiss, but among all peoples everywhere, and to 
put this down will certainly be not only beyond your strength 
but beyond that of one far more mighty, if you will pardon 
our saying so. Accordingly, scorn us not as of little ac- 


Petition anent the Marriage of Priests 165 

count; even a rustic often speaks very much to the point. 
And though we be but httle children, we are yet Christ's, 
and, far from scorning us, you may confidently trust that 
salvation will be yours if you receive us. As to ourselves, 
we shall never cease to sing your praises if you but show 
yourself a father to us, and shall render you willing and glad 
obedience. Grant a gift to your children, who are so 
obedient that they come to you before all things, and so 
trusting that in this matter, however difficult it is thought 
to be, they have ventured to appeal to you only. The 
Most High God long preserve your Excellency in prosperity 
and in the knowledge of God! We pray with all humility 
that you will take all we have said in a spirit of justice 
and kindness. 

Einsiedeln, Switzerland, July 2d, 1522. 
Your Most Reverend Fatherhood's most obedient 
servants, 

Balthasar Trachsel, 

Georg Stahelin (Calybeus), 

Werner Steiner, 

Leo Jud, 

Erasmus Fabricius, 

Simon Stumpf, 

JoDoc Kilchmeyer, 

HULDREICH PiSTORIS (Pfistcr), 

Caspar Megander (Grossmann), 
John Faber (Hans Schmid). 

HULDREICH ZwINGLI. ^ 

' These were all prominent clergymen. It is incredible that they were the 
only priests who were unchaste or had made clerical marriages. 

Trachsel of Arth was dean of the Chapter of the Four Cantons; Calybeus 
(Stahelin), of Galgenen, later pastor of Freienbach, canton Schwyz; Steiner, 
priest of Zug; Jud, the well-known friend of Zwingli, then people's priest at 
Einsiedeln; Fabricius, priest of Stein on the Rhine, the one to whom Zwingli 
sent his account of the visit of the delegation from the Bishop of Constance; 
Stumpf, priest at Hongg, canton Zurich; Kilchmeyer, a canon of Lucern; Pis- 
toris (Pfister), pastor of Uster, canton Zurich; Megander (Grossmann), chap- 
lain of the hospital attached to the Dominican monastery: Faber (Schmid), 
a canon of the Great Minster, Zurich. 


XIII 


A Friendly Request and Exhortation of Some Priests 
OF THE Confederates that the Preaching of the 
Holy Gospel be not Hindered, and also that no 
Offence be Taken if to Avoid Scandal the Preach- 
ers WERE Given Permission to Marry 

(July 13, 1522) 

[Bin fnintlich bitt und ermanung etlicher priesteren der EidgnoschafFt, 
das man das heylig euangelium predigen nit abschlahe, noch unwillen darab 
empfach, ob die predgenden ergernus zu vermiden sich eelich vermachlind. 
Translated by Lawrence A. McLouth, Professor of German, New York 
University. In Schuler and Schulthess ed., i., 32-51 ; in Egli and Finsler ed., 
i., 210-248. 

Of all the documents which have come down to us from the Reformation 
this and its predecessor will strike a modern Protestant minister as two of 
the most extraordinary. It is a pity that Zwingli confounds in these two 
petitions two words which should be kept separate — chastity and celibacy. 
What priests and monks and nuns take is not a vow of chastity, but of 
celibacy. That is they engage not to marry. ] 

TO the pious, provident, honourable, wise, members of 
the cantons, lands, and neighbouring districts, our 
gracious favourable and dear lords, we, some of the priests 
and heralds of the Gospel of Jesus, offer our obedient, 
willing service and submission in the Lord Jesus Christ our 
Saviour. , 

Pious, provident, etc., hearers, our first humble request 
is, that your Wisdom will not at once take offence on account 
of the petition, which we bring before you as before our 
fathers, although it may appear at first strange or unfair. 

166 


Priests to Preach and to Marry 167 

We hope, that, when you thoroughly understand the matter 
according to our explanation, you will act in the case, having 
put aside all astonishment or displeasure, just as happened 
to St. Paul, Acts xvii., 17. When at Athens he began to 
preach of our Lord Jesus Christ and the resurrection of the 
dead, they laughed at him first; but, after they thoroughly 
understood the matter, many of them were converted to the 
Christian belief, especially one of the highest magistrates 
called Dionysius and a noble lady, Damaris. And so we also 
hope that when the subject is heard to the end, all of your 
reasonable hearts will become favourable. And it is a fact 
— in order that the matter may not longer be delayed — that 
we have heard that some of our lords of the Assembly have 
viewed it as wrong that one should preach the holy Gospel, 
which now goes forth through all Christendom, as though it 
were something new and unheard of; the blame of which 
action is perhaps that of those who have not been able to 
apply such divine doctrine most to the purpose, or have 
perhaps mixed with it something that does not belong to it. 
Otherwise we well know, that there is in the praiseworthy 
Assembly no one who would venture to oppose God's Word. 
Wherefore we have undertaken in this paper to inform every- 
one briefly of the contents of the Gospel lest anyone take 
serious offence thereat; this is done for the good of the 
common Assembly and for the consolation of all tender 
consciences. 

Now the Gospel is, as Paul writes to the Romans, I., 16, 
nothing but the power of God for the good or welfare of each 
who believes, be he Jew or heathen, although from the be- 
ginning of the world it was first revealed to the Jews. He 
says it is the power of God. This is to be understood in this 
way: if one desires the good and happy life, which is re- 
vealed as coming after this life (for the philosophers also con- 
cede that, and each feels in himself that he has much anxiety 
and worry as to how it will be with him in the hereafter, 
but can find neither Him who gives happiness nor can teach 
the way to Him) , then one always feels the need of help from 


i68 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

one greater, stronger, wiser, and more certain than he himself 
is. This need and want Almighty God from the beginning 
of the world has known and provided for, in this, that He 
everywhere revealed Himself, made Himself known to us 
in all goodness, that we might not come in error or despair 
in our wondering desire for the life to come after this life. 
And everywhere to those who have found Him, accepted 
Him, and put their trust in Him, He has shown His power 
and presence so clearly that one can never sufficiently 
wonder at His mercy. 

Adam He treated graciously according to the character 
of the matter, Abel the righteous He avenged, Enoch He 
translated, Noah He warned of the flood and protected, 
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, David, and others innumer- 
able He so plainly led and loved, that their names and 
memory even to this day show that it is all nothing but a 
gracious manifestation of Himself for the good of us poor 
human beings, and that which is called the Gospel is the same 
as "Good news" in German. For what better can be 
offered to the poor human race, if it wanders in ignorance of 
God and blessedness, than that which makes God known to 
it, guides and blesses it? Is that not the power of God 
and not of man? Is it not this power which brings us 
blessedness, and not man himself? Therefore He first 
revealed Himself in kindness to men, that they might 
learn to know Him as a father by His kindness. Therefore 
also Christ taught us to call Him father first of all, before 
we asked anything of Him, speaking thus: "Our Father," 
by which word we are assured that we can safely put in 
Him all our trust and confidence, because all comes from 
His power. 

Since now in the Old Testament Almighty God has by His 
power often revealed Himself to men by conversations, mira- 
cles, and other things, so that men might at all times know 
God's power and grace ; and since they by their wantonness 
and hardness of heart have alienated themselves from Him, 
He finally desired to arrange with the human race through 


Priests to Preach and to Marry 169 

His only Son [Hebrews i., i], who also with miracles as Nico- 
demus speaks, [John iii., 3], and with truth of the doctrine 
certainly showed that He was a son of God, in order that 
His abundant mercy might be more richly revealed to men. 
For, as He was formerly inclined in love to the Jews, so 
He desired through His Son to draw to Himself by kindness 
all the human race. This will be clearer to us, if we relate the 
leading works of Christ. Is it not a great and effective means 
of teaching humility, that the Son of God, otherwise like 
His Father, condescended to accept the weakness of men 
[Philippians, ii., 6], that we might all give up pride and come 
to God ? That He was bom poor in a manger, then brought 
up in the midst of hard labour, does not that teach contempt 
of riches, the gaining of one's bread not by violence or 
usury but by the work of the hands? [Ephesians iv., 28]. 
That He healed the sick everywhere, if they put their trust 
in Him, does that not teach that we should put all our trust 
in Him and help one another? [Galatians vi., 10]. That 
He suffered for us the most disagraceful death, in order that 
He might save us from the power of death, the control 
of the devil and sin, did that not surpass all human kindness? 
That one should perhaps die for a righteous man, as Paul 
writes [Romans v., 7], would be commendable, whereas He, 
who is righteous, suffered death for us sinners and unright- 
eous, does that not teach us not to depend upon our own 
righteousness, but alone upon His making us righteous, 
His saving, and His having mercy, though we are all sin- 
ners? That He on the cross in the midst of all pain 
and suffering called to His heavenly Father on behalf of 
His murderers saying: "Forgive them, for they know not 
what they do,"' does that not teach us to be without de- 
sire for revenge, without hatred, without demur? And very 
many other examples are heard daily from the Gospel. 

Now we will hear some portions of His doctrine. Does 
He not teach us that we can do nothing of ourselves and 
are nothing, even in things which affect the body, without 

' Luke xxiii., 34. 


170 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

Him, when He says [Matthew vi., 27], "no one can add a 
cubit to his stature ' ' ? And we should of course understand, 
that if we cannot add anything to the body, over which we 
think we have the most power, we must in all things depend 
only on Him. Does He not teach us not to take thought 
for nourishing the body and for collecting riches, by means 
of the lovely figure of the flowers of the field and the birds 
of the air, which He clothes in beauty and feeds? All things 
which are necessary to our soul and bodies, does He not 
well teach us to ask of Him briefly with "Our Father in 
heaven"? Does he not teach us that the true worship of 
God is of all things the pleasantest to Him? [John iv., 23J : 
"The true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit 
and in truth." Does He not teach us truly that in all 
worry, trouble, grief, we should come to Him? [Matthew 
xi., 29]: "All ye that are weary and heavy laden, come to 
me and I will give you rest."' Does He not teach us the 
way of justice and truth, when he says [Matthew v., ^y]: 
"But let your communication be Yea, yea; and Nay, nay; 
for whatever is more than that cometh of evil"? Does He 
not teach us verily the way of truth, when He says, "I 
am the way, the truth, and the life" [John xvi., 6], and that 
"whoever enters through Him shall find pasture" [John x., 
9] ? Does He not teach us how surely to gain everlasting life 
when He says [John vi., 40], "Verily, verily, I say imto you, 
whoever beHeves in me, hath eternal life"? Does He not 
teach us how great faith we may put in His word, when He 
says, not a jot or a tittle shall be taken from His Word or 
the law, until all things therein contained be fulfilled [v., 18, 
and xxiv., 35] ? Are not all these and many more not certain 
examples of good news, when the power of God is opened 
to human weakness? 

As before stated, the mercy of God was never more 
richly revealed than through the Lord Jesus Christ our 
Saviour, and for this reason, that we all receive of His ful- 
ness together [John i., 16], which is so great that it makes 

' The motto of many of Zwingli's printed writings. 


Priests to Preach and to Marry 171 

all men, which ever have been, are, or shall be, rich in God, 
innocent, and blessed. [Hebrews x.]. For no other name 
is there under the sun, in which we can be blessed [Acts iv., 
12], than in the name of Jesus Christ. Here one is to under- 
stand not only the syllables or letters of the word "Jesus," 
but the being blessed in His power, in His mercy, and from 
His suffering, so that in the name Jesus one will understand 
all His being and deeds, in which we, trusting and believing, 
are blessed. For He came upon the earth to make sinners 
blessed and whole, whom He also so kindly visited, that 
people spoke evil of Him on that account. These he an- 
swered thus : ' ' The well need not a physician, but the sick, ' ' ' 
showing that the pity of God is ready to bless sinners at 
all times, and that He came into the world to announce 
this and certainly to keep it. Is it good or bad news, that 
God has offered us His grace so mercifully, without any 
merit on our part, indeed when we were naturally children 
of wrath [Ephesians ii., 3]? Although we are all men. He 
has revealed to us the riches of His mercy and love, and 
although we were dead in sin. He has made us alive through 
the death of Christ, again awakened from the dead, and 
given heaven as a possession in Christ Jesus, so that He 
revealed to future men the overflowing riches of His mercy 
which He has so gently poured out for us through Christ 
Jesus. Mercifully and freely are we made whole and kept 
whole through faith and belief (which God has mercifully 
wrought in us), and that too not from us: It is a gift of 
God, not from our works, so that no one could boast. For 
we are His creatures in Jesus Christ created for good works, to 
which God has ordained us, that we walk therein.^ Notice 
here the beautiful meaning in St. Paul, comprehending all 
the work of God upon us poor sinners, accomplished through 
His own Son, Our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. All that 
is nothing else but the Gospel, that is, the good news and 
the announcement of the mercy of God, which we all need. 
And, although He remarks: "The whole need not a physi- 

'Lukev.,31. ^Eph. ii., 10. 


172 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

cian," and "I am not come to call the righteous, but sinners 
to repentance,"' still it is not the meaning that anyone is 
righteous, but that some probably think themselves right- 
eous. These same, as Augustine says, ^ were from the first 
unrighteous, and, when there was nothing else that made 
them unrighteous, the assumption of their own righteous- 
ness was a sufficiently great sin, as the Pharisee well shows, 
who boasted loudly in the temple of what he had done 
[Luke xviii., ii]. Therefore these above mentioned words 
of Paul should be carefully explained to the people by those 
who boast that they preach the Gospel, so that all the right 
can understand its power and contents. 

These things briefly stated give us a little view of the 
Gospel, which is more clearly and more perfectly discovered 
in springs than in pools and puddles. The springs are the 
words and acts of Christ Jesus described by the Apostles 
Matthew, John, Luke, and Mark as much as is necessary 
for the blessedness of each man. For, as St. John shows, 
it would be impossible to describe all the words and works 
which Christ said and did [John xxi., 25]. Accordingly the 
springs are the preaching and practice of the holy Apostles, 
the predictions of the Prophets, and the belief of the Pa- 
triarchs. With those, however, who in these times teach 
the Gospel or teach by means of the Scriptures there is a great 
difference; for some drink from the springs themselves, and 
give also to others; but others cannot come to the springs, 
but go to the brooks, which flow from them, but always 
contain something mixed and dirtier than the springs 
themselves; and accordingly they are inclined to preach 
against that which is least of all, and which, although true, 
is still little to be considered, so that it seriously offends the 
young and weak in Christ, Wherefore it behooves them 
carefully to consider what is the most necessary to the 
welfare of souls and the quiet of our poor human beings. 
And, if they cannot attain the same by themselves, they 
should get advice from those who are certain of the springs, 

'Luke v., 32. 'Explanatio libri psalmorum. Ps. xxxi., i, 2. 


Priests to Preach and to Marry 173 

not from those taught in error among experimenters and 
quibblers, who lead people only into greater error, but rather 
from those who are well informed of the right springs of 
the Gospel. If that had been the case from the beginning, 
it is well to suppose that no one, or at most very few, would 
have felt any displeasure. 

But who they are which draw from the proper fountains, 
not every one can understand or know. Hence it is neces- 
sary to describe them in a figure of speech, that the 
simple may begin to understand. Whatever preachers 
exert all effort to reveal and make known the will, doctrine, 
meaning, and honour of God, to bring sinners to repentance, 
and to ease troubled consciences, disregarding their own 
honour, advantage, and dignity, and do this by means of 
the before-mentioned fountains, are, as is easy to see, of the 
same intent and opinion as Christ was, who sought not His 
own advantage but our salvation. But those who do 
nothing but judge their flocks, preaching only of their 
bringing in sacrifices, interest, and tithes, finding each day 
a new saint to whom sacrifices should be made, boastfully 
offering for sale many indulgences, filling their preaching 
with their own power and dignity, and telling how great 
therein is the power of the pope, they are, as is easy to see, 
more concerned about temporal good than about God's 
honour or tie piety of the conscience. Not that one 
should not support a respectable dependent priesthood with 
offerings, tithes, and other things, but that dwelling upon 
this alone will show avarice. 

Therefore, honourable, wise, etc., gracious and dear 
Lords, t'aoa^h some who cannot allow nourishment to be 
withdrawn from their arrogance, undertake to harden and 
vex you to the point that you should forbid the Gospel to 
be preached, or preached so that it injure us, or discover sad 
blasphemy, listen not to them, else ye certainly fall into 
the disfavour of God. For it is a very bad and arrogant 
thing when an assuming man will not be instructed by 
another. How much more injurious it is, when man will 


174 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

not harken to God, so that he proves he is not of God! 
What arrogance and unrighteousness the holy prophet 
Isaiah shows to us, xxx., 9-13. "They are a people that only 
arouse me to anger (he speaks in the person of God). 
They speak to those who are seers. See not ; and to the pro- 
phets. Prophesy not unto us right things, speak unto us 
pleasing things ; prophesy unto us error, get out of the way, 
and from the footpath. The holy God of Israel cease to be 
preached unto us! O how much evil was thereby done, as 
we can well see from the prophet, when he says later on: 
Because ye have despised the word (undoubtedly God's word) 
and have turned your trust into lies and disorder; there- 
fore this iniquity shall be to you as a breach in a wall, 
which shall cause its sudden and unexpected fall." Surely 
the word of God is never disregarded without great punish- 
ment, and it has always been useful, wherever it was heard 
and followed, which Christ Himself very truly shows 
[Luke vi., 11]: " Into whatever city ye shall come, if they 
take you not in (the holy apostles and those preaching 
the Gospel are meant), go again into the street and say: 
The dust which has clung to us here with you, we shake off 
over you. But know that it will go lighter with Sodom than 
with that city: that is, the city which would not accept 
you who preached me." Also St. Peter says, II Peter 
ii., 20: "If one has escaped the pollutions of the world through 
the knowledge of the Lord Jesus Christ, and is again en- 
tangled therein and overcome, it is worse after than before. " 
Doubtless nothing is worse for a man's soul than not to want 
to hear of that by which he is saved, Christ Jesus. 

We should also find instructive the treatment which 
was accorded the disciples at the beginning of their preach- 
ing, when the Jews forbade them to preach anything of 
Christ. But they answered: "One must obey God rather 
than man" [Act. v., 29]; and they preached about it again 
and again, until the magistrates were angry with them. Then 
a wise, pious man arose, named Gamaliel, who commanded 
the apostles, that is, messengers, to stand apart, and said: 


Priests to Preach and to Marry 175 

"Heed and consider well what ye do with these men. In 
the past Theudas and Judas drew to themselves a following, 
which however broke up with all those who held to them. 
Therefore depart from the people and leave them, for it is 
ordered of God, and so ye cannot forbid it or otherwise 
order it. For ye cannot overcome God; but if it is a human 
invertion, it will come to destruction." Thus ye should 
remember, gracious Lords, if one sees clearly, that Almighty 
God, by showing His countenance through His teaching, 
that is, the holy Gospels, punishes the world so wicked and 
desires to call it to improvement — should remember that 
it becomes us not to resist. For if it is of God, we cannot 
avert it, while if only a human invention, it will pass away 
of itself. Paul was stoned in Lystra so that he was left 
for dead; but when he came to himself again, he entered 
again into the city, and the city was afterward converted 
to Christ [Acts xiv., 19]. Likewise was he also in Corinth 
persecuted, but he ceased not till he had converted the city 
to Christ, and what he was unable to do in person he did by 
letters. For God spake to him at night, strengthening him 
[Acts xviii., 9]: "Thou shalt not fear, but speak, and be not 
silent, for I am with thee." Thus it was also in Ephesus. ' 
There was an uprising in the whole city, so that they seized 
Paul's companions, Gaius and Aristarchus, and held them 
in the midst of the furious people, who complained that 
the honour of the great goddess Diana was about to pass 
away. And Paul was protected, so that he came not 
among the people, although he desired to go among them. 
Still finally the honour of the idol Diana and other 
idols was put down and that of the true God set up. 
For the whole city was soon after converted; and the 
holy Apostle and Evangelist John was buried there with 
great honours. This instance we exhibit to your wisdom 
that it may thereby learn that according to the words of 
Gamaliel no one can hinder the progress of the Gospel, 
if it is of God; and for that reason not hastened by 

* Acts xix., 23 sqq. 


176 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

anyone. For if it is not of God, it will pass away of 
itself. 

Now, ye wise and pious men, it is our purpose truth- 
fully to preach the holy Gospel as unadulterated as possible 
for the good of the common Confederation. For as things 
now stand, we feel the necessity of Almighty God's leading 
us by His teaching to a better and more pious life ; for it is 
otherwise to be feared that should we remain continually 
in this condition, God would not endure it. And though 
we and others should be forbidden to preach the Gospel, 
it would not for that reason impede his progress ; for we can 
say, as the apostles spoke, when forbidden to preach Jesus 
at Jerusalem [Acts v., 32] : "One must obey God rather than 
man." We see that certain great princes and lords, bishops 
and prelates, although they, as they wish to appear, do 
not oppose the Gospel, still make the matter vexatious 
and suspected, by giving to all that preach the Gospel 
hateful names, saying they are Lutherans, Hussites, or 
heretics; when there are everywhere enough learned men 
who, drawing from the true fountains, preach to us the 
divine doctrine, so that there is no need of any Hussites or 
Lutherans. If Luther has drunk where we have drunk, 
then he has in common with us the evangelical doctrine. 
And people see that forbidding does no good. The force 
of the Gospel doctrine groweth more and more. Thus we 
show your Wisdoms that we have nothing in common 
either with Luther or with anything else that could harm 
Christian doctrine, even nothing at all in common. As 
far as we are able, we drink the Gospel doctrine out of the 
true fountains, without which no one can be blessed, in 
order that among the people of the pious Confederation 
we may with all decency and fidelity speak for the same 
to hungry souls, that their despairing consciences may be 
set at rest and made steadfast. For no one can set at rest 
consciences as well as the word of God, as David shows in 
Psalms Ixxvii., 3, 4: "My soul could not be comforted; then 
I thought of God, and found joy." Also Christ himself 


Priests to Preach and to Marry 177 

[Matthew iv. , 4] : " Man lives by every word that issues from 
the mouth of God." And therefore rejecting God's word 
would be nothing less than rejecting the comfort of one's 
soul: but that is not your intent, as we well know. But 
when any one is less skilled than he should be in preaching 
the Gospel, it is well to remember that it is not wrong to 
enjoin silence upon him. But this we do not wish to do 
at all (if God wills), but for the benefit of believers preach 
truly and faithfully the Gospel, which nothing can harm 
more (in not following) than lewdness or sin, or above all 
sins unchastity. Therefore we wish now to speak to your 
Wisdom of this same thing for the second part. 

Your honoured Wisdom has seen up to this time the 
dishonourable shameful life which alas ! we have led till now 
with women (we would speak of ourselves alone) , so that we 
have vexed and angered many, although the fault is partly 
youthful blood, which no one can entirely control, partly 
those, who have never wished to command false hypocritical 
chastity to cease, even though they have seen that chastity 
was not kept even as God well shows. And the same ones 
could have disregarded the command, for it is only a human 
law, not a divine command; yes, they should have disre- 
garded it, because they saw that it was nowhere kept and 
that much disgrace and vexation to the holy Gospel arose 
from it. But that this never happened, is to be considered 
as coming from the fact that it brought some of them much 
profit. For when one must give 2, 3, or 4 gulden for absolu- 
tion, how large a sum of money do you think would come 
in in a year'? There arises then here a very great suspicion 
concerning hypocritical chastity, that it is considered more 
on account of money than on account of God's will. For 
among the old Christians no one was made priest till he was 
over thirty years, and it was proper for them to live in matri- 

' Not only was this tax on priest's concubines exacted yearly, but four or 
five gulden was exacted for each child bom of these unions. About 1500 
children were thus paid for in a single year, so general was priestly concu- 
binage. See the note of the Swiss editors, i., 225. 


178 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

mony like any one else. But later they decreased the age, 
made it twenty-four, and at the same time forbid wives. ^ 
May each one see how those circumstances hang together, or 
how wise it appears, that the age is decreased, and that in 
the midst of all carnal attacks that are the worst at the 
twenty-fourth year wives were not allowed, without any 
grounding in Holy Writ, which nowhere forbids priests to 
marry but in some places recommends it, as we will shortly 
show your Wisdom, so that you may see in what our princi- 
ple is grounded concerning the marriage which we desire to 
contract, but without injury and vexation to you." 

First Christ Jesus our Saviour speaks of chastity [Matthew 
xix., lo], saying that not every one is fit to use this word, save 
those to whom it is given by God. Here any one sees that 
it is not for us but for God to preserve chastity. How now 
can men command that which is only for God? Just as 
though one would live from the purse of another, whether 
he would or not. Thus God desired to keep the heavenly 
virtue of chastity in His own power, so that man might not 
proudly assume it or boast of it, but should view it as 
God's alone. For nothing is more unpleasant to God than 
a proud spirit, which easily seduces those who keep chastity 
into pleasing themselves by boasting as follows, saying to 
themselves: How blest thou art! that thou art not like 
those who cannot live without doing such things! How 
much purer and better art thou than they! But with all 
that no one can know how pure the heart within is. For 
as long as we wear this most faulty body it is certain that 
it will attack us in many ways; yes, even by those whom 
one considers quite chaste, much greater wickedness is 
alas! committed, than where marriage had occurred. We 
do not wish to appear as attacking those pious souls, pure 
from God's gift, recognising that in them with gratitude; 

' For the discussion of the Church's position on the marriage of the clergy, 
see Emil Friedrich, Lehrbuch des katholischen und evangelischen Kirchen- 
rechts. 5th ed., Leipzig, 1903, pp. 158 ff. 

'Almost all the signatories to this petition were married within a year 
after signing it or were married at the time. 


Priests to Preach and to Marry 179 

but we complain about the trouble, that, since God has 
not given us to live chaste lives, men act so hard toward us, 
in that they trouble us in our weakness which we have in 
common with them, with the dishonouring statement that 
that is not proper for us which is proper for all. 

Secondly Christ speaks again in the same place [Matt, 
xix. , 12]: " whoever can keep chastity, let him keep it. " Here 
he makes it free, since he says: whoever can keep it, let 
him keep it. Thus, if he can keep it, let him keep it; 
if he cannot keep it, then let him marry. But now the 
keeping of it depends not upon our ability, but upon God; 
else why does He say: He who can keep it, let him keep it? 
Not that we should understand "ability, " as if it came from 
ourselves, but as given by God, the meaning is: To whom 
God has given the power to keep it, let him keep it; to 
whom ability is not given, he is not bound to keep it. How 
then have men ventured to forbid it, since God did not wish 
to forbid it on account of its difficulty? But He gave it to 
whom He would. And those to whom He gave it became 
bound to keep it. He to whom it is given, feels it very well, 
needs no such subtle question as How can I know whither 
it is given to me or not? Now the sum of this article or 
words of Christ is: To whom is given by God the ability 
to keep it, let him keep it; and those to whom it is not 
given are not bound by any divine law to keep it. 

Thirdly, Christ says in the same chapter, verse 4, to the 
Pharisees: "Have ye not read that He who made the human 
race at the beginning created man and woman, and said, For 
this cause a man shall leave father and mother, and cleave to 
his wife, and the two should become one flesh, so that after 
that there should be not two but one flesh or body ? What 
God has now united, let man not put asunder." Now hear 
you first, that marriage is so highly esteemed by God, that the 
natural law yields to it, when He says: A spouse shall leave 
father and mother and cleave to his wedded mate. If now 
one can then leave father and mother, which natural and 
divine law allow not, but only in this case; much less then 


i8o The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

can any human law forbid the consummation of marriage 
or if consummated, break it up. For how could this be re- 
conciled, that divine law yielded to marriage, whereas 
human law did not? For to that He says: What God hath 
joined let not man put asunder. Now if a priest marries it is 
a divine union in marriage. For according to divine law 
he may marry. Thu; no man shall or can put asunder 
such a union. 

Fourthly, Paul says [I. Cor. vii., 2]: "On account of un- 
chastity shall each man take a wife for himself, and each 
woman a husband." From these words the following con- 
clusion is drawn : Each man, without exception (for whoever 
says "each" excepts none), if he feels he cannot get along 
without sexual intercourse, shall have a spouse of his own 
and be satisfied with his own. This ought to teach us fairly. 
that each father should say to his sons: "Dear sons, live 
pure lives. And if you ever feel that desire is overcoming 
you, tell me, and I will give you wives of your own. " This 
same should each mother say to her daughters. In that case 
there would be many less prostitutes, many less bastards; 
and if one married, much less adultery. Besides it often 
happens that our children choose their own mates; and if 
they are not married according to their choice, their feel- 
ings and thoughts as to their spouses appear to them as 
the heads upon a Kaiserskreuzer. ' But in case the above 
mentioned regulation should be followed, they could not 
contradict or quarrel; for they would have been so reared 
from childhood that they might tell their needs. Now if 
the priest is troubled with desires, Paul tells him to take a 
wife; for he has excepted no one. 

Fifthly, Paul says in the same chapter, verse 8 : "I say 
to the unmarried and to widows: It is properly quiet and 
good for them, if they abide even as I ; but if they cannot 
control themselves, let them marry; for it is not well for 
men or women to burn." From Paul's words we can see 
that not to marry but to live a continent life is a quiet and 

' An imperial coin. 


Priests to Preach and to Marry i8i 

proper thing. We attack these virtues in none; but those 
who can remain thus [continent], we consider worthier than 
ourselves. But this we desire: since we have learned alas! 
that we cannot remain continent, since God has not granted 
us that, — we desire that marriage be not forbidden us. 
For Paul gives no other reason why one should assume 
sexual relations, except passion. This we alas! confess we 
have, since we have fallen into disgrace on account of it. 
Passion one is to understand (as occurring) when man is so 
excited by the desires of the flesh that he strives for the 
enjoyments of the flesh. Therefore it is better that he 
marry, that the feelings be freer, and not rage in such 
thoughts. 

Sixthly, again in the same place [I. Cor. vii., 25]: "Con- 
cerning virginity I have no command of the Lord." Notice 
here that St. Paul clearly admits that he cannot enjoin 
upon any one virginity, for God has given no command 
about it. O would that they had also done thus, who have 
never become like St. Paul in knowledge or virtue, so that 
where God has not forbidden a thing, they had not made a 
command of their own! For Paul's meaning is, since God 
has not commanded chastity, he himself had no power to 
command it. And when he was asked by the Corinthians, to 
whom he wrote these words, whether it was proper to 
remain chaste, ' or whether one should be forced to remain 
chaste, ' his answer through the whole chapter was : Chastity 
is, to be sure, pleasing to God and also becoming; for in 
marriage there is much responsibility — that is, care of the 
wife or husband, or children, or of affairs touching the family. 
Therefore he advised that he to whom God had granted 
chastity' should preserve it. But no command could he 
make about it. For God himself had made no command 
and therefore he says twice in the same chapter, that one 
is not to take his advice as a command, and that he does not 

' To suppose the Apostle Paul asked whether chastity was to be preserved 
is absurd. What this passage plainly says is that under certain conditions 
celibacy should be preserved; but ZwingH confounds chastity and celibacy. 


i82 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

advise this, in order to get them into trouble. In the words 
of Paul one also notes that he interprets the words of Christ 
in the two first passages as we understood them. 

Seventh, he writes [I. Tim. iii., 12 sqq.] : "This is certain, 
whatever preacher desires a congregation or parish, desires 
an honourable office. Therefore a bishop (that is, an 
overseer or priest, pastor, or lay preacher, all of which 
are in Greek Episcopos, that is, bishop or overseer) must 
be blameless, the husband of one wife, ' ' etc. Here we see 
that all preachers are bishops. Also of this opinion is St. 
Jerome. ' Also that his office is watching, and that a bishop's 
office is not of high dignity as they now put on airs, but an 
office that must be performed without any let up. For 
if a watch on a station or tower considered himself a great 
lord and did not carefully watch, he would not be approved, 
because there is no need of him save to watch. There is 
also no need of bishops as lords but as unceasing watchmen, 
although they may have become blind [Isaiah Ivi., 10]. 
So we see that he is to be of a pious decent life, so that one 
could not easily accuse him of a disgraceful method of 
Hving. Accordingly he is to have not many wives, but 
only one wife; since Paul commands the overseer to have 
a wife. Let each reasonable man consider what a bad 
thing an unmarried priest is, even a dangerous thing — of 
which we do not wish here to say more, in the hope that 
Almighty God will enlighten His people, that they insist 
on the honour of their own bishops, when they hear St. 
Paul commanding priests to have each one wife, but only 
one. 

Eighthly [I. Tim. iii., 12], in the same place where the 
former announcement is made : ' ' Deacons (says Paul) , that 
is, servants of the bishops, shall be the husbands each of one 
wife, ruling their children and their servants well. ' ' Deacons 
are all those who help the bishops in the service of spiritual 

'His comment on Titus i., 5; also Epistola 69 ad Occanum, cap. iii., 
and Epistola 146 ad Evangelum, cap. i. These letters are in The Nicene and 
Post-Nicene Fathers, 2d series, vi. : 143, 288. 


Priests to Preach and to Marry 183 

things, whom they now call assistants. Those Paul also 
commands to take wives, so that greater sinning, adultery, 
seduction of virgins, and whoring be avoided. A very 
dangerous animal is a young priest who on account of 
his office has access to young people, women or maidens. 
Keep straw from the fire ! If now he is given a wife he would 
be like other decent men concerned with the care of his 
family, wife, children, and other things, so that the ardour 
of wicked temptation would be removed. 

Ninthly, Paul predicts [I, Timothy, iv., i] : "The Spirit 
speaketh expressly that in the latter times some shall 
depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits and 
the doctrines of devils, speaking lies in hypocrisy, having 
their consciences seared with a hot iron, forbidding to 
marry," etc. Here one sees clearly that Paul estimated the 
great injury to the soul before it came, and wanted to 
provide against its coming. One also sees that such injury 
is inspired by the devil in order to seduce souls by a fair 
appearance; for it has such an appearance, when one says: 
"Is not purity a beautiful thing? Yes, but where is it? 
Where is it kept?" Thus the devil desired to dazzle men 
with such an appearance, so that they would attempt purity 
and accordingly fall into such shame as would injure not 
alone themselves but also those with whom they transgress. 
Yes, to be sure, the devil has here as in all his attacks 
made use of cunning. For we are so foolish, when a pretty 
mirror or other thing for exhibition is put before us, that we 
think it is good and want to be able to keep it without 
restraint. And the devil well knew that it would well please 
the common man, if one said: "Yes, of course, priests, 
who extol and regard God, should lead pure lives." He 
knew also at the same time that they remained nevertheless 
hiiman beings, flesh and blood, wanting in all virtues, and 
that the flesh would for that reason not give up its treachery, 
but would bring them into greater disgrace. 

Finally, the prohibition to the clergy of marriage comes 
from the devil not from God; this one hears in the words 


184 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

of Paul. Besides Christ says [Matt, xv., 13]: "Every 
plant, which my heavenly Father hath not planted, shall be 
rooted up." Now the command of chastity ' is neither given 
nor enjoined by God, and God and the devil are not more 
than two plants. If it is not from God, then it must be 
from the devil. We speak here only of it as a command: 
purity is doubtless a very wise gift and virtue. To whom 
it is given, we greatly congratulate; but we complain, that 
men arrogantly force us into dishonour, when they have no 
witness or right from the divine Scriptures. Indeed, what 
was formerly looked upon with wise consideration in the 
Councils, have they done away with; and also of this we 
desire to speak here. 

The old fathers in the Synod of Gangra^ considered 
the wives of the clergy, and the words of their decision 
stand to-day in the papal laws Di. xxviii, C. Si quis.^ If 
any one teaches that a priest should do away with his wife 
because he is a priest, be he cursed! Likewise again: C. 
Si quis discemit. Ibid. "• If any one consider sinful or vex 

' I. e., celibacy. God commands every one to be chaste. 

' Gangra was the capital of Paphlagonia, the district of Asia Minor which 
bordered on the Black Sea, between Pontus on the east and Bithynia on the 
west. There in or about 340 was held a council called to take action 
respecting the ascetic views and practices of Eustathius, bishop of Sebaste. 
It passed twenty canons severely condemning these views and practices. 
They will be found in English translation in Hefele's History of the Church 
Councils, A.D. 226 to 429, pp. 325-339. Those of particular value for 
Zwingli at this time were these: 

Canon i. "If any one despises wedlock, abhorring and blaming the 
woman who sleeps with her husband, even if she is a believer and devout, as 
if she could not enter the Kingdom of God, let him be anathema." 

Canon 4. "If any one maintains that when a married priest offers the 
sacrifice, no one should take part in the service, let him be excommunicated." 

Canon 9. "If any one lives unmarried or in continence, avoids marriage 
from contempt, and not because of the beauty and holiness of virginity, let 
him be anathema." 

Canon 10. "If any one of those who for the Lord's sake remain single, in 
pride exalts himself above those who are married, let him be anathema." 

Canon 14. "If a woman leaves her husband and separates herself, from 
an abhorrence of the married state, let her be anathema." 

3/. e., Corpus juris can., c. 14, Dist. xxviii. 

*I. e., Corpus juris can., c. 15, Dist. xxviii. 


Priests to Preach and to Marry 185 

a married priest, as though he should not hold mass because 
he had a wife, and for that reason avoid him, be he ciursed! 
Here we fight with their weapons. If the Synod of Gan- 
gra assembled in the Holy Spirit — as it did; for it 
treated the Gospel and the apostolic doctrine alike— why 
then have those coming later not left the same, instead of 
doing away with it without the support of Holy Writ? 
Further, if it is inspired by the devil that one forbid mar- 
riage according to the above words of Paul, and if those 
succeeding have forbidden it without authority of Scripture, 
then they have done it as inspired by the devil, and the 
command of the devil has driven out divine freedom. 
Well-taught church father, well-fed and satisfied, expound 
the syllogism or the foul crowd will succumb to it. ^ 
Further, "one should not believe every spirit, but carefully 
consider whether it be from God" [I. John iv., i], and 
whether the rules of the Synod of Gangra are every- 
where like the laws left by Christ and Paul, as is 
mentioned above and here : then they are of the true spirit 
of God, Further, if it was proper for them to exchange 
the divine for the humafi, why would it not become 
each Christian to cleave to the divine, since the human is so 
clearly contrary to the divine? For that chastity^ is left 
of free choice by God, and that it is forbidden by men, 
are entirely in discord and out of harmony. Also the 
excuse is of no avail, when they say that it is mentioned 
in the next "Distinction"-^ that the ordinances of the Synod 
of Gangra were done away with honest purpose ; for one 
can make answer: Who has given anyone power, so that 
that which is left free of God shoidd be enjoined by men? 

' This sentence is in doggerel: 

Wol geleerter vatter, 

Vol und satter, 

Tund der sylogismum uff 

Oder aber der ful huff 

Wirt aber damider ligen. 
'I. e., celibacy. God left it to man's choice if .he should marry or not, 
but will punish unchastity. 

^ Corpus jur. can., Dist, xxix. 


i86 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

And what a whole Council has considered right, should this 
or that pope abolish? or if two Councils judge contrary to 
each other do they do it not the less in the Holy Spirit? 
Or is this Spirit so inconsistent with itself and forgetful that 
it inspires one thing to-day and to-morrow something else? 
Since now that cannot be, one must always say that such 
happens from the shortcomings of the Council; but these 
things we should try according to the line of the Scripture, 
as is said above. If one thus tries the Synod of Gangra 
may it endure the trial ! For that it has constituted itself 
in conformity to divine permission ; wherefore it shall fairly 
stand; and what is not in conformity with the divine will 
shall not stand. Besides the clergy have long lived accord- 
ing to the mode of life approved by the Synod of Gangra, 
and not according to the ordinances of those who wanted to 
force chastity' on the clergy. St. Hilary [bom at Poitiers, 
France, became bishop of that city about 355 ; died there 
367], in his time a bright light in Christianity, had wedded 
wife and children, while he was bishop of Poitiers. Until 
up to seven hundred years after the birth of Christ some 
priest's sons became popes, as is stated in Di. 56^: "Hosius 
[bishop of Cordova, Spain, bom about 257, became bishop 
about 295; died about 357] was the son of a sub-deacon, 
and was a pope.^ Pope Bonifacius I [418-422] was the son 
of a priest called Jucundus; Pope Agapetus I [535-536] was 
the son of a priest named Gordianus; Pope Theodorus I 
[642-649] was the son of Theodorus, bishop of Jerusalem; 
Pope Silverius I [536-567] was the son of Pope Hormisdas I ^ 
[514-523]; Pope Deusdedit I [615-618] was the son of 
Jucundus, a priest; Pope Felix III [483-492] was a born 
Roman, the son of a priest ; Pope Gelasius I [492-496] was 

' He means celibacy. 

2 Corpus jur. can., c. 2, Dist. Ivi. What immediately follows is Zwingli's 
translation from the Latin, with chronological matter supplied and errors 
corrected. 

3 This is a mistake. Roman Catholics claim that he represented the pope 
in the Council of Nice, 325. But he never was pope himself. 

■• Zwingli says that he was the son of a Roman bishop, Silverius. 


Priests to Preach and to Marry 187 

an African, ' and the son of Bishop Valerius ; Agapetus, bom 
at Rome, son of Gordianus, a priest': all popes of Rome. 
Although the canonists wish to say that these were bom out 
of wedlock, they do so that they may establish this licen- 
tious chastity^; and those undoubtedly bom in wedlock they 
insult after their death. For all these popes lived in old 
times when piety and honour had much greater results than 
in our times, so that people would hardly have allowed those 
to come to such prominence who were bom in dishonour. 
Wherefore it is well to remember that they were not so 
ill-bom." 

For in those times the marriage of the clergy was an 
unsettled question. For Nicholas, the first of that name, 
who was pope [from 858 to 867] ^ had ordered that priests 
be allowed to marry. The Bulgarians (Bulgaria borders on 
Hungary) asked him what they should do with their priests 
who had taken wives, being of the opinion that they should 
be driven out. And he answered them, Di. xxviii, Consolen- 
dum [Corpus jur. can., c. Dist. xxviii] : Although the priests 
had acted culpably and wantonly, still they should endure it 
after the example of Jesus Christ, who suffered the bad among 
the good. Augustinus, the holy teacher, if one reads aright, 
Confessionum, libro sexto, cap. xv, complains that he so 
loved his first love whom he allowed to return again into 
Africa, by whom he had a son, that he took no wife but 
hoped, all the time of her absence, that she would come 
back to him, and therefore would take none in marriage, 
but rather satisfied the impatience of love with another 
woman, wherefore he complained of himself before God, 
and thought he had done wrong. For it would have been 
better to have married, as he himself shows in the preceding 
chapter xii, in which he overcame and persuaded Alipius, 
so that he said he wanted to marry but had never ventured 
to do so, but now would, because Augustinus had approved 

• Another error. He was bom a Roman. 

* This is a repetition of what is said above. 

3 He means celibacy. t Zwingli gives merely one date, 859. 


i88 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

marriage so highly. From which we may truly conclude, 
that at the time of Augustinus, who lived 433 a.d./ no 
opposition was made against the marriage of the clergy, 
and that Augustinus had two wives, one after the other, 
instead of wedded wives according to the decision of the 
Council of Toledo, ^ Di. xxxiv, Is qui : Whoever has no wedded 
wife but instead a concubine, him shall people not turn 
away from the altar or partaking of the sacrament; indeed 
when he is satisfied with one wife, let her be called wedded 
wife or concubine. ^ Then Augustinus complains of his 
weakness, that he was not able to wait till she returned 
from Africa (though she never came), but was satisfied with 
one other. A great number of proofs of this kind could 
be brought together. For to speak finally of the subject: 
Let one command as much as one will, nature is not so 
easily controlled: it is the power of God to keep chastity, 
not our ability. How then do they venture to set up a 
command, which man cannot obey with his own strength? 
Indeed it is only a piece of hypocrisy, though no reference is 
here made to those who have such grace from God. Then 
it was true also of the pious old fathers that they did not 
keep chastity "I; they were also men. Although in our times 
chastity is falsely assumed for a time under fair appearances 
by some, but soon the truth comes out. They have begotten 
children by concubines, committed adultery, seduced maid- 
ens, from which deeds very great misery has sprung, murders 
and other evils. Finally: Naturam expellas furca, tamen 
usque recurret — that is: Though you drive nature out with 
a stick, it will return again, s Unavoidable errors one must 
not desire to overcome, but should see how they are most 
properly to be endured. 

Tenthly, Paul writes again to Titus (i., 5-7): "For this 
cause left I thee in Crete (an island now called Candia, 
whence they get Malvasia wine), that thou shouldst set 

'Augustinus was bom 354, died 430. ^ In Spain, 400 A.D. 

3 Corpus jur. can., c. 4, Dist. xxxiv. *lie means celibacy. 

5 The quotation is from Horace, Epist., I: epist. 10, verse 24. 


Priests to Preach and to Marry 189 

in order the things that are wanting, and ordain honourable 
elders in every city, as I had recommended thee. If any 
be blameless, and has only one wife, true and faithful 
children, of whom one cannot say that they live riotously 
or are unruly. For a bishop shall be one of whom one 
cannot complain." These words of Paul are still clearer 
than those above in Article VII, although the meaning 
is the same. But there are good things to be noticed in 
them: first, that old honourable men shall be made bishops 
in each city — that is, priests or lay-pastors. They must 
not be sent from Rome, from which they bring us no divine 
teaching, but how good Corsican wine is and what pretty 
prostitutes there are on the Campo Floro. Second, that 
these words "only one wife" shall be so understood that 
he shall have not more than one wedded wife at one time, 
and not according to Jewish or heathen customs that he 
should venture to have more than one wedded wife. Third, 
that the bishops shall see to it that their children are brought 
up more correctly than commonly the custom is. Fourth, 
that you may hear that a bishop is nothing more than a 
priest; and that you do not worry that he says "in each 
city," which word he understands as meaning each church 
community. For in Ephesus there were in one "city" 
many bishops. Acts xx., 17 — that is, preachers. Otherwise 
should one understand "bishop " after the kind of the present 
bishops, one would need ten Ephesuses. Fifth, that bishops 
should be of pure life above other men. But how can he 
be of pure life, if it is not proper for him to take a wife and 
if he cannot be chaste? How many priests are pious, well- 
taught bishops or overseers, on whom one can lay no blame 
for anything except that they say, he does not live a chaste 
life, or he is a whorish priest. See, that single sin takes 
from them all faith in the eyes of men ; let him love God as 
he will, let him teach as faithfully as he will, everything is 
spoiled, as soon as one hears that he does not live piously 
as far as chastity is concerned . How great injury that causes, 
any reasonable man can estimate. Ah, how blind men are, 


190 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

that they do not remove this disgrace, although God and 
reason favour! 

Eleventhly, Paul writes to the Hebrews (xiii., 4) : " Mar- 
riage is a highly desirable thing, and an undefiled bed, 
but the impure and adulterous God will judge." These 
words of Paul those of the Greek Church have always 
brought up against the Roman defenders of pretended chas- 
tity; marriage is desirable, an honourable thing. Accord- 
ing to the former it is established not by a fool but by God; 
consequently it is a medicine for sin that is innate in us and 
from whose attacks none is free, as long as he lives. And it 
has its foundation in a law of God : Love thy neighbour as 
thyself. For Almighty God, knowing and pitying our 
shortcomings, that He may aid them, has united marriage 
with faith and belief, in that whoever keeps faith and 
truth in marriage, finds no injury in marital relations. For 
God considers faith kept with one's fellow-man as faith kept 
with Him. Therefore Paul says: "and an undefiled bed." 
For what one does to his neighbour, one does to God. 
Indeed God does not consider Himself loved, unless one's 
neighbour be also loved. Therefore He commands the 
offering, which is to be made, be left upon the altar till one 
has become reconciled with one's neighbour, and judges 
His honour according to the good of one's fellow-men. 
It also has its foundation in natural law: What you would 
not have done to you, that do not unto others. If you would 
have your spouse remain true to you, leave another's 
untouched, thus to speak of other persons, daughters and 
serving-maids. And for this reason the Greeks would not 
be forced into pretended chastity, and are as good Christians 
to-day as we are ; yes, better, in this that they are satisfied 
with single spouses. And we are licentious, as it pleases us, 
and the high bishops suffer it, as is to be noticed. That is 
of use, not considering that it causes offence in one's fellow- 
men, which they should avoid of all things according to 
the opinion of Christ [Matt, xviii., 7]: "Woe unto him by 
whom offence cometh!" Now the present offence comes 


Priests to Preach and to Marry 191 

from none but the high bishops. For chastity ' is enjoined 
not by God or by the holy apostles, but by the bishops- 
Nor can one say that while priests live impure lives now 
in times past they were chaste. We say no. For if one 
reads the decree (that is a papal law) he will find that the 
deacons and hypodeacons have always opposed this pro- 
hibition, as well as the priests. For St. Hilary, in his 
times a light among all Christians, had wedded wife and 
children. Another evil happens, because God is displeased 
with the wicked impurity of the clergy, namely, that the 
children bom therefrom are commonly considered wicked, 
dishonourable outcasts. Whence comes this? From this, 
that the men — that is, high bishops — have prevented their 
being bom in wedlock; and those who were rightly created 
by God, are disgraced before men by the prohibition of men, 
which thing Christ earnestly forbade. [Matthew xviii. , 10,6]: 
"Take heed that ye disgrace not any of these little ones 
who believe in me. For whoever shall offend or disgrace 
one of these little ones (for thus in this place St. Chrysostom 
understands the word scandalon) , ^ it were better for him that 
a millstone were hanged about his neck and that he were sunk 
in the depths of the sea." Indeed the disgrace brought 
upon the poor children of men is the cause of very much evil. 
If it is a daughter and if her birth is not soon made honourable 
in the sight of men, she soon despairs and takes up a loose 
life, remaining all her days a courtesan, to be offence to 
all men. But we do not wish to be understood as touching 
the honour of those who live in piety, although they are 
children of the clergy, of which there are, if God will, many, 
but hope we have showed that this disgracing is the cause 
of much sin, nothing of which the children caused, that this 
injury is done them not by God but by men, who have 
disgraced God's creatures on account of their own avarice. 
For these children whom they have themselves disgraced 

' That is celibacy. 

^ See his commentary on Matthew. Homily 69. In The Nicene and Post- 
Nicene Fathers, ist series, x., 420 ff. 


192 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

they should care, so that the disgrace be removed from them 
before God and man. If it is a man child, in some places 
he is allowed to take up in secret no honest calling, ' so that 
he is forced to become nothing but a good-for-nothing fool. 
Often such despair brings with it a carelessness in the father 
and mother, who think: Thou canst not bring honour, etc. 
The conclusion is that marriage is an excellent and honour- 
able thing, which is also not forbidden the clergy in the Old 
Testament, which is much stricter than the New. But 
though the wise bishops, who wanted to be wiser than even 
God, who could probably have forbidden it, had He thought 
it useful and honourable, have brought about so praise- 
worthy a state of chastity,^ still we will let them answer 
for it to God, and it will doubtlessly go hard with them. 
For Christ says [Matthew xv., 9]: "For in vain do they 
worship me, since they teach the doctrines and commands 
of men." 

These and many other reasons from the Scriptures have 
influenced us, honourable, wise, and respectable Sirs, to 
win your Wisdom in the matter of the marriage which we 
desire to contract, indeed some of us to publish marriages 
already entered into, which your Wisdom will not especially 
oppose, in view of the great dishonour which we have 
shamelessly allowed to be put upon us, in view of the great 
offence thereby offered all men, and in view of our sore 
consciences with which we have daily performed the divine 
service of God's word and other sacraments, but always 
realising our unchanging weakness and having no peace. 
Therefore I urge your Wisdom, as our fathers (for we are 
all bom of one praiseworthy Federation and are yours and 
of yours) by God our Creator who made us all of one clod 
of earth, that we recognise each other as brothers, by the 
blood of Jesus Christ, shed for us all, that no one ask more 
for himself than for another, by the Spirit of God, who is 
God, who in all His enlightening and inspiring never for- 

' An illegitimate son could not get into any guild, in many places. 
^ It should be celibacy. 


Priests to Preach and to Marry 193 

bade the clergy marriage, indeed even commanded it: 
pity us your true and willing servants, some of whom have 
just reported themselves as willing to marry and some of 
whom as desirous of making their marriage public, grant 
us this, so that that which is no sin before God, may not 
be disgraceful before men. And since we have most faith- 
fully busied ourselves all our days at home and abroad in 
the interest of your honour, grant us that we be freed from 
this disgrace of impurity and may live in honour among you. 
For it would ever be unfriendly, if those, whose honour we 
have increased, wished at all times to forbid us honour 
before not only kin and neighbours but also strangers. 
It is we also who have suffered good and evil with you in 
trouble, be it pest or war, and have always acted as decent 
honest folk. And so it is not from lasciviousness but from 
love of the honours of pious marital purity, that we appeal to 
your wisdom. For if it came from lasciviousness, we could 
serve that end much better if we had no wives. We know 
well what trouble, care, and labour comes with marriage; 
we know also how easily every day we could desert the 
women, whom we have, alas! known in the past. Therefore 
it is not from lasciviousness, but from modesty and love 
of the souls committed to our care, not to make them wicked 
forever. We have most of us outgrown our youthful 
ways and are generally nearer forty than thirty. You 
will also not hear those who will cry out with many a 
remonstrance: Will dare you take wives? You have sworn 
chastity.' Here listen, gracious sirs. No one has sworn 
chastity with other words than are demanded here. When 
the bishop who ordains the priests asks if they are pure, 
then the speaker answers: "As far as human weakness 
can suffer or endure." See, gracious Sirs, in this affair we 
have sworn this way and no other. This we will prove 
by the lord bishops themselves, though there is no need of 
it: no one denies that, as we hope. Since now we are 
sufficiently aware, alas! that we have fallen often from 

' He means celibacy. 


194 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

weakness, and that therefore neither oath nor command 
binds us, also that St. Paul says: It is better that a man 
marry, as is mentioned above. Art. V, let yourselves be 
influenced to recognise publicly that which we do before 
you, and if there had not been so great a desire for honour 
.we would truly never have covered up our disgrace. Also 
do not consent to hear those who will cry out: Who would 
rear their children, they would commit adultery, we would 
have to consider their wives as beggars, they would rule 
us with their children, — and make other complaints. We 
will in this and other things according to the admonition, 
as is finally contained in the herein articles. Listen also 
not to others who say : Is it not a disgraceful thing to sleep 
with a woman and next morning hold mass? Answer: 
Can one not also do that if he has stayed with a harlot? 
If we had not conscience otherwise than that we so far 
forgetting God and ourselves should be inclined to such 
wickedness, we would not need to direct this admonition 
to your Wisdom. It happens that our consciences are clear, 
that we can live in marital relations without offending any- 
one: the oversight of the conscience does not allow one to 
commit such a sin. And so we admonish you as our fathers : 
AUow us to live in honour with our pious fellow-citizens; 
and although there is no ground anywhere in the Scriptures 
for it, still if we have erred, overlook or forgive us our 
marriages. For each father must overlook or forgive his son 
something. For we are still yours, of your blood and soil, 
of your faith and heart, and no one of us is defiled with 
anything dishonourable save before the world. And if we 
may speak of doctrine without vainglory, we would wish 
still to commend ourselves more; but be this enough 
for us, though that we are all so taught and made eloquent 
by the mercy of God, that we can with fair propriety speak 
the healing doctrine of our Lord Jesus Christ. 

But in case this does not help, dear, gracious Sirs, as we 
hope, still we beg you most humbly to protect us from the 
violence of the pope of Rome and all clergy. Thus we 


Priests to Preach and to Marry 195 

shall protect ourselves by the consolation and protection 
of the Scriptures ; so that, if we did not protect ourselves by 
ihe authority of Scripture, we would be willing to stand the 
consequences as is fair. And if anyone wishes to discuss 
the subject publicly or later into a written discussion about 
this, we will with God's help overcome all adversaries 
by means of Scripture. Let no one fear because there are 
many adversaries; the Word of God, freedom, and the 
favour of His mercy are on our side. Not to speak with 
arrogance, we think too that you owe us that protection; 
we are yours, and our ancestors from earliest times have 
always rendered assistance to those threatened by injustice, 
whence a high reputation has grown up in all lands for 
the Confederation. How much more should you not refuse 
protection to us against those who would use force with us; 
since we have looked to you with entirely confident hearts, 
especially when in many places of the Confederation it 
has been customary from times past, in case a priest was 
wanted, to lay upon him the condition that he have a wife 
of his own, and leave theirs untouched (undefiled), which 
was often considered foolish by many. But they really 
acted wisely, if they had only added to the requirements, 
that the priests should wed these wives; as it is, they have 
not treated them in an entirely friendly way, by leaving 
them thus in a state of dishonour. God put such into your 
minds! For truly and by the loving God we swear, by the 
welfare of our souls, that it will be divine and honourable 
in you, and honourable and wholesome for us. We shall 
also with faithful industry be of service to your Wisdom 
at all times, so that your Wisdom shall of necessity 
clearly see that no evil has come about. God be with you ! 
Amen. 

These are the requests which we express in the interest 
of peace and quiet, which we wish steadfastly to preserve 
with God's help : 

That neither our wives nor our children should be de- 
prived of the right and justice of your Wisdom, but, as is the 


196 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

custom with the laity, should enjoy rights, as the family of 
any honest man usually does. 

That where one of us is with justice found to have com- 
mitted adultery, we wish to be understood as giving up 
and submitting, so that we would without opposition yield, 
if we were dismissed from the living or parish. 

That we would no more assume that we might give to 
our children the livings which we hold, and in no way claim 
to possess what belonged to the living or the church. 

That if any one considered himself injured or likely 
to be injured in other things by our marriage, we would 
submit to the reasonable judgment of the authorities, so 
that the marriage be not injurious or disadvantageous to 
anyone. 

That we do not wish to be understood as encroaching 
upon the rights of anyone, but (as recommending) that each 
priest who desired to marry should lay before his lords 
articles to which they could have easy access. 

Wise and honourable Sirs, we have wished to sign our 
names, but have not done so for several reasons which we 
shall at the proper time make known and bring forth, for 
in the little book (pamphlet) there is much that will re- 
quire the names. No more now than this: God's will be 
done on earth as in heaven ! 

Given the 13th day of July, 1522. 


XIV 

Defence Called Archeteles, in which Answer is Made 
TO AN Admonition that the Most Reverend Lord 
Bishop of Constance (being Persuaded thereto by 
the Behaviour of Certain Wantonly Factious Per- 
sons) Sent to the Council of the Great Minster 
at Zurich Called the Chapter. 

(August 22-3, 1522) 

[Apologeticus Archeteles adpellatus, quo respondetur paraenesi a reveren- 
dissimo domino Constantiensi (quorundam procaci f actione ad id persuaso) ad 
senatum prepositure Tigurine, quern " capitulum " vocant, masse. In Schuler 
and Schulthess ed., iii., 27-76. In Egli and Finsler ed., i., 256-327. Trans- 
lated by Mr. Henry Preble, New York City. 

This is Zwingli's reply to the admonition which the Bishop of Constance, 
the diocesan of the city of Zurich, addressed to the chapter of the Great 
Minster on May 24, 1522. Zwingli was not mentioned in it but rightly re- 
garding himself as the chief agent in bringing in the new ideas which were con- 
demned by the Bishop, he made this reply. His delay in doing so was probably 
due to his absorbing occupations in other directions. The treatise was written 
hastily, he informed Myconius, in sending him a copy (August 26, 1522). 

There are numerous allusions to the treatise in the Zwingli correspond- 
ence. Thus ZwingH in writing to his bosom friend, Myconius, on August 
23, 1522 {Werke, n. e. vii., 567), promises him a copy, and this promise he 
redeemed on the 26th {ibid., 569); on April 11, 1524, he alludes to it when 
writing to Konrad Hofmann (viii., 169), and lastly to Konrad Sam in Ulm 
on February 12, 1527 (Schuler and Schulthess ed., viii., 28), he imparted in- 
formation regarding it as Sam was somehow unacquainted with it. In letters 
to Zwingli from Michael Hummelberg on August 26, 1522 {Werke, n. e. vii., 
574), the same on September 4 (p. 578); Melchior Macrinus, on September 
30 (p. 588, he calls it a Kalco); Sebastian Meyer, on November 11 (p. 612); 
Johannes Zwick, on November 27 (p. 820); and Medio on February 10, 1523 
(viii., 22), mention is made of it. But the gem of the collection is this de- 
licious effusion from Erasmus, written from Basel, September 8, 1522 (p. 582), 
on receipt of Zwingli's present of a copy: 

"I have read some pages of your apology [Archeteles]. I beseech you 

197 


198 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

for the sake of the glory of the Gospel, which I know you would favour and 
which we all who bear the name of Christ ought to favour, if you should issue 
anything hereafter, treat so serious a matter seriously, and bear in mind 
evangelical modesty and patience. Consult your learned friends before you 
issue anything. I fear that that apology will cause you great peril and will 
injure the Gospel. Even in the few pages that I have read there are many 
things I wanted to warn you about. I do not doubt that your prudence will 
take this in good part, for I have written late at night with a mind that is 
most solicitous for you. Farewell." 

The Rev. Dr. B. J. Kidd, in his valuable collection of Documents of the 
Continental Reformation (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 191 1), characterises the 
Archeteles as "rather truculent" (p. 389). It was thisquahty probably which 
offended Erasmus.] 

In this treatise square brackets are used to indicate either the translation 
of the Greek term or terms which Zwingli used or references which are more 
exactly given than these are by Zwingli. 

TO the Most Reverend Father and Lord in Christ, Hugo 
von Hohenlandenberg, Bishop of Constance, Greeting, 
Huldreich ZwingH, preacher of the church of Zurich at the 
Great Minster. 

That I again trouble your Highness with a letter, most 
noble Bishop, overwhelmed as you are by such a mass 
of duties, I do not think will be laid up against me, for I 
know that I am speaking to one whose highest pleasure it is 
that the name of Christ be spread abroad as widely as possible ; 
and His business, as it is not of men, so it can in nowise be 
undone by men. But now that for about six years I have 
laboured to the best of my ability with the talent entrusted 
to my keeping, that when the Lord came and demanded His 
gain, I might not slothfully bring forward with fear and 
shame the one idle talent wrapped in a napkin, lo! I am 
denounced before your Highness as a destroyer of the 
Lord's fold, not its guardian or shepherd. And this thing, 
as was fitting, caused you to send to us at Zurich that 
unnecessarily magnificent delegation of three scholars, ' and 
I rendered such account to them before the Council of my 
teaching, which is not mine but God's, that every one might 
have been content with it, if only he weighed the case in 
accordance with his judgment and not his feeHngs. And 

'See his letter to Erasmus Fabricius, p. 113 of this volume. 


Archeteles : Reply to Bishop's Admonition 199 

when I thought the matter had been settled in entire peace- 
fulness, as has been the constant and only object of my 
effort, certain impatient fellows began to gnash their teeth, 
not so much because they had found anything wrong as 
because they had not conquered and slain their adversary 
and levelled everything with the ground; and they began 
to look for an opportunity to make a disturbance, until, 
having thought out a scheme for harassing me secretly 
and underhandedly, they made you the patron of their 
design, and soothed their jealousy at the risk of your good 
name, forgetting that a counsellor was regarded, even 
among the ancients, as a sacred thing, and one not to be 
abused of any man. For, by their continual outcries and 
insinuations they finally dragged you into sending to the 
Council of our canons, which we call the Chapter, a document 
of admonition that is as far removed from any learning 
as from any moderation. For, this I divine rather than 
definitely assert, led by the following reasons particularly: 
first that you are not capable of anything of the sort your- 
self, and this you may take to mean that you could not 
accomplish anything even if you could do this kind of thing, 
nay, that you could have accomplished more, if you had 
given utterance to your thoughts in the German language ' ; 
secondly, that you meditate nothing but what is peaceful, 
while this admonition is so full of violence and threats, so 
pregnant with them that it might bring forth if necessary, 
nay, has already brought forth, this pamphlet which you 
see dedicated to your Highness. It is called "Archeteles" 
on this account, because it is masculine and is going to 
put an end, I hope, to all controversy between those gentle- 
men and myself, so that after this first engagement, 
with a continuous document at least, they will themselves 
make an end of strife and contention, and it may truly be 
the beginning and end of the entire quarrel, for I call God 
to witness I have none with them, so much so that I wonder 
at nothing more than what reason could have driven them 

*The Bishop of Constance was a notoriously poor latinist. 


200 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

to send to a place where there was no disturbance a thing 
which they expected would serve as an apple (epilog) of 
discord, to arouse disagreement and strife. For I will say- 
freely what I think. In their whole harangue they thunder 
forth the word peace, like those prophets whom Jeremiah 
denounces for continuing to cry, when there was no need, 
"Peace, peace; when there is no peace" [Jer. vi., 14]. For 
at Zurich, as far as the teachings of Christ are concerned, 
everything is as quiet as anywhere in the world, even 
the laymen in general are so well versed in the Gospel that 
they will not listen to any other teachings. And this you 
will see more clearly from this example. While hither- 
to reckless mendicant friars had spouted forth in the pulpit 
whatever came into their heads, the Council has forbidden 
them to preach anything which they had not drawn from 
the fountain head of the two Testaments of Holy Writ.' 
Wherefore it appears that these gentlemen see discord 
where, in the words of Paul, the name of God is glorified 
with one mind and one mouth [Rom. xv., 6]. And yet 
they have been disappointed in their hope, for, having 
heard the admonitory document, I only blushed with 
shame that men of this kidney should be turning their eyes 
greedily upon me in the session of the Chapter, and re- 
joicing at the attack upon me, but I by no means grudged 
them this as long as the weapons with which I was attacked 
were not stronger than they were. For, all that has been 
patched together here is so poverty-stricken in its barren- 
ness and awkwardness that I do not know but it would 
have been wiser to pass it all by with contempt than to refute 
it, if the injury they are doing by it to the Sacred Writings had 
not challenged me to come to the aid of these. For, with 
one or two exceptions, whenever they take the Sacred Books 
in their hands they twist them so that they cannot hide 
their pain in silence; whenever they declaim they are so 
clumsy that you would think they had purposely aimed at 
raising a laugh. I say nothing of their solecisms and 

'This was in 1520. 


Archeteles : Reply to Bishop's Admonition 201 

barbarisms, for to these our ecclesiastical ears have become 
hardened. 

Therefore, most kindly Bishop, if you see them handled 
here a little freely, there is no reason to wonder; for they 
have deserved it by their recklessness and ignorance. And 
the same is demanded by the office that I fill. I must con- 
tradict and refute them, and, like faithful Abraham, who 
when he heard that Lot had been captured by the enemy 
even slew kings to set him free, I must rescue the Sacred 
Writings so wickedly tortured, and I feel sure that by that 
achievement I shall restore the spoils of highest honour 
to our great Melchizedek [Gen. xiv., I3#.]. For, although 
this whole performance seem on the face of it to be in ac- 
cordance with your orders, I am not at all willing to under- 
stand it in that sense. For I want your good name to be 
intact and inviolate at all points, because I am pretty 
strongly convinced that where there is any talk of the 
doctrines of Christ, you hold the soundest views, and that 
you bid those of your Council to settle in the most suitable 
way the disputes that may happen to arise at this time 
between the heralds of God's word. Let them see to it how 
well they do it. There is a report, however, that some of 
them do not act in all things as you would have them, but 
as their own diseased minds dictate. And in this admoni- 
tory document this is clear to everybody, for mention 
of my name is there avoided simply for the purpose of 
cutting off an opportunity for an answer on my part, though 
meanwhile I am attacked on all sides with the most damaging 
suspicions and am almost buried under them. How much 
more fitting it would have been — I appeal to your sense 
of justice — if I had taught anything impious, as these 
gentlemen will have it, to engage with me openly and to 
show definitely by the authority of Scripture, where and 
in what I had done wrong! As it is, by filling everything 
with their frightful lamentations, what else are they calling 
into doubt and suspicion than the whole teachings of Christ 
which I have preached so strenuously? But they shall get 


202 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

no satisfaction; for if they had ever been minded to Hsten 
to those teachings they would not have hidden themselves, 
like cuttle-fish, in their own inky blackness, though by the 
help of him whose business is at stake I have so strained 
and purified and cleared this blackness that their purposes 
are evident to all and only their names are missing. These 
too, if they go on, as they have begun, attacking me from 
imder cover, I shall be obliged to make known. I would 
rather they should suffer me quietly to lay the food of 
heaven before the sheep entrusted to my charge, to fill 
them with it and bum them with the fire of love, than that 
by their tricks and insinuations they should call me away 
from the sweet repose of letters to defend myself. I shall not, 
if they like to delight their spirits with quarrels, grudge 
them their contending constantly if they please with whom- 
ever shall be seasonable, so that they do not assail me, 
at least in a spirit of altercation. The opportunity to 
admonish or discuss shall be theirs at all times, so that they 
grant that the Sacred Writings are a sacred anchor, not to 
put trust in which is most faithless and wicked, and so that 
they come squarely to try conclusions with me. Otherwise, 
I too shall claim the right np6^ jipfiTa KpyriZeiv [to fight 
the devil with his own weapons].' If anybody shall 
call this arrogant, most excellent Bishop, I beg him to 
think over the things that I thought over until the divine 
spirit made stable that which it wrought in me, to wit: 
When we seeHhe race of man worried and troubled, through 
the course of life, as to the attainment of happiness here- 
after, and this not so much from natural vigilance as from 
the desire for life, the breath of which God, the Creator, 
breathed into our nostrils from the beginning of creation. 
Yet no way shows itself anywhere by which that happiness 
can be found. For if one turns to the philosophers, there 
is among them so much divergence of opinion about happi- 

^ Plutarch, Vitce Aemil., c. 23; Lysandri, c. 20. 

^ The dudum of Schuler and Schulthess seems smoother than the quuin 
of EgU and Finsler.— H. P. 


Archeteles : Reply to Bishop's Admonition 203 

ness that one is filled with disgust at them; but if to the 
Christians, one finds much more confusion and vagueness 
among some of them than among the heathen, some of 
them aiming to reach happiness through human tradition 
and the material things of this world, relying, that is, upon 
their own human notions, while others rely only upon the 
mercy and promises of God, and both struggle with tooth 
and nail, as the saying is, to get their own opinion accepted. 
Placed thus at the parting of the ways, whither shall I turn? 
To men? If you say, "Yes, to men," I continue: "To 
those who in the old days when Christianity was still a 
new thing were held to be wise, or to those who just before 
our day showed forth folly rather than wisdom?" Here the 
opponent will struggle and become dumb, like the chief 
men of the Jews when asked by Christ, "The baptism of 
John, whence was it?" [Matt, xxi., 2$ff.]. And if you press 
him very hard he will admit that one must turn to the men 
of old, as worthy of more authority both for their antiquity 
and for the holiness of their lives. And when you add: 
"Even among these one can find things at variance or 
inconsistent with the writings of the Evangelists and the 
Apostles. To which, therefore, do you think one ought to 
accede?" he will answer, unless he be a blockhead or a 
dumb brute, "To the things that were uttered under the 
inspiration of the Spirit of God. " For the things which are 
of human wisdom, however magnificently coloured and 
decked out, can deceive, but not the things that are of God. 
Here one needs the sinews of faith, which if any man lack, he 
will totter and faint and fall. 

As I turned these things zealously over in my mind, 
I say, most excellent Bishop, and prayed to God to point 
out the right way to my hesitating soul, He said, "Thou 
fool, reflect on this: The truth of the Lord abideth for- 
ever; cling to that truth" [Ps. cxix., 90]; and "'Heaven 
and earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass 
away' [Matt, xxiv., 35]; the things of man shall be done 
away, but the things of God are unchangeable"; and "'In 


204 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

vain they worship me, teaching the doctrines and command- 
ments of men'" [Matt, xv., 9], as if God ought to follow 
our suggestions, or as if, when we had contrived something 
which at first sight seemed beautiful and good and even 
holy, it were straightway going to please Him. Rather 
ought we to strive always to depend upon Him with our whole 
heart, and not upon our own desires and contrivances, like 
sluggish slaves who will suffer many stripes if they neglect 
the will of their master and do their own. Therefore, 
putting all else aside, I came at length to have trust in 
nothing and in no words so much as in those which proceeded 
out of the mouth of the Lord. And when miserable mortals, 
forgetting both themselves and God, tried to palm off their 
own works as His, I began to look to see whether any 
means could be found by which one could detect whether 
the works of man or of God were the better, especially as I 
saw not a few straining every nerve to make the simple- 
minded accept their own utterances as divine, even though 
they were at variance with, or in direct opposition to, the 
words of God. And as I sought, it occurred to me that all 
things are made clear in that light which saith, "T am 
the light of the world" [John viii., 12], which lighteth every 
man that cometh into this world; and again [I. John iv., i], 
"Believe not every spirit, but try the spirits, whether they 
are of God. " And seeking for a touchstone, I find none 
other than the stone of offence and the rock of scandal, 
[I. Pet. ii., 7], upon which are broken all who, after the 
manner of the Pharisees, make the word of God of none 
effect through their tradition. Having, therefore, put these 
things together in this way, I began to try every doctrine 
by this touchstone, and if I saw that the stone refiected 
the same colour or rather that the doctrine could bear the 
brilliancy of the stone, I accepted it; if not, I rejected it. 
And finally it came to pass that at the very beginning of 
the test I began to discover whether there were anything 
added to the real doctrine or inserted into it, and then I 
could not be driven by any force or any threats to put in 


Archeteles : Reply to Bishop's Admonition 205 

the human things, however they puffed themselves out 
and tried to appear fine, the same trust as in the divine. 
Nay, if any set of men taught their own notions that were 
not consistent, or rather were quite inconsistent, with the 
divine, I flung this saying of the Apostle at them, "We 
ought to obey God rather than men" [Acts v., 29], until 
those who have such an exalted opinion of their own utter- 
ances and little or none of those of Christ, got the worst pos- 
sible opinion of me, and this I regard as the surest sign that 
the procedure is most acceptable to God and beneficial to 
me. For "Woe unto you," he says, "when all men shall 
speak well of you!" [Luke vi., 26], and "Blessed are ye when 
men shall hate you . . . and shall reproach you and cast 
out your name as evil, for the Son of Man's sake," and 
"Your names are written in heaven" [Luke vi., 22, and 
x.,20]. 

Therefore, if envious persons ever denounce me to your 
Highness as disregarding or scorning human traditions, 
know that this comes from my having found them to be at 
variance with, and in opposition to, the divine teachings, 
and that I cannot be made to fear what man can do to me. 
For, though he cast out my name, I am sure that it will 
have honour with God; for the name of God will never be 
more surely glorified than if my name is held in the worst 
repute among men, and if he slay my body, he will establish 
my soul in everlasting life. To this treasure, namely, the 
certainty of God's word, must our hearts be guided. For 
this neither time nor moths can reduce to naught, but they 
can titles and priesthoods and statues and gold and fine 
raiment and feasts and coaches and mules. Do you see 
what has driven me to refuting their bloodless document 
of admonition? This, verily, because I see that by their 
very speech, which, as Christ witnesseth, is the surest 
messenger of the heart, their feelings with regard to divine 
and human things stand forth clearer than light. And since 
they cannot rest and will not suffer the budding knowledge 
of Christ to grow, I would have their words known far 


206 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

and wide, that they may be the better guarded against. 
It is not I who condemn them, but the Lord speaking by 
the mouth of Ezekiel, and saying [Ezek. xiii., 3 ff.]: "Woe 
unto the fooHsh prophets, that follow their own spirit, and 
have seen nothing! O Israel, thy prophets are like the 
foxes in the deserts ! Ye have not gone up into the gaps, 
neither made up the hedge for the house of Israel to stand 
in the battle in the day of the Lord. They have seen vanity 
and lying divination, saying. The Lord saith: and the Lord 
hath not sent them : and they have made others to hope 
that they would confirm the word. Have ye not seen a vain 
vision, and have ye not spoken a lying divination, whereas 
ye say, The Lord saith it; albeit I have not spoken?" and 
the rest of the things that are written in chapter xiii. Who 
does not see that by these words that class of men is hit who 
say with their tongue, "Lord, Lord" and "the temple of 
the Lord, the temple of the Lord" [Jer. vii., 4], but in their 
heart look to this: "Whosoever shall swear by the temple, 
it is nothing; but whosoever shall swear by the gold of the 
temple " [Matt, xxiii., 16], and this: "Whosoever shall swear 
by the altar it is nothing, but whosoever sweareth by the 
gift that is upon it is guilty "[ Matt, xxiii, 18]. And yet 
they would have themselves appear the while as champions 
of the divine law and name and of the Gospel. Therefore 
your Highness should avoid both their advice and their 
conversation, unless you desire to expose yourself to the 
greatest derision. I will not say here how roughly they 
handled a few days ago certain pious men and true heralds ' 
of Christ, though you had not ordered such harshnes. 
But this is not generally known, and the belief is current 
that everything is done by your authority and command, 
which may sometime cast a great stain upon you, even 
without your knowing it. For this matter should not be 
carried on upon a basis of power, but upon that of the sanc- 
tion of the Sacred Writings. For the more authoritatively 

' Allusion to the treatment accorded to George Brunner and Sebastian 
Hofmeister. See Finsler's note ad loco. 


Archeteles : Reply to Bishop's Admonition 207 

you exercise your power, the more will you render yourself 
odious to all men. For we ought to take the Holy Scrip- 
tures as our guide and master; if any one uses them aright 
he should be unharmed, even though our little doctors 
be ever so much displeased. Otherwise calamity will fall 
upon us sometime, for the knowledge of the Sacred Writings 
is to-day upon the lips not only of the ecclesiastics but of 
almost the entire community. Therefore nothing ought 
to be done which savours of authority rather than of reason 
and the divine purpose; for nothing more would be accom- 
plished than Paul accomplished by kicking against the 
pricks. For the study of the Gospel (to say nothing mean- 
while of the majesty of God) is too vast a thing to be put 
to sleep or to death by the persecution of one or two in- 
dividuals, and if it were kept under for a time by the wicked- 
ness of certain men, it would yet burst forth into a fiercer 
flame. You should therefore be wary and wise, and pray the 
Lord to guide your path, and, to make an end finally, you 
should take it in good part if something be taken from you 
to be added to Christ. For thus you will make the house of 
Hohenlandenberg most illustrious and your own soul most 
acceptable to God. The Most High God grant this ! Amen. 
I beg you for the sake of Christ to examine from top to 
bottom this whole matter which is under discussion here. 
For it could not longer be hidden, and ought not to be, that 
certain persons were arming with your power their own 
hostility to Christ and his teachings. I have watched for 
a long time to see if some one from all the diocese would not 
challenge them into the arena and put a stop to their walking 
with heads thus high in air, and now that no one has ap- 
peared, I have come forward myself. May it be svuaipc^g, to 
victory, and to the glory of Christ, and may He preserve 
your Highness long in prosperity! For I, too, wish you 
well. Zurich, August 22nd, in the year 1522. 

Yours devotedly, 

HULDREICH ZWINGLI, 

preacher at the Great Minster of the Church of Zurich. 


2o8 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

Admofiition Sent to the Chapter of the Great Minster 
by the Most Reverend Lord Bishop of Constance. 

Hugo, by the grace of God and of the ApostoHc See,. 
Bishop of Constance, to our sincerely beloved in Christ, the 
venerable and honourable Provost and Chapter of the 
Collegiate Church of the Great Minster of Saints Felix 
and Regula at Zurich in our diocese, greeting and sincere 
affection in the Lord. 

I. We have for some time, dearly beloved, heard re- 
ports that there are, almost all through Germany, people 
who cry out day and night that the people of Christ have 
been wrongfully oppressed until now by the heads of the 
Church with hard and burdensome regulations, observances, 
and ceremonials, in consequence of which such persons 
are trying with all their might to cast off and do away with 
ceremonials, and 

II. in this golden age (for that is what they call it) 
in which the Gospel is at last beginning to shed its light 
upon mankind, to lead back the mass of the people to 

III. the freedom of the Gospel. But when they strive 
to pull up out of the field of the Lord what human ordinances 
they 

IV. call tares and cockles, we see, alas, the wheat also 
being rooted up before our eyes. For have not hateful 
contentions arisen from this, and is not the whole business 
carried on with recriminations, after the pattern of silly 
women? Is not every one saying: 

V. I am of Paul, I of Cephas, and I of Apollos? Is not, 
in short, that happening which is apt to happen among sheep 
when in the darkness of night 

VI . a raider, a wolf, has broken into the fold ? They flee, 
and some run unawares into the wolf's jaws, some plunge 
against a wall in front of them, and some wander about in 
panic-stricken uncertainty. So the body of the Church is 
affected in these days by a sort of spirit of dizziness, and 
some go feeling their way in the dark, as it were, not know- 
ing what direction to take, others move about in a circle, 


Archeteles : Reply to Bishop's Admonition 209 

some stand still waiting for the sure light .of truth to shine 
forth out of the darkness, others know not any course to 
take, but yet deride and judge those who take part on either 
side. Others are led astray and driven to doing this by 
various passions, those worst of counsellors, anger, 

VII. hatred, jealousy, ambition, and the like, so that, 
in their zeal to follow after individuals, the real love of peace 
and calm devotion to truth are abandoned or made war 
upon, than which wickedness what can be imagined more 
execrable? You can in fact see some people cling with so 
much 

VIII. animosity to their own undertakings or decisions 
that they cannot be turned about by any reasoning or pious 
persuasion. They would rather have everything rush to 
ruin and destruction with them, than turn their feet back 
from the path they have entered, even though it be no path. 
Such people are in short filled with wrath and undying 
hatred against all whom they see or hear of not only as in 
opposition to themselves but even as not agreeing with full 
voice and mind to their opinions. And how much damage 
and destruction this brings upon the Republic of Christ, any 
Christian can tell. For how can it be that in so many op- 
posing and 

IX. diverging opinions harmony can be restored? 
Peace was never sought nor found through strife. 

X. To what opinion meanwhile is the simple-minded 
people to attach itself? What shall it embrace? What 
approve? What shall it do? Whither turn? For 

XL it sees learned and simple, scorning all gospel- 
taught gentleness and love, and charging upon each other 
so fiercely and wounding each other so pitiably that every 
man seems trying to seize his neighbour who does not happen 
to agree with him in this matter and 

XII. to cast him out of the ship of the Church as a 
sinner and a heretic, while 

XIII. he hears on the other side tones full of injury and 
insult and reviling quite contrary to any Christian piety. 

14 


210 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

As each side thus attacks and pursues the other, every man 
finally follows the course that his inclinations lead or his 
passions drive him to adopt. 

XIV. When a faithful minister, who has the misfortune 
to be a steward of the Lord at such an ill-fated time and amid 
such a mass of evils, sees the one and only bride of Christ 
smitten not in one place only but on all sides within and 
without, and wounded with a mortal wound, with what 
pain is he not wrung, with what anxieties torn, knowing not, 
meanwhile, what he ought to do? For if he speaks as love 
of the bride and the bitterness of a mother's pain suggest, 
he has to fear wranglings and strife, nay the savage bites of 
hatred and contumely, and to expose himself to these 
not from one or the other party, but from both. 

XV. But if he prefer to follow the advice of the prophet 
Amos who saith, "Therefore the prudent shall keep silence 
in that time; for it is an evil time" [Amos v., 13], and, as the 
vision of Ezekiel has it, to mourn and groan over all the 
abominations that are done; or, with the royal prophet,' to 
keep quiet in the wilderness while there is contention in the 
city^• 

XVI. the truth of the Gospel stands in his way: 
"The good shepherd giveth his life for the sheep. But he 
that is an hireling, and not the shepherd, whose own the 
sheep are not, seeth the wolf coming, . . . and fleeth" 
[John X, II, 12]. Since, therefore, we are of those ministers 
whose lot has fallen upon 

XVII. these dangerous times, and we see the evils 
constantly increasing, and the peace disturbed, and 

XVIII. offences multiplied in the fold of the Lord, 

XIX. with the introduction of new errors not less dan- 
gerous than the earlier ones, and meanwhile the peace, 
that we have long been waiting for with great longings, 
Cometh not, but confusion, 

XX. we are forced to act by "the zeal of the house of 
God" [Ps. Ixix., 9; John ii., 17], in one part of which at least 

' David. ^ Ps. Iv., 9. 


Archeteles : Reply to Bishop's Admonition 211 

there is a watchful guardian. Led by zeal for the faith which 
at baptism we swore to defend, by zeal against the present 
schism under which our holy Mother Church is suffering 
so severely, we have determined to shut our eyes and delay 
no longer, but to toil in season and out of season, to preserve 
as far as possible the unity handed down by the Lord through 
his Apostles to us their successors, and to gather into the 
Church the wandering and erring sheep which, by factious 
perversity and heretical tampering with the faith, certain 
persons are separating from our mother. 

XXI. Therefore we exhort you, brethren, and accord- 
ing to the mastery of the Lord and his Gospel we entreat 
you : Watch against the snares of the devil, and, both for 
your own salvation and for that of the Lord's whole flock, 
keep guard more energetically against this deadly heresy. 

XXn. For they are renewing the old-time attack upon 
the unity of the Church, and are bringing into play again 
their sacrilegious machinations with their customary wiles- 
Is not the party of the old-time heretics visible here? Does 
not the accursed plant which the Heavenly Father hath not 
planted show this? These are the same nostrums with which 
in old days they turned the simple-minded away from the 
real cure of their trouble, the same sophistical tricks and 
exhortations, that, forsooth, they might not live in harmony 
with their own bishops and priests, nor hold fast to the dis- 
cipline of the Church in peace and faith according to the 
commands of the Lord, nor keep inviolate and unstained 
in their walk the glory of the Christian profession, which 
is founded upon obedience and harmony. The same policy, 
the same overturning of things, is now again in process of 
introduction at the hands of certain persons to the downfall 
of salvation, that God be no more prayed to, and that he 
who has denied Christ appeal no more to Him he has denied, 
that after the wrongdoing repentance of the sin be also 
taken away. They will not that satisfaction be made unto 
the Lord through bishops and priests, but, leaving the 
ministers of the Lord, they would 


212 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

XXIII. raise up a new and sacrilegious custom contrary 
to the directions of the Gospel. 

XXIV. And in order to include all the machinations of 
the devil for the destruction of the simple-minded, they cut 
off the prayers and orisons through which, if anything 
especially foul and monstrous has appeared in the Church, 
the Lord ought to be appeased in long and uninterrupted 
penitence, and, under a lying pretence of an insidious peace, 
call upon the sick and wounded 

XXV. to take to heroic measures, a recklessness, to wit, 
that leads to destruction. Alas that this is so plainly 
shown by these times of ours in which there is no place for 
obedience and peace and quiet, and the bitterness of re- 
bellion and strife and persecution seems to have spread 
over all things. Hence we warn you again, dearly beloved, 
not to trust wantonly to these destructive utterances, nor 
feed the fever of fallacy with acceptance of fallacy, nor take 
poison for a healing draught or death for salvation. 

XXVI. Be not deceived by the authority of these people 
nor by the learning with which they proclaim everywhere 
that they have the spirit of the Lord. 

XXVII. For with adulterous teaching they seek to 
break down the chastity of the Church and to violate the 
truth of the Gospel. 

XXVIII. The Lord cries and says: Hearken not unto 
the sayings of false prophets, for the visions of their hearts 
deceive them. They say, but not out of the mouth of the 
Lord, Ye shall have peace. [See Jer. xxiii., i6, 17.] 

XXIX. Peace they bring, who themselves have no peace. 
They promise freedom, when they are the slaves of corrup- 
tion. ' They, who have withdrawn from the Church, offer 
to raise up and bring back to the Church those who have 
fallen laden with many burdens. They who walk in the 
darkness of error would restore you to the light, and 

XXX. undertake to furnish the food of the Gospel to 
all, when they are themselves tortured by the pangs of a 

' II. Peter ii., 19. 


Archeteles : Reply to Bishop's Admonition 213 

fatal hunger. Let no man cause you to wander from the 
way of the Lord which you have learned from the cradle. 
Let no man drag you Christians away from the Gospel, 
from the teachings of the Church, and 

XXXI. from the pious traditions of the ancients. 

XXXII. Let no man take from the Church you who are 
the sons of the Church. Let those perish by themselves 
who wish to perish. Let those alone remain outside the 
Church who have withdrawn from the Church. Let those 
alone be without their bishops who have revolted against 
their bishops. 

XXXIII. Accept our advice, who are compelled and are 
ready to make an accounting to the Lord for you, and with- 
draw not from the Church you have thus far believed, nor 
from its priests, for it is written [cf. Deut. xvii., 12]: 

XXXIV. "The man who shall have puffed himself up 
in his pride so as not to listen to his priest or judge, who- 
ever he shall be in those days, that man shaU die." 

XXXV. We desire, nevertheless, nay urge, that the 
Gospel be preached and known and kept, only let it not 
remove any man from the fold and unity of the Church, 
without which 

XXXVI. there can be no Gospel; Christ is one, and the 
Church is one, and 

XXXVI I. there is one apostoUc seat placed upon a 
rock by the voice of the Lord. Another altar besides the 
one altar cannot be set up, nor a new priesthood besides the 
one priesthood be established. 

XXXVIII. "Whoso gathereth not with me, scatter- 
eth."^ 

XXXIX. False and impious and sacrilegious is whatever 
is set up by the favour of man to the injury of the order of 
the Church. 

XL. Reason does not dictate nor does the natural rever- 
ence we ought to feel for our forefathers counsel this sudden 
casting off with hostile violence of the traditions, observ- 

' Luke xi., 23. 


214 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

ances, and ceremonials of the fathers. For I do not admit 
that those people should here be listened to, who 

XLI. resist the ceremonials and ordinances of the 
fathers simply on the ground that they are, as they say, the 
inventions of man, and not from the Spirit of God, but 
things laid upon the Christian multitude as a burden and an 
oppression by dreamers and perverted spirits; 

XLI I, as if the same notion could not be got up in re- 
gard to the traditions of the Apostles and 

XLIII. of the general councils. Let injurious clamour 
of this sort cease, therefore, and let unholy suspicion, such 
as the least of these gentry would regret in his own case, 
be not showered upon the good fathers who 

XLI V. are commended to us as much by their lives as by 
their teaching . . . Let the general good also invite us 
to retain the observance of the ceremonials of the Church 
at least 

XLV. for the time being. For all political order would 

XLVI. fall to the ground, if the things which had been 

XL VI I. agreed upon by general consent, or 

XLVIIL at least acceded to, could be found fault with, 
or 

XLIX. called to the test of a new standard at every 
man's own sweet will. For where has there ever been an 
opinion so unanimously accepted that no objection could 
be made to it by people influenced by devotion or ignorance 
or mere contrary-mindedness and the itching to get up some- 
thing new? It is, therefore, fair, and has been sanctioned 
by law and custom, that every decision affecting a body of 
people should rest 

L. upon the voice of the majority in matters at least 
which are not 

LI. at variance with the divine law, as in the present 
case. If, on the other hand, it were free to any and every- 
body to obstruct the course of things, nothing more would 
be accomplished than if 

LI I. there should be kept up between the masters of 


Archeteles : Reply to Bishop's Admonition 215 

a ship a bitter and continuous quarrel, one wishing to make 
sail, another to shorten sail, one striving to tack to port, 
the other to starboard. For when the decision of the major- 
ity has been reached, is it not wiser to help carry it out or 
at least not persistently to oppose it, and so 

LIII. to reach some sort of a harbour, than, in the 
uncertain hope of a better harbour, to throw everything 
into confusion and evident mutiny? Finally, what is more 
likely, that 

LIV, one person should be deceived, or the whole 
community? What is more probable, that the consciences 
of a few should be at fault, or of all? Granted that their 
counsels seem to them, or even perhaps 

LV. are, sounder 

LVI. counsels; yet of what advantage to the general 
body, of which they are but a small part, is this obstinate 

LVI I. attempt to drag it elsewhere, when it is moving 
in the opposite course without risk of losing its soul? To 
what does it give birth but strife and offences and confusion? 
Granted even that the whole body was wrong in establishing 
or accepting a ceremonial system thus far maintained, and 
that, as is the portion of human ignorance and frailty, some 
things have become mixed with the Christian religion which 
are not altogether in harmony with the Gospel and Holy 
Scripture, yet the Christian piety which we ought to show 
in all our dealings with all men demands that, with a view 
to their instruction, we 

■ LVIII. make some allowance for those who err with 
good intentions, at least if their error be not excessive, rather 
than expose everything to such manifest uproar and rebel- 
lion. It was no doubt in this sense that the dictum was 
made: 

LIX. A universal error has the force of right. As, there- 
fore, our beatified Pope of blessed memory, Leo X, and his 
most serene majesty, Charles V, Emperor of ta3 Romans, 
recently 

LX. condemned new doctrines of this kind, and pro- 


2i6 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

mulgated their condemnation in official documents, ' on the 
groimd that such doctrines were contrary to the order of 
the Church and contrary to the law of the Gospel and to the 
imity of Gospel ordinance, we appeal to you whom the Holy 
Spirit has appointed 

LXI. to rule with us the Church, which he won 

LXII. by his blood — we appeal to you by that pity 
which all Christians feel at the thought of vile schism in the 
Church, his spotless bride, to see that these doctrines are 
put off, put aside for the time, not preached or discussed or 
taught, openly or in secret, also that nothing be 

LXIII. altered, changed, or made different in the cere- 
monial of the Church, until 

LXIV. those whom it concerns come together for the 
business of the Church, and conferring together render a 
decision regulated by regard for discipline and mercy, and 

LXV compare the Scriptures together, so that we may 
all walk in the house of the Lord in one mind and one step 
and one path, until we win the true peace in him who hath 
made the two one in Jesus Christ, our Lord. Finally we 
beg you, yourselves and through those entrusted to you, 
diligently to offer prayers meanwhile to the Lord, that he may 

LXVL be appeased by the restitution that is due him, 
and may wash away the sin of the wrongs we have done to 
merit these things. Pray for the things that make for the 
peace of Jerusalem, that the Lord may "do good in [his] 
good pleasure unto Zion ; build . . , the walls of Jerusalem 
[Ps. li., 1 8]. This, Venerable and Honourable Brethren, 
beloved to us in Christ, is what, led 

LXVII. by our fatherly affection for you, we determine 
to write to you at this time of confusion, begging you by the 
bowels of compassion of our Lord, Jesus Christ, to abide 
in the unity of 

' The Pope's Bull against Luther, June 15, 1520, and the Emperor's edict at 
Worms, May 26, 1 521, against the same. These, slightly condensed, are given 
in the original Latin in B. J. Kidd's Documents of the Continental Reformation 
(Oxford, 191 1), pp. 75-79, and 87-89, respectively. There is a full trans- 
lation of the Bull by H. E. Jacobs, in his Life of Luther (N. Y., Heroes of 
the Reformation), pp. 413-435. 


Archeteles : Reply to Bishop's Admonition 217 

LXVIII. Holy Mother Church and in obedience to 
those set over you, and not to cast away thus hastily the 
ceremonies of the Church introduced by our forefathers, and 
this we strongly hope and confidently promise ourselves from 
you. The Most High God deign to keep 

LXIX. His Church in peace and you in safety ! Amen. 
Given at Constance the twenty-fourth day of May in the 
year of our Lord one thousand five hundred and twenty- two. 


HULDREICH ZWINGLI'S REPLY. 

To you I must now address my words, who two months 
or so ago put forth a certain document. Your names I 
willingly and gladly omit to mention, that they may not 
be in ill repute among good men, and that I may not provoke 
you unduly, for I have a hope that you will finally leave the 
asses and come over to the oxen, abandon the goats for the 
sheep. Not that I do not know your names or could not 
set them out as a laughing stock to the crowd, but I think 
it more profitable, for the advancement of Christ's teaching, 
not to do so. Although it may give rise to suspicion of 
others than yoiurselves as authors of the docimient, yet I 
have preferred to spare your names rather than to answer the 
viciously wanton suspicions of certain persons. For I am 
going to treat you as you would by no means treat me if I 
treated the cause of the Gospel in your style and defended 
myself with weapons like yours. And I pray to God to 
enHghten and guide my mind so that I shall say nothing un- 
worthy of him, and yours so that you shall take everything 
that I say in good part, that casting aside all strife we may 
come together into one body in Christ and think in harmony 
in the Lord Jesus. Amen. 

I. In the first place, therefore, what was the need of 
accusing me, a Swiss professing Christ among the Swiss, of 
raising this disturbance, since you say that it is taking 
place only in Germany, and the Swiss are not reckoned 


2i8 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

among the Germans? Yet, meanwhile, though I have been 
watching almost a whole month, I have been unable to 
discover that you have sent a like admonition to anybody 
anywhere in Germany. Why do ye not apply your remedy 
to the diseased part? Know ye not that Christ said: 
"They that are whole need not a physician, but they that 
are sick"? [Luke v., 31]. It becomes apparent, therefore, 
that it is I to whom ye are singing your little song; for I 
fancy you have more sense than to be applying a remedy 
to a limb that you do not consider diseased. But in this 
matter I owe a certain amount of gratitude to you, because 
it has pleased you to give me a sort of general hint, unless 
perhaps you did it to cut me off from an opportunity to 
answer. This I rather think, however, you are offering me, 
in order not to be forever using the same subterfuge and 
exposing yourselves to ridicule. And as to the matter it- 
self, it is not thought to be such a very unworthy deed if one 
complains that Christ's poor sheep are being crushed under 
burdensome ordinances and observances. For that holy 
man Moses did the like [Exod. ii., 11] when he slew the 
Egyptian and freed the Israelite and finally led all the people 
out of captivity. But why do I bring up such ancient mat- 
ters? Christ himself was moved to compassion when he 
saw the multitude neglected like loose and outcast sheep 
that had no shepherd, so that presently he said unto his 
disciples, "The harvest truly is plenteous, but the labour- 
ers are few," and bade them pray the Lord of the harvest 
that he would straightway send harvesters [Matt, ix., 36-38]. 
And so Paul, who was ready to become accursed for the sake 
of the Israelite brethren, that they might at length loathe 
their burden of laws and ceremonials [Romans ix., 3]. 
It cannot be denied, I think, that the hodgepodge of human 
ordinances is so tremendous that hundreds of those Cyprian 
oxen were not enough to eat them up; and no wonder, 
since every one thinks himself at liberty to make new ones to 
his heart's content, and no one objects or resists, so that now 
they have all but accepted this bit of tyranny, "whatever 


Archeteles : Reply to Bishop's Admonition 219 

the prelate will he may, " though Christ gives warning to the 
contrary, saying [Matt, xv., 9]: "In vain do they worship 
me, teaching for doctrines the commandments of men." If, 
therefore, these things profit us nothing before God, yet 
meanwhile weigh upon the poor sheep to such a degree that 
God, pitying them, promised by the mouth of his prophet 
that he would take away the shepherds who fed them- 
selves, and would visit and free the scattered sheep [Ezek. 
xxxiv., 10], (Here I beg of you to read the whole chapter, 
that you may be taught how offensive to God are those 
shepherds such as you would like to make him, who yet on 
account of the goodness of his heart cannot be made such,) 
what harm is there, pray, if one complains that the people 
of Christ are unduly kept in constant oppression? He does 
nothing else, surely, than what God himself hath done, and 
Christ, and Paul, and Moses. 

II. What harm, pray, is going to happen to us if the 
whole rubbish-heap of ceremonials be cleared away, since 
God declares that he is worshipped in vain by these things? 
The sayings of the Lord are pure sayings, silver tried by fire 
and cleansed from earth, aye seven times cleansed. Are we, 
therefore, to mix dross with the silver again? Are we to 
change to dross those who have become the true metal of 
Israel? "The house of Israel is to me become dross" [Ezek. 
xxii., 18]. You should consider, therefore, whether this age 
of ours be not rightly called golden by them who look to 
setting the words of God in all their purity before hungry 
souls, and allowing none of the vanities of human recklessness 
to be mixed therewith. But they would make it an iron 
age who cannot suffer this, saying: Depart from us. We 
want not the knowledge of thy ways. We have no use for 
thee. Hence they cry out: Seize him, bind him, cast him 
into prison, lay on the cords of torture, bring on uvqjojvas, 
the pillory, drown, hang, burn, that verily the words of 
Christ may be fulfilled [John xvi., 2]: "The time cometh, 
that whosoever killeth you will think that he doeth God 
service." To such, therefore, the age is not golden, but 


220 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

it is to those who by the fire of that trial are proved to be 
pure gold and bright silver and gems, and to those whose 
consciences, pitifully torn by the slayers of souls, are now 
at last brought into the quiet haven of true piety, whom the 
Lord feeds upon the mountains of Israel by the rivers, and in 
all the inhabited places of the country, in fat pastures 
[Ezek. xxxiv., (13 and) 14], whom the Lord feeds and they 
shall want for nothing, whom the Lord hath led out into 
broad pastures and has saved because he willed it. 

IIL They do rightly who call us to the freedom of the 
Gospel, for by that alone are we saved. Hear Christ in the 
last chapter of Mark : " Preach the Gospel to every creature. 
He that belie veth" (after the Gospel has been preached, 
to wit) "and is baptised, shall be saved. "^ The truth hath 
made us free ; therefore are we truly free ; the Son hath made 
us free [John viii., 32]. How shall a slave reduce us again 
to slavery? We owe nothing to any man save mutual love 
(though the Apostle means this to be understood without 
derogation of the authority of kings and potentates). How 
do certain men, then, venture to require of us more than the 
talent that was entrusted to them? 

IV. Here, to begin with, I wonder at the flowery and 
poetical elegance of your diction, when you say: "What 
human ordinances they call tares and cockles they strive to 
pull up." You were imitating the great comedy writer, I 
suppose, when he said, what plays he had written he hoped 
might please the people, or "What you think such is not a 
real marriage." For the whole phraseology otherwise is 
so lifeless and without grace that I have seldom seen so 
long an effusion so devoid of all charm, and were it not 
for this floweret which sprang up here so opportunely, no one 
could read the thing without nausea. But I return to the 
subject. Tares and cockles they call human ordinances, 
yea, and dross and rubbish and sawdust, everything that is 
foreign to the thought of Christ, and that came forth from 
hypocrisy, greed, and cpikavria, or self-love. Here again 

' Mark xvi., 15 Jf. 


Archeteles : Reply to Bishop's Admonition 221 

gratitude is due you because you allow that the Gospel 
teaching is the wheat. But when, alas! you see the wheat 
also being rooted up before your eyes, you show plainly that 
the parable which Christ sets forth in Matt, xiii., 37-39, 
and explains there, has not been very thoroughly studied 
by you. For you would otherwise have seen that Christ is 
speaking there not of different kinds of teachings but of dif- 
ferent kinds of men, of whom some have not so cast off all 
shame as not to shrink from sinning openly, yet do not 
abstain from sinning, albeit their wrongdoing is not of a 
heinous character, but such as human life can scarcely 
be gone through without. This is an offence nevertheless to 
some of the weaker brethren. He bids us bear with these, 
"for in many things we offend all" [James iii., 2], and the 
mote must first be cast out of one's own eye, that one may 
properly draw out the beam from one's brother's eye [Matt, 
vii., 5]. Hence Christ here bids us to look with indulgence 
upon certain usual and commonplace shortcomings, but he 
holds a different view of greater sins, as when he bids us 
pluck out the eye — ^that is, the seeing or watching thing, the 
teacher or bishop, if it offend, and cast it from us, and so 
with the hand and the foot [Matt, v., 29, and xviii., 9]. You 
will never find Christ or the Apostles speaking in such a 
way as to show a wish that we should suffer any pernicious 
teaching inconsistent with God's word to spring up among 
us. For Christ himself bitterly hits the scribes and Phari- 
sees for putting God's commands in the background and 
teaching their own traditions [Matt, xv, 3]. He also cries 
out that they sin, saying, "Ye sin, knowing not the Scrip- 
tures," though they knew their own traditions. And he 
calls them to the study of the Scriptures, saying, "Search 
the Scriptures" [John v., 39], and meaning evidently to turn 
them away from their own devices and fabrications. Paul 
also reminds Titus, that a bishop ought to be one "holding 
fast the faithful word as he hath been taught, that he may 
be able . . . to convince the gainsayers " [Tit. i., 9]. John 
bids us [I. John iv., i] "try the spirits, whether they are of 


222 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

God." There are hundreds of passages that bid us to look 
out that human teachings be not accepted in the place of 
the teachings of God. And if it be said: "These people of 
yours have called human teachings tares and cockles. What 
of it, if one just turns things a little and changes the sequence 
somewhat, but does not vitiate the real meaning?" It fits 
exactly that human wisdom, tradition, knowledge, be called 
tares and cockles, because an enemy hath sown them among 
the harvest of God, while the bishops were asleep, or rather 
abetting. So far there is no flaw in the parallel, but there 
will be one if you go on to the following — "Let both grow 
together," and the rest. But, to finish this section, if you 
see the wheat torn up with the tares, it were yours to see 
to it that the wheat be not destroyed, not the tares. You 
ought to help those in your neighbour's ship who are haul- 
ing in a net full of large fish, and not those who are building 
with wood and hay and stubble. And this especially now 
that ye see so large a number of the most learned men 
straining every nerve in this direction, so that from this 
consideration, if from no other, we can recognise the work 
as of God, because now that the light of learning and of 
tongues has come into the world, exceeding few abuse it 
for mercenary purposes. Our Lord Hugo ought to have 
bc;en urged to embrace more ardently the cause of Christ 
towards which he was pointing in the beginning of this drama 
(for I hear that utterances of his were noticed to this effect, 
" I desire, even at the utmost personal loss, that the teaching 
of the Gospel be advanced"), he ought to have been urged 
to sow the good seed more industriously and guard it more 
strenuously. This was a case for spurring on the runner 
if he had determined to make Christ's glory the grander, not 
for throwing an evil spel' upon him as he was making a 
good race. 

V. "But if any man seem to be contentious, we have 
no such custom, neither the churches of God" [L Corinth, 
xi., 1 6]. But whence arose the contentions? Was it not 
from the carnal [L Corinth. iii., 3], who say, "I am of Scotus, 


Archeteles : Reply to Bishop's Admonition 223 

I of Thomas, I of the Bishop of Rome"? Yet Paul [Galat. 
ii., 5] would not give place to them even for an hour, although 
the case at hand was that of circumcision only, not of sure 
salvation, nor of Christ, nor of judgment. Therefore 
terrible punishments await us, if after the light has come 
into the world we love the darkness rather than the light. 
To which, if you please, do you think we ought to give place, 
to those who have built their house upon the rock of Christ 
or to those who have built upon the sand? If on the side 
of one or the other we must fall, on whose side must we stand? 
On the side of those who stand even though they fall, and 
so stand, and shall stand, that no blow of evil can ever befall 
them, or of those who while declaring themselves fixed 
upon the surest foundation have already fallen, for whom 
the blackness of darkness is waiting, "and their damnation 
slumbereth not "?[II.Pet.ii.,3]. I beg of you by all the gods 
and goddesses, since the matter in dispute is whether as 
much ought to be attributed to the traditions of men as to 
the word of God, has it never occurred to you, that all men 
are liars, and, on the contrary, that God is true [John iii., 33; 
Rom. iii., 4], or these sayings:"! am the way, the truth, and 
the life" [John xiv., 6], or "He that followeth me, shall not 
walk in darkness" [John viii., 12], and hundreds of others? 
And in occurring to you, does it not give rise to the feeling, 
If thou shalt embrace this truth thou canst not be deluded, 
but if thou embracest the truth of men, however much it 
disguises itself, thou canst? What reason is there, then, why 
thou shouldst not follow the sure and unquestionable rather 
than the doubtful, aye, fallacious? We must contend, 
no doubt, if we wish to convince the gainsayers, only let 
it not be done in a spirit of contention, but with the pur- 
pose of vindicating the words of God, and not with the tricks 
of the philosophers but with the strong arms of Scripture. 
Thus did Stephen upbraid the Jews, quoting from the early 
Scriptures, and when they resisted though they ought to have 
been convinced, he cried at last, "Ye stiffnecked and un- 
circumcised in heart and ears, ye do always resist the Holy 


224 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

Ghost" [Acts vii., 51]. And thus did Paul often speak, 
especially to the Romans ' in the last chapter of Acts, where, 
after having tried for nearly a whole day by passages from 
Scripture to make them believe in Christ, he finally brought 
out this shaft from Isaiah [vi., 9], and hurled it at them: 
"Go unto this people, and say, Hearing ye shall hear, and 
shall not understand; and seeing ye shall see, and not per- 
ceive : For the heart of this people is waxed gross, and their 
ears are dull of hearing, and their eyes have they closed ; lest 
they should see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and 
understand with their heart, and should be converted, and I 
should heal them. " But if any fault is ever to be found on 
account of contention, surely it ought to be found with those 
who have made it their effort to show forth unto the world 
how much they can do by contending and relying only upon 
the hair-splitting of the sophists and not upon those two 
swords, the Old and the New Testaments, except so far as 
their shameful ignorance compelled them, driving them, 
whether they would or no, to take into their hands weapons 
strange to them from any quarter. Yet these two swords 
are those which Christ bade his disciples to give their cloaks, 
nay sell their shirts, to acquire. These people may be called 
contentious, as far as I am concerned, as also those who, 
after the fashion, or, as you say, pattern, of silly women, 
spit out reproaches upon others as it were, a fine lot of 
(xix}xi]iai nai npofAaxoi [warriors and champions, of the 
truth], to be sure. 

VI. Not to confuse the declaimers here, I will show in 
short compass who are the wolves and raiders and the rest 
of the characters named in such tragedy style. Christ 
is the shepherd [John x., 11]. His sheep are they who 
know his voice and follow him as he goeth before them. 
But they are thieves and robbers and not merely raiders, who 
by some other way than by the door, which is Christ, climb 
up into the fold of the sheep. Wolves are they that put 
on the aspect of sheep, but in their hearts think of nothing 

' To the Jews in Rome. 


Archeteles : Reply to Bishop's Admonition 225 

else than how they can seize and tear in pieces the tender 
sheep. Wolves, I say, are they of whom the Benjamin of 
the Apostles spoke when he foretold [Acts xx., 29], that after 
his departing would come those who would grievously afflict 
the flock and not spare it. Now let us see to whom those 
tragic e7tiq)Govi^ixaT(Y [appellatives], in the very beginning 
of the effusion can rightly be applied. When the simple- 
minded Christians, not perceiving that false prophets had 
sunken to wolves, but judging them from their aspect as 
sheep, put up with them, these, changing all the devotion 
of shepherds into the madness of wolves, began to seize upon, 
scatter, and destroy everything, in order to fill up the vast 
maw of their lusts, not satisfied to stuff their belly with the 
milk and wool and flesh even of the sheep which they had 
seized, but breaking their bones also and leaving no bit of 
cruelty untried. Then I confess that a good part of the 
sheep, marvelHng when they saw themselves butchered 
by those in whom they had placed their refuge, fled away 
from such certain destruction. But this did the poor crea- 
tures no good. For those mighty Nimrods hunted and 
pursued them and swallowed them like so much bread. 
But after he who promised to remain with his own even 
to the fulness of time could not longer bear this ruin of his 
own, he called certain men after his custom, men not wise 
according to the flesh (for God hath made the wisdom of 
this world foolishness [I. Cor. iii., 19], but lowly men, to bring 
his name unto the kings and potentates of the earth, just as 
in the days of old those had done who from fishers were made 
Apostles. And as soon as this was heard among the people, 
it is wonderful how they all began to breathe freely and to 
give thanks, and stop their flight, feeling that a leader was 
come and enrolling themselves under him, abandoning mean- 
while those who besides the empty name had nothing worthy 
of a shepherd and turning to the shepherd and bishop of 
their souls, they who a little while before had been as like 
as possible to lost sheep, according to the saying of Peter 
[I. Pet. ii., 25], and who now walked in that light which 


226 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

lighteth every man who cometh into this world, and thus 
could not stray or go wrong any more. Hence it is clear 
that all this brew of ceremonials is of no concern to those 
who have already come back to wisdom, but only to those 
who still stumble about in the darkness of hiunan devices, 
disregarding Christ and his teaching. It can not be said 
that these mock at their shepherds, for they worship them 
as gods and are as like unto them as possible. But if you 
fancy that those who have gone over to the side of the Gospel 
mock at their leaders, they are not on fire with such hatred 
as you complain of a little later. There is none who is so 
derisive of his neighbour as he who cannot possibly be 
persuaded to accept the divine sayings instead of those of 
men. They say: "What have I to do with Christ or with 
the Apostles? Customs have changed and demand an 
altogether different system of life. Poor clown, do you 
assert that our bishops with all their splendour can come 
down to this humble plane? They are not only wiser but 
have given us precepts far preferable to those of Paul or 
Peter or even Christ himself." These are they, doubtless, 
who in their madness make a laughing stock of the simple 
heralds of Christ and hold them in reproach [Wisdom of 
Solomon (in the Apocrypha) v., 3], but God also will laugh 
at their own calamity [Prov. i., 26]. 

VII. Here I will first comment upon your style, when 
you say, "Others are led astray and driven to doing this, " etc. 
What proposition, pray, do you oppose to this as a co-or- 
dinate, or join to it? You will say, no doubt, the one that 
follows, "You can, in fact, see some people," etc. But ani- 
mosity (to use your word) is a passion. Therefore it is 
included in the previous proposition. Then it must be noted 
that your word consiliatrices is put for consultrices, counsel- 
lors. For consiliare means to them what the Romans meant 
by consulere or consilium dare, give counsel. Hence consilia- 
tor for consuUor, counsellor, which they sometimes put for sena- 
tor, by the same process by which they say fornix, ein Of en, ^ 

'There is evidently a blunder here. Could an original "fomax" and 


Archeteles : Reply to Bishop's Admonition 227 

an arch, fornicator, ein Ofner, an arch-frequenter, a for- 
nicator. As to the matter itself, it is not commendable 
for one to do anything with bubbling over wrath or am- 
bition, though Paul rejoices for the Gospel even if it be 
preached "of strife or envy" [Phil, i., 18]. And this 
you also ought to have done, provided the necessity of 
the situation demanded it and you had examined that 
passage, for there is scarcely any one who is not roused to 
indignation sometimes at wrong doings. Whether these 
feelings can be called wrath I will not now discuss, especially 
as even the Holy Scriptures attribute such to God [I. Kings, 
xi., 9] — "The Lord was angry with Solomon," and [Isaiah 
Ixi., 8] "For I the Lord love judgment, I hate robbery for 
burnt offering." Therefore I am led rather to rejoice for 
the Gospel with Paul, whether it be preached in season or 
out of season. If any seem to be jealous of those who make 
the uproar, it does not seem to me to be so much jealousy as 
reasonable grief because they are not willing in any way to 
come back to sense. But hitherto the heralds of Christ 
have been thought to strive for none of the objects of ambi- 
tion, the champions of human devices for all such, praise, 
glory, honours, wealth, office, kingdoms, and everything 
that is esteemed best worth while, and this in the time when 
modesty, that last blessing in evil days, was not yet obsolete. 
Now nobody strives to satisfy his ambitions thus, but 
every one seizes with tooth and nail everything he can lay 
hold of, so that Isaiah [i., 23] says truly, "Thy princes are 
companions of thieves." Now as to the ambition with 
which you can reproach our party also, that they covet 
glory and praise, if not bishoprics and priesthoods, you say 
nothing to the point, for this defect can be hidden by denial 
and you cannot prove that afterwards. Hence it is clear 
that you said this in a cavilling spirit, and yet it does not 
apply to these, who do not "gather grapes of thorns, or 
figs of thistles" [Matt, vii., 16]. Of those it can, however,, 

"fornacator" have been changed by somebody into the more piquant 
"fornix," "fornicator"? — H. P. 


228 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

truly be said, "which creep into (rich men's) houses and lead 
captive silly women laden with sins"' [II. Tim. iii., 6]. 

VIII. Those who through the knowledge of our Lord 
Jesus Christ have escaped the pollutions of this world, 
according to the words of Peter [II. Peter ii., 20], and are not 
willing to become again entangled therein, ought not to be 
reckoned as obstinate but as firm in their faith, being un- 
willing to withdraw from the sacred commands that have 
been given unto them. For having tasted that the Lord is 
sweet and that he shall be blest who puts his hope in him 
[cf. Ps. xxxiv., 9], they have begun to cease to fear what man 
can do to them, and neither present things nor future things 
can separate them from the love of Christ, just as the com- 
panions of Ulysses, having eaten Xgjtov t6v jueXirjdea xapnov 
[the honey-sweet fruit of the lotus], would not return to their 
people [cj. Odyssey ix., 93 ff.]. For "No man, having put 
his hand to the plough, and looking back, is fit for the 
Kingdom of God" [Lukeix., 62]. Even God himself by the 
mouth of his servant Jeremiah encourages them not to yield, 
saying [ch. xv., 19], "If thou take forth the precious from the 
vile, thou shalt be as my mouth : let them return unto thee ;. 
but return not thou unto them. And I will make thee unto 
this people a fenced brasen wall : and they shall fight against 
thee, but they shall not prevail against thee : for I am with 
thee to save thee and to deliver thee." From this I think 
it is sufficiently clear that they are not only guilty of no sin 
who cannot be turned away from the truth of the Gospel, 
but do well and wisely and steadfastly, if they struggle con- 
tinually for it with all their might and ever keep before their 
eyes the watchword "Endure to the end." Let those mad 
men have done, therefore, who think that the divine should 
yield to the human. 

IX. Peace Christ prayed for for his own when he had 
risen from the dead, the same peace which before his death he 
had given and left to the Apostles [cj. John xiv., 2^], but not 

' The Latin seems somewhat truncated here, but I think T have expressed 
its meaning. — H. P. 


Archeteles : Reply to Bishop's Admonition 229 

the peace of the world, which belongeth to sinners, forsooth, 
to those who "have made a covenant with death, and with 
hell are at agreement" [Isaiah xxviii., 15], and who believe 
that the soul of man is destroyed with the body like the 
beasts, as all their life beareth witness. For they build like 
the Milesians as if they were to live forever, and enjoy their 
pleasures as if they were to die to-morrow, humming to 
themselves these words of Paul [I. Corinth, xv., 32] or of 
Sardanapahis (from whom I mistrust Paul borrowed it to 
characterise their devotion to their bellies) : ' ' Let us eat 
and drink, for to-morrow we die." These, I say, fear every 
breath of air lest the quiet of their enjoyments be disturbed 
in some part; they cry "Peace, peace," when "there is no 
peace unto the wicked" [Isaiah xlviii., 22]. But if they 
fancy that they have a perfectly calm mind, they are 
adeoi [atheists]; if they are not adeoi [atheists], they are 
to be pitied. For believing that God hath given unto 
us TO EvayyeXiov [the Gospel], as the doctrine of salva- 
tion, if they yet do not yield or defer to it, it is evident 
that they are beyond hope, and that they have forsaken 
Christ, as Demas forsook Paul [II. Timothy iv., 10], "having 
loved this present world. " But if they weighed more care- 
fully the words of Christ, in which he declares that he came 
not to send peace upon the earth but a sword, with which 
fathers should be set at variance with their children, etc. 
[cf. Matt. X., 34], and that passage of John [xvi., 33]: 
"These things I have spoken unto you, that in me ye might 
have peace. In the world ye shall have tribulation; but 
be of good cheer; I have overcome the world"; and the 
passage of Isaiah [xlviii., 18], "O that thou hadst hearkened 
to my commandments! then had thy peace been as a river, 
and thy righteousness as the waves of the sea," — if, I say, 
they had looked carefully at these things, they would be 
doing nothing else than trying how peace might be estab- 
lished between God and us, and how human things might 
yield to the divine, and by yielding become divine. For 
this is the true peace, which is had in God and not in one's 


230 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

passions which boil in constant turmoil like the waters of 
the Channel.' That peace, nevertheless, has friendship 
with all men as far as in it lies, according to the teaching 
of Paul; this other with none who oppose our desires. There- 
fore, most excellent gentlemen, whoever you are, you enter 
upon your task in vain. For there will never be peace be- 
tween those who are of Christ and those who are of the flesh. 
For the first, like their master, will never cease to fight, 
and the second will never yield, unless the illuminating 
spirit shall sometime enlighten them and draw them to 
itself. Yet meanwhile it is given to those followers of the 
Lord to live in gladness and the enjoyment of peace in Christ 
even if they suffer persecution. For they rejoice with the 
Apostles that they suffer shame for the name of Christ 
[Acts v., 41]. The others, as shown above from Isaiah, have 
no peace and no rest. I pray the Most High God to deign 
to look upon them with graciousness as He looked upon 
Peter when he denied him, that they may be turned back 
to him in wisdom and give glory unto God. Amen. 

X, The common people, endowed with the harmlessness 
of the dove, will yield to the Gospel alone, and the less 
vitiated with the dregs of human traditions, the more cap- 
able they are of receiving the heavenly teachings, to which 
they flee for refuge in confidence as to a sacred anchor. 

XI, When they see the learned at swords' points with 
each other, they judge more clearly than the little scholars 
themselves which side is right according to Christ. For 
"he that is spiritual judgeth all things" [I. Cor. ii,, 15], 
and they are the really spiritual, for they depend wholly 
upon the spirit — ^that is, the mind of God. 

XII. I hear no men more arrogantly reproach with the 
name of heretic for the slightest possible cause everybody 
who already has or is beginning to have sound views than 
men of a class to which I sincerely trust you do not belong, 

XIII. There is a class of men so shameless that though 

' The channel between Euboea^and Boeotia — because of its ebb and flow, 
the classical simile of instability. 


Archeteles : Reply to Bishop's Admonition 231 

they are a constant stumbling block to the unhappy people 
through their unblushing sins, they will not listen to any sort 
of warning, far less to any correction or improvement. I 
wish, indeed, that they would strive to be other than they 
are reputed to be — nay, I exhort them for Christ's sake to 
strive. And when this takes place, justly grounded criti- 
cisms will cease, or if they do not cease, they will no longer 
disturb them. For they will learn, meanwhile, that they 
shall be blest of whom evil is said, and they will try to show 
that the slanders poured out upon them are poured out 
upon men most undeserving of it. But what wickedness 
is this, despitefully to entreat him who is appointed to be 
an example unto the rest, and to refuse to listen to any 
warning? I admit, as far as I am concerned, that I have 
often said that a fair proportion of the bishops of our time 
are not real but counterfeit bishops, and I do not think I 
ought to be blamed for it either, since Isaiah calls such 
"dumb dogs" [Isa. Ivi., 10], and Christ calls them "thieves 
and robbers" [John x., i]. I am speaking of those who 
have not entered into the sheepfold by the door. For you 
will find few who fill the office of bishop to the best of their 
ability, and do not rather conduct themselves as rulers and 
satraps and kings. I would that all who have spoken in 
these days unrestrainedly had spoken passionately rather 
than truly. It is the duty of all and especially of the heads 
of the Church to see whether their ill repute is deserved or 
undeserved. For Paul teaches that an elder convicted of 
sin is to be rebuked publicly [cf. I. Tim. v., 20]. 

XIV. Up to this point you have been telling what has 
happened, I think, but now you wish to make it appear 
dangerous for a bishop to open his mouth, and you count up 
the dangers to which he would be exposed — namely, that he 
would be spoken ill of, and would get into strife. What 
would you have said if he had even run the risk of stripes? 
Christ sent out his disciples as sheep in the midst of wolves 
[Matt, x., 16, and Luke x., 3], and yet he says that the 
shepherd goeth before his sheep [John x., 4]; and again, 


232 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

that the good shepherd layeth down his life for the sheep, 
but not so the hireling. For when the wolf cometh, he 
leaveth the sheep, and fleeth [John x., ii and 12]. 

If, therefore, the bride of Christ was so wounded within 
and without as you desire to make it appear, what need of 
this and delay? Why do you coddle the bishop in his delay, 
or rather why do you delay him when inclined to act quickly? 
There was need of haste. The bishop ought to have been 
roused as quickly as possible, with "Ho there, see how your 
flock is perishing! Why do you tarry? You ought to be the 
first to run into danger." Then if he had been inclined to 
delay, saying, "My good name will suffer, I shall be reviled, 
I shall have to wrangle, " you should have said "Oh, coward! 
dost thou not remember what Christ said? — 'Ye shall be 
hated of all men for my name's sake' " [Mark xiii., 13, and 
Luke xxi., 17]. As it is, since the bishop is minded to believe 
that there is nowhere surer or readier salvation than where 
Christ is preached, and ye are trying to hinder him, is not 
that equivalent to saying that you have so worked upon 
and stirred up our most kindly bishop as to make him accuse 
me of an abominable deed, to wit, the ravaging of the sheep- 
fold of Christ? Now you will have it that the one and only 
bride of Christ is wounded. I admit that she is wounded, 
not with a mortal wound, but in love. That is an easy and 
pleasant wound, nay one so acceptable that she bears with 
calmness that the priest and the Levite should pass by upon 
the other side and not look back [Luke x., 31, etc.]. For 
she knows that the good Samaritan is at hand who will 
cleanse with wine what is foul and soothe the sore places 
with oil, and take her upon his beast to the shelter of the 
heavenly mansions. But they who do not recognise the 
physician shall suffer pitiable torture, not only from the 
pain of their wounds but from despair of a physician. For 
they spend all their substance upon physicians who apply 
the poultice of human traditions to the wound and so draw 
a false skin over it, but heal it not in itself nor perceive any 
cure. What need of more? "Woe unto [you] that call 


Archeteles : Reply to Bishop's Admonition 233 

evil good, and good evil; that put darkness for light, and 
light for darkness; that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for 
bitter!" [Isaiah v., 20]. 

XV. I could wish that you had better understood 
the utterances of the prophets For what you quote from 
Amos is diametrically opposed to your case. For Amos 
[ch. v., 5] is upbraiding the children of Israel because they 
had abandoned the Lord and made [sacrifices] unto calves 
and idols in Bethel and Gilgal and Beersheba, leaving off 
righteousness and turning judgment to wormwood, and 
because they feared not Him who ruleth the whole universe, 
whose name is the Lord. For He shall overthrow the strong 
and lay low the mighty, because they hate him that rebuketh, 
and abhor him that speaketh uprightly. Therefore, though 
they raised up lofty dwellings of quarried stone, yet should 
they never live in them, because they had robbed the poor. 
So also should they never gather the vintage of their cun- 
ningly planted vineyards, for He knew their sins, to wit, 
that being reverenced as parents by the simple-minded 
people, they yet showed themselves like the crudest enemies, 
receiving money from the rich and crushing down the poor. 
Yea, and things should become so bad that the wise man 
would not dare to open his mouth on account of the vicious- 
ness of that time. See, I pray you, whether time has turned 
backward to show us this picture of evils, now that some 
persons practise so unblushingly all that savours of tyranny 
that from fear of injuries and excommunications and dread- 
ful things no sagacious man ventures to utter a murmur. 
See, I say, how unfortunately you dip into hidden writings, 
when you use those which cry out against your own side. 
I do not now recall where your quotation from Ezekiel is 
found, but wherever it comes from, I think you have quoted 
it with the same judgment and appropriateness as the passage 
from Amos. 

XVI. For what is written in Ezekiel v., 11, whence it 
seems that your quotation was gathered, is as thoroughly 
against you as anything could be. So also the passage from 


234 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

the fifty-fourth Psalm. ^ For the prophet is there caUing 
down the curse of discord upon the IsraeHtes for their 
faithlessness, and this also fell upon them for having 
crucified Christ, And there was as much contention in the 
city of Jerusalem as there ever was in Troy or Carthage or 
Athens. In short, ovdev Ttpog etto? iSdikV ovroo? [this talk of 
yours is not a bit to the point]. 

XVII. I wonder that the times now first seem dangerous 
to you, when the evils, in consequence of which Paul [II, 
Tim. iii., 2] reckons the times as dangerous, began to show 
themselves long ago and have run riot so down to our time 
that a large number of the most learned men have been 
unable to hold their peace longer after the example of the 
prudent man whom you cited a little while ago from Amos 
so inappropriately, if you will pardon my saying so. Indeed 
they are ready to undergo any danger rather than keep 
silence before such foul abominations. Who would call 
these present times dangerous when the sheep of the Lord 
are sought out and set free and fed? They are dangerous 
if death is an evil, but not to those to whom you would 
make it appear, but to those, forsooth, who are taught that 
the soul cannot be destroyed by these people who can destroy 
the body. But about these I do not think you are so very 
anxious. Therefore from this fear of yours I free you by 
these presents. I want to warn you here, since you keep 
indulging in the same complaints and the same words, so 
that when an answer has been made to what you had said 
before, you are constantly running back to the same point, 
I want to warn you to look out lest 6ig Hpdfjiftrf davarob 
[you prove a back number].' 

XVIII, Offences have been multiplying for about a 
thousand years, especially at the hands of those who do not 
care a snap for the little ones of Christ, whom he wished not 
to have made of little account, when he said [Matt, xviii., 

'Fifty-fifth in the King James version. — H. P. 

'Basil the Great, Epistola, 187. (Trans, in Nicene and Post-Nicene 
Fathers, 2d series, vol. viii., 223; "twice cabbage is death.") 


Archeteles : Reply to Bishop's Admonition 235 

10], "Take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones" 
who believe in me. But these men, disregarding the words 
of God, teach the little ones their own sayings, and turn to 
themselves the hope of those (I mean the little ones) whose 
only hope ought to be in Christ, stamping the grace of God as 
obsolete while marking with approval their own penances. 
They mercilessly frighten and drive to despair the feeble 
voice of conscience, selling that which ought to be freely 
given away and requiring chastity, ' which Christ left free, 
while they abuse their power of the keys as they call it, and 
at the same time teach that all their fulminations must be 
accepted whether rightly or wrongly hurled forth. They 
defend their own luxury when compared with the Gospel 
simplicity and condemned from time to time, and think 
it right to regulate even the clearly divine ordinances ac- 
cording to their own sweet will. The day would fail me 
if I tried to count up all their offences, though these ye 
regard not as offences, but if a vinedresser or a shep- 
herd or a husbandman eats meat in Lent, as the sacred 
city of Rome ventures to do without harm, that ye call an 
offence. 

XIX. Here you commit two sins, one against those who 
proclaim the Gospel to-day, in saying that they are spread- 
ing new errors ; the other against yourselves, in calling those 
earlier things you mention dangerous errors, under what- 
ever head you class them, unless by earlier you mean the 
errors with which Christians were deluged in old days, when 
according to Sabellius there were three Gods, according 
to Arius one God and one vnoffraffig [substance], while 
Manichseus held that Christ pretended to have taken upon 
himself the nature of a man, and Marcion taught that there 
were two Gods, one the creator of the good, the other of the 
evil. Worse errors than these, I say, are sown abroad to-day 
now that that country bumpkin Zwingli is preaching the 
Gospel with such energy and risk of harm. But your words 
when carefully weighed do not seem to be meant to apply 

' Meaning celibacy. 


236 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

to these earlier errors, but to those into the place of which 
the Gospel errors are stepping. 

XX. BaW' ovToos 7takiv[yon are throwing out the same 
stuff again] if you mean that schism, by which certain per- 
sons have separated from Christ and turned to men and 
created things, and by "mother" her who is our mother, 
the heavenly Jerusalem, the bride of Christ without spot 
or blemish, and by "wandering sheep" those who have 
strayed from Christ the true light and are wandering in the 
darkness of human traditions, — if you mean the "factious 
perversity" by which the human is contumaciously accepted 
as divine and Christ is abandoned for sordid gain, and that 
"heretical tampering with the faith" by which certain 
persons wantonly twist the meaning of the sacred writings 
to the winning of their own advantage. For he is the real 
heretic who interprets the sacred writings not by the light 
of Christ but by his own. If, I say, this is the way you un- 
derstand these terms, ovrcog ftakXers [you are at it again]. 
I do not use the singular for fear our most Reverend Lord 
of Constance should fancy that my words were directed 
to him, when, as a matter of fact, I desire that his authority 
be intact at all points. 

XXI. "According to the mastery of the Lord and his 
Gospel "you entreat (you say "according to" for "by "the 
mastery of the Gospel). What you are trying to indicate, I 
do not understand, for Christ forbids his disciples [Matt. 
xxiii., 10] to let themselves be called Masters. And in Luke 
[ch. xxii.] he commanded, saying, "He that is greatest among 
you, let him be as the younger; and he that is chief, as he 
that doth serve. " But why do I follow up these things again 
as if there were a grain of sense in the whole effusion? As 
to your bidding me watch against the snares of the devil, 
I will do so sedulously. For I know well enough that, in 
the words of Peter [I. Pet. v., 8], "as a roaring lion, [he] 
walketh about, seeking whom he may devour. " I know, too, 
with what weapons he should be resisted, to wit, strength 
and steadfastness of faith, and trusting to these, I shudder 


Archeteles : Reply to Bishop's Admonition 237 

not at the gates of hell nor at the tortures which the good 
are made to suffer in this world. 

XXII. What do I hear? Am I playing such a dam- 
nable game? Bringing into play again sacrilegious machina- 
tions and old-time heresies? Who could refrain from 
upbraiding under such circumstances? Through many lines 
you rage and rave and riot so that for the violence of your 
raging you have no clear idea yourself of what you are saying. 
You wish to seem to be urging the unity of the Church, when 
your words breathe nothing but rebellion, uproar, war, 
destruction and whatever belongs thereto. What will 
happen under such circumstances if I proceed to strike 
back with revilings at those whom I know to be the instiga- 
tors of this barbarous accusation? Will not that happen 
which the divine Paul predicts? [Gal. v., 15] — "But if ye 
bite and devour one another, take heed that ye be not 
consumed one of another." And ye cannot make denial, 
saying that those things were said with general application, 
for you have not sent a like threatening admonition to any 
others, nor are there in our whole chapter more than one 
or two who do not share your sentiments. Hence it is 
absolutely clear that you were aiming at me alone. And 
if you maintain with the utmost vigour that these things 
were written simply as an admonition to myself, what was 
the need of embittering so harshly a matter which really 
does not apply to me? You say, that I might be the more 
carefully on my guard. Do ye think me so stupid and sense- 
less that I have not any perception at all? But let that pass. 
I appeal to your intelligence, — is not this whole thing, by 
whatever name ye call it, brandished at me? I wish, there- 
fore, not to return like for like, but to return your own 
utterances in about the same brevity that you use in this 
section, but corrected first and renovated by the gauge of 
the Gospel teaching, and you can then regard them as my 
declaration of principles. I shall not cease to try to renew 
the old-time unity of the Church of Christ, setting snares 
for no man but often turning them to good when set, as I 


238 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

will prove through yourselves as witnesses, and never 
intending to lend myself to any faction, much less to one 
of heretics. For I have never planted any other plant than 
that which Christ planted at the direction of his Father, 
which cannot be rooted up. For three years ago now (to 
give you an account of the preaching I have done at Zurich), 
I preached the entire Gospel according to Matthew, and 
at that time I had not even heard the name of those persons 
to whose faction you accuse me of belonging. I added the 
Acts of the Apostles to the Gospel immediately, that the 
Church of Zurich might see in what way and with what 
sponsors the Gospel was carried forth and spread abroad. 
Presently came the First Epistle of Paul to Timothy, which 
seemed to be admirably adapted to my excellent flock. 
For there are contained in it certain canons, as it were, of 
the character worthy of a Christian. Here, inasmuch as 
certain smatterers showed perverted opinions of the faith, 
I postponed the Second Epistle to Timothy until I should 
have expounded that to the Galatians. Then I added the 
other. But the before-mentioned smatterers now went to 
such a pitch of mad impiety that they well-nigh made the 
name of Paul a disgrace, throwing out these pious ejacula- 
tions, which, of course, do not offend anybody: "Who was 
Paul, pray? Was he not a man? He was an Apostle, 
to be sure, but a sort of outside one only, not one of the 
twelve. He never talked with Christ. He did not put 
together any portion of the faith. I believe as much in 
Thomas or Scotus' or whom you will as in Paul. " So I also 
expounded both the Epistles of Peter, the standard-bearer 
of the Apostles, that they might see clearly whether both 
men spoke under the inspiration of the same spirit, and 
when I had finished these, I began the Epistle to the Hebrews, 
that they might recognise more plainly the goodness and 
glory of Christ. From this they will learn that Christ is 

'Thomas Aquinas, doctor angelicus, born 1227 or 1225, died 1274; 
Johannes Duns Scotus, doctor subtilis, bom c. 1265; died 1308. The first 
was a Dominican, the second a Franciscan. 


Archeteles : Reply to Bishop's Admonition 239 

the great High Priest, and they have in fact neariy learned 
it already. Nor is there any ground for your accusing me 
in regard to certain writings. For before these came into 
my hands I had begun the business, nay had promised to do 
so about a year before. They will learn also that Christ, 
having been made a sacrifice once for all, has accomplished 
their salvation forever. This is the seed I have sown. 
Matthew, Luke, Paul, and Peter have watered it, and God 
has given it splendid increase, but this I will not trumpet 
forth, lest I seem to be canvassing my own glory and not 
Christ's. Go now and say that this plant (to come back to 
your point) is not of the Father in Heaven. I have not, 
I say, used any false nostrums or tricks or exhortations, 
but in simple words and terms native to the Swiss I have 
drawn them to the recognition of their trouble, having 
learned this from Christ himself, who began his own preach- 
ing with it. I have never drawn away any one from har- 
mony with his bishop, if he was a bishop and not a thief 
or robber such as Christ characterised in John x., 12. From 
what sources I have drawn the discipline of the Church I 
mentioned a little while ago, I have vigorously urged 
my flock to hold fast to the glory of our profession, saying, 
" Seeing then that we have a great apxi^p^d [high priest] that 
is passed into the heavens, Jesus, the Son of God " [Hebr. iv,, 
14], hold fast to that confession, and seek not honour from 
one another, as Christ bade the Jews not to do because it 
interfered with their believing in him [John, v., 44], saying, 
"How can ye believe, which receive honour one of another, 
and seek not the honour which cometh from God only?" 
Mark these things carefully, I beg of you. I call my flock 
absolutely away, as far as I can, from hope in any created 
being to the one true God and Jesus His only begotten Son, 
our Lord, he that trusteth in whom shall never die. I try 
with all my might to make them ask forgiveness of him who 
desires to be freely asked even though we are sinners, say- 
ing [Matt, xi., 28], "Come unto me, all ye that labour and 
are heavy laden, and I avanaixjoo'' [will give you rest]. 


240 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

This I believe so firmly that if occasion should arise I do not 
think I have need of any bishop or priest to make satis- 
faction for me. For Christ did that once, when he delivered 
up his body as a sacrifice for us, and washed us with the 
blessed bath of his blood. The whole body of the presbyters 
I reverence as I do the angels of God. Though I abominate 
them that are given up to their bellies, yet I forbear and 
suffer the weeds to grow up with the grain, I enjoin upon 
my flock to pray without ceasing but in soul and spirit, 
and to worship the Father in spirit and in truth, according 
to the saying of Christ. Nay, I bid them knock even to 
importunity, as the parable of the widow in Luke teaches 
[Luke xviii., i, etc.]. 

XXI n. He that gathereth not with Christ, scattereth 
abroad, and he that is not with the same is against him 
[Matt, xii., 30 and Luke xi., 23]. How can the Gospel it- 
self now be at variance with the Gospel teaching? Do ye 
think that God's state is worse than Satan's? If he were 
divided against himself, his kingdom could not stand, 
[Matt, xii., 25], and think ye that God's kingdom can stand 
if He be at variance with Himself? He would be divided 
against Himself and at variance with Himself, if His Gospel 
were opposed to the Gospel teachings. I might proceed 
to hit the nail on the head here, and show just what Gospel 
teaching ye are fighting for so valiantly, but I prefer to show 
myself more modest where I rather think ye have no modesty 
at all. 

XXIV. Do I not teach long and great penitence, when 
I am continually crying: " /usravosiTs [repent], go and sell 
all that thou hast and give to the poor" [Matt, xix., 21], 
and "Give alms, and all things shall be pure unto you"? 
[cf. Luke vi., 38]. Meanwhile I forbid — I do not deny it — 
giving to those who own so much gold that they even load 
their mules with it, by the which neither mule nor rider is 
the better off, however. For so it would come to pass 
that even the swine should be forced to wear gold in their 
snouts, and the poor would die of hunger. Yet Christ said 


Archeteles : Reply to Bishop's Admonition 241 

that these should be Hke as the most faithful supporters 
among his followers. 

XXV. What ye mean by heroic measures, I do not 
understand, but I know this, that Christ vigorously urges 
his disciples to boldness when going to meet the monsters 
of this world, saying [John, xiv., i], "Let not your heart be 
troubled," neither be afraid. In the same passage you call 
insidious the peace that I desire us to enter into with God, 
whether it be insidious or simple and sincere. What follows 
presently is of the same stamp with your shrieks of lamen- 
tation in sections 23 and 24, where I promised not to set 
forth what sort of a Gospel you would like to champion 
if you might. 

XXVI. I never boasted that I had the spirit of God» 
but I confidently hope meanwhile that He will not be absent 
from His own work. He whom I have so often found prosper- 
ing the things He was accomplishing through me. I wish, 
therefore, that you would make true charges against me, and 
not such as some violent emotion suggests. Yet am I 
well aware that there is a sort of holy boasting, from which 
neither Christ nor Paul shrank. For Christ said, "I am the 
good shepherd [John x., 11], and "all that ever came before 
me are thieves and robbers; but the sheep did not hear them" 
[John X., 8]. "I am come that they might have life, and 
that they might have it more abundantly" [Johnx., 10]. "I 
am the Hght of the world" [John viii., 12], "I and my Father 
are one" [John x., 30], and hundreds of other such things. 
Paul said, "For I suppose I was not a whit behind the very 
chiefest apostles" [II. Cor. xi., 5],' and "Though I would 
desire to glory, I shall not be a fool" [II. Cor. xii., 6], and 
"In nothing am I x^nep Xiav [behind the very chiefest] 
apostles " [II. Cor. xii., 1 1], ' and " I laboured more abundantly 
than they all" [I. Cor. xv., 10]. Therefore it might be that I 
have taken some credit to myself in regard to the sacred 
writings, but if I have ever done so, I know that I did it 

' The Douay version keeps more literally to the slightly different Latin 
in these two cases. — H. P. 

16 


242 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

sparingly. But as I turn the whole business over carefully 
in my memory, I recall that it was once imputed to me as 
wrong that I had said that God spake by my mouth when 
I was setting forth His word. But that I did, that the 
crowd might not think that I spoke of myself and give me 
the credit that belonged to Christ. I even gave distinct 
warning that no one must make a mistake about that point. 

XXVII. Adulterous teachings I think are those which, 
made up by men given over to their own desires, are sold 
as divine, and I hate them worse than a serpent. Nay, this 
bit of a difference which I now have with you sprang from 
nothing else than my diligent effort to sift out the dross from 
the gold. I speak the truth, but refrain, I beg of you. 

XXVIII. It will first be worth while here to define false 
prophets ' according to Christ's understanding of them, that 
it may be more evident to what sort of people these words 
of Jeremiah properly apply [cf. Jer. xxiii., i6]. Christ says 
[Matt, xxiv., 24, and Mark xiii., 22]: "For there shall arise 
false Christs, and false prophets, and shall shew great signs 
and wonders; insomuch that, if it were possible, they shall 
deceive the very elect. " But with these words he did not 
bring out the full force of the term, so that what goes just 
before must be added here. "Then, " he says, "if any man 
shall say unto you, Lo, here is Christ, or there; believe it 
not" [Matt, xxiv., 23, and Mark xiii., 21]. Now we are not 
talking here of false Christs, but of false prophets. These, 
Christ says, will support their false doctrine by showing 
signs and this shall trouble even the elect. These same men 
will say (for this word "for" that follows ["for there shall 
arise"] shows that both apply to the false prophets) — "Lo, 
here is Christ, or lo, there." I show no signs, nor believe 
them easily when shown, even if the decision of certain 
blind persons had served as an introduction to them. I 
do not hold that Christ is "here" or "there," but wherever 
two or three have been gathered together in his name, 
there I know he is in the midst of them [Matt, xviii., 20]. In 

' He so calls the monks. 


Archeteles : Reply to Bishop's Admonition 243 

short, false prophets are they who with signs and wonders, 
not to say jugglers' tricks, cast a spell even upon the elect, 
and exhibit Christ where they will. Enough has been said 
for you, I know; you do not need to have me drive every- 
thing home. We must hasten to the words of the prophet 
who, as representative of God, thus threatens the false 
prophets: ''Behold I will feed them with wormwood, and 
make them drink the water of gall" [Jer. xxiii., 15]. This 
is only too true, for they breathe forth not only wormwood 
and gall, but poison and death, some of them. There fol- 
lows: "For from the prophets of Jerusalem is profaneness 
gone forth into all the land." There are no prophets in 
Jerusalem in these days, from whom we can suffer pollution, 
but from whatever quarter the world is polluted, there 
Jerusalem seems to be beyond a doubt. From whomsoever 
proceed the murder of souls and the contempt of God and 
men, know that such are false prophets. There follows: 
"Thus saith the Lord of hosts. Hearken not unto the words 
of the prophets that prophesy unto you : they make you vain : 
they speak a vision of their own heart, and not out of the 
mouth of the Lord" [Jer. xxiii., 16]. Therefore, those who 
speak out of the mouth of the Lord are not false prophets. 
Again, those who speak the vision — that is, the purpose, 
opinion, thought, of their own heart are false prophets. 
Now see how many of those who are on your side (for they 
would all venture to declare that these things which have 
been got up by certain hypocrites are worthy of as much 
belief and trust as those that have been handed down in 
the writings of the Gospel and the Apostles), how many, I 
say, are going to be left and not pass over to the number 
of the false prophets. How few of these do not teach that a 
sort of visions should be accepted in place of the Gospel ! 
How few, if any point comes into discussion, do not settle 
it according to the opinions of men, without any search of 
the Holy Scripture ! See now the wallet hanging from your 
back, and you will discover how much justice there is in 
your accusation of those as false prophets who teach, relying 


244 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

solely upon the divinely inspired books, and how greatly 
you will profit the Christian world, if ye conquer in your 
defence of hypocrites and preachers of visions. But what 
need of much speaking? Every time you take the sacred 
books into your hands, it turns out unfortunately for you. 
For they almost always are at variance with you, as the 
next following remarks will show even more clearly. 

XXIX. For the words of Peter, which you quote from, 
II, Pet. ii., I ff., apply especially to those who with vain 
arrogance say, "I am the Christ, I have power to bind and 
to loose, I have power to loose and to kill thee," yet live 
meanwhile so impurely in the desires and lusts of the flesh, 
that they entice those who had truly escaped, and promise 
freedom to those in the bonds of error, when they have them- 
selves fallen into slavery to their very corruption. That is 
to say, so far are they who arrogate to themselves the powers 
of God from being able to free others, that they corrupt them 
the more and lead them astray, being themselves altogether 
corrupt. I know what you will say to this, but the authority 
of him whom you are going to oppose to me will not crush me 
so much as the whole vnodeGig [argument] of this chapter 
supports me. I will run through it briefly, that what I 
mean may be made more clear. In that second chapter 
Peter is putting on their guard those to whom he is writing 
— that is, all Christians, of course, — foretelling that among 
us also there will be lying teachers, just as in the old days 
false prophets crept in, and they will lead the people astray 
after them, that they may indulge their lusts the more freely, 
though they will do this quite without being aware of it. 
And this he shows by many examples, illustrating that the 
majesty of God when scorned has always mightily afflicted 
the scorners, and especially those who give free rein to all 
the lust and uncleanness of the flesh, and uvpioTijrog 
naracppovovoi [despise government] — that is, the highest 
government, namely, that of God. "Presumptuous are 
they and self-willed," so that they fear not "to speak evil 
of dignities" — that is, putting behind them, nay, scorn- 


Archeteles : Reply to Bishop's Admonition 245 

ing, the "dignity" or glory of Him to whom alone glory 
belongs and in whom alone it is lawful to glory, they would 
claim for themselves that which belongs to God alone. 
And what greater insult to God can be done ? Now ' * glorias 
in the plural number it is not unusual for Peter to use for 
the dignity or glory of God. For in I. Pet. i., 11, we read 
"when it testified beforehand the sufferings of Christ, and 
the glory [gloria] that should follow." For how could it 
be that Peter, forgetting himself, should now mean by 
"dignities" those arrogant elders whom he had chided in 
the earlier epistle? But the words following show the same 
thing, nay, the whole body of this chapter shows it, as I 
have said. For Peter is aiming at nothing else than pre- 
venting men from arrogating the divine to themselves and 
selling human wares for divine. How much that helps your 
side, ye may look to, yourselves. 

XXX. It is of little consequence if those who are devoted 
to the Gospel suffer some hunger for it, so be it that they 
desire to be filled. For that woman of Samaria who had 
spoken with Christ at the well did some good unto her 
fellow-townspeople when, suddenly brought to admiring 
wonder at him [John iv., 7], she desired that her people also 
should have a share in the thing, and summoned them from 
the town for the purpose, that they might themselves hear 
Christ, who were yet men and eminent for knowledge while 
she was simple and hungry for the Word. But having 
received the food of the Word, she was perhaps herself 
superior, yet she grudged it not to others. How much of 
the Gospel food ye have in your store-houses is not clear, 
yet ye wish to seem so full that ye can belch it forth upon 
others. Indeed, as far as I can see, you have not up to now 
allowed unto others any knowledge of the Gospel teaching. 
But you seem to speak of everything rather vaguely, and if 
you deny this (as you will be right in doing) you cannot 
then deny that it is I alone you are aiming at. 

XXXI. The traditions of the men of old deserve to be 
regarded with the more reverence, the more they are in 


246 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

conformity with the Gospel. But what do you call the tradi- 
tions of the ancients? Those which the greed of certain 
individuals has recently devised? You will say, "No." 
Why do you not then present distinctly by name the tradi- 
tions that you are trying so hard to have kept? Thus I, 
who am so in need of the heavenly food, and those like me, 
can see plainly which are to be retained and which let go. 
Please mention them all, whether of early or recent date, 
that the sore spot may be laid bare to the physician. For 
here seems to be the point in our ailment where it stings and 
is especially inflamed. 

XXXII. Amen, if only you mean the Church of Christ 
and the bishops who are really bishops and not [John x., 8] 
thieves and robbers, but installed according to the rule of 
Paul to Timothy and Titus. 

XXXIII. Here, unless it were now pretty well agreed 
by all that this whole thing was made at your instigation, 
you would expose our most kindly bishop to being laughed at 
in that you represent him as speaking with full confidence 
because prepared to render an account of his flock, though 
that I suspect is the lot of none besides him who said, 
"Father, of those that thou gavest me I have not lost one" 
[cf. John xvii., 12]. Yet I could wish that, since you have 
taken so much time to get it up, you had done the whole thing 
a little more carefully, and did n't turn about so absurdly 
now to threats and now to entreaties, now weaving a veil of 
human tradition over the Gospel, now letting the Gospel 
go altogether and advocating only human, tradition. You 
may be laughed at by the crowd as a certain bishop is 
laughed at all about to-day who eniaKonei [watches] over 
a flock within the diocese of our most Reverend Lord of 
Constance. For in his continued but vain struggles against 
a certain learned and truly pious preacher, he finally went 
so far in madness as to venture to say before the general 
crowd, even pouring out crocodile tears the while: "The 
difference between a real bishop to whom the sheep have 
been entrusted and him to whom the sheep have not been 


Archeteles : Reply to Bishop's Admonition 247 

entrusted is that this fellow can even lead the sheep astray 
as he will and is not forced to give an account of his leading 
them astray, because he is not their shepherd, while on 
the contrary I, who am the lawfully appointed bishop, am 
compelled to give such an account of your sins, O my sheep, 
that though ye sin, not ye have to give an account yourselves, 
but I." And this view he supported by the words of Ezekiel 
[iii., 18], though he looked at them somewhat awry, for he left 
out this part — "The same wicked man shall die in his 
iniquity; but his blood will I require at thine hand." And 
when the crowd heard this mistake, they began to laugh and 
to say, "Bravo, good shepherd, who hast made us safe to- 
day!" But these things and things like them are not stum- 
bling blocks of offence and error, and do not savour of heresy 
and impiety, oh no! Why? Because the servant who smote 
Christ in the face before Annas did no wrong [John xviii., 22], 
for he could not sin, being on the side of the high priest. 

XXXIV. This that you quote from the seventeenth 
chapter of Deuteronomy, what has it to do here? There the 
question is about judgments, and in your view also the old 
law has been abolished as far as it has to do with ceremonials 
and judgments. What have ye to do with the Sacred Writ- 
ings, which ye take into your hands so inappropriately, 
not to say clumsily? How much better it would have 
been not to touch these weapons of Achilles, which drag your 
untrained selves to destruction rather than help you in 
fighting, and to stay within the palisade ! But if you main- 
tain with all possible vigour that the thing concerns me, I 
will say, how do I not listen to the bishops? Nothing is 
easier, since they say nothing. 

XXXV. Thank God that at last you grant even this 
to unhappy mortals, that the Gospel be preached to them. 
I should think you ought to have put this in at the beginning, 
and that you would have begun in this way: Since, then, 
the Gospel of Christ has been approved by Holy Mother 
Church, and our predecessors long ago directed in their 
sacred Canons and synodal Statutes that it be preached. 


248 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

it is our will and strict command and charge that every 
pastor or people's priest have a copy of the marginal notes 
of Guillerin of Paris, ' and that from this every Sunday he 
expound to the people under our authority the Gospel ac- 
cording to the text, with a loud voice so that he can be heard. 
For once, if I remember rightly, I saw some bishop's synodal 
Statutes written in about this fashion, before I was anointed 
with the holy ointment. But you have kept this till towards 
the end, imitating certain rhetoricians, who bid one to keep 
the special points for the end of the speech that they may 
cling the faster. But if this had fallen out, would it not 
have been lawful to preach the Gospel? See into what a 
situation your affairs and words and notions have got! 
How neatly I could put my finger here upon your sore 
point; but I do not want to, lest some of its rottenness 
should touch the Most Reverend Lord of Constance. 

XXXVI. I cannot understand in what sense you think 
the statement ought to be taken that without unity of the 
Church there can be no Gospel. For during the time^ when 
the doctrine of Arius had infected almost the whole Chris- 
tian world, so that those who were on his side not only were 
called opdoSo^oi [orthodox], but were so powerful that they 
outlawed all the best people whose view of Christ was really 
sound, there was a Gospel, I take it, for both sides rested 
their case on it, and yet there was a tremendous split in the 
Church. Therefore there can be a Gospel along with a 
split in the Church. Here I know whither you would like 
to seek refuge, but you will be caught there, namely, that 
there is no Gospel for those whose views are unsound. There- 
fore Anastasius and Liberius, ^ though Roman Pontiffs, had 
no Gospel, because they agreed with Arius, Whose was 
the Gospel then? The Church's. Therefore there can be 
a Church with sound views, and this Church can have the 

'Properly Guilielmus (Guillermus) of Paris (fl. c. 1485), a Dominican. 
' The fourth century. 

3 Anastasius was pope 398 to 401 ; Liberius, 352 to 366. Their Arianism 
was very doubtful. 


Archeteles : Reply to Bishop's Admonition 249 

Gospel, even if it has no Roman Pontiff. But what can be 
more absurd than this according to the teachings and ordi- 
nances of men? But, not to nin outside the subject, see 
how clearly I can divine that you had reference to that 
remark of Augustinus, to which all who exalt human tra- 
ditions above the Gospel flee as to the protection of the 
shield of Telamon, "I should not believe the Gospel unless 
the Church had approved the Gospel."' Here I appeal to 
your sense of justice: tell me frankly whether you do not 
think that this remark of Augustine's was a trifle reckless 
or escaped him unawares. For suppose Augustine had never 
lived : there would still have been a Gospel, as the glad tidings 
of God's grace, there would still have been the covenant 
which God in his grace had entered into with the miserable 
race of man, and the same would have been true if, after 
he was bom, Augustine had never believed it. Did any one 
before Augustine hold this view? Certainly not, for there 
is no record of it. Since the approval of the Church has 
not yet been spoken of distinctly enough, hear this further: 
Historians tell us that Matthew first committed the Gospel 
to writing eight years after Christ's ascent into heaven, be- 
cause the necessities of the situation demanded it. Up 
to that time they had preached it from memory with only 
the aid of the inspiration of the Holy Ghost. Tell me, pray, 
what Church stamped the Gospel with approval then, and 
whose Gospel? Was it that which they all had in their 
memories? Country bumpkins! The Gospel could waver, 
therefore, and go wrong, after the manner of human things. 
Or was it the Gospel inspired by the Holy Ghost that had 
been sent by the Father and Christ? But it were impious 
if we said that that which God himself directs has need 
of human sanction. It remains, therefore, that Augustine 
uttered those words with more force than discretion, or else 

' In his Contra epistolam Manichaus quam vacant Fundamenti, chap, v., 
ed. Vienne, 1891. Corpus eccle. Latin., xxv., 191 ^., p. 197, 1. 22. English 
trans, in Nicene and Post- Nicene Fathers, iv., 131 : "For my part I should not 
believe the Gospel except as moved by the authority of the Catholic Church." 


250 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

that he would never have believed if he had heard that the 
Gospel was preached before it had been written down. 
For no man had then stamped it with approval, much less 
any general council. Here you concoct as answer, that it 
appears from the beginning of Luke that some approval had 
been given by the Church, for he tells us that many had tried 
to write down the Gospel [Luke i., i, etc.]. This last I 
readily admit, for otherwise he would have said, "Matthew 
and Mark tried to write down EvayyeXiov [the Gospel] 
before me." But of those many since no Gospels exist 
it appears that they were rejected as not having been written 
with perfect faithfulness. Therefore four Gospels have 
been approved by the Church. I say to all this that I am 
very much surprised that while it is clear that "approve" 
should be understood here as "accept," some people are 
still so blind as to think that the Gospel would have had no 
existence, if it had not obtained the sanction of the fathers. 
The fathers did nothing but cut off from the original and 
genuine accounts the ocnoupvcpa and voda, that is, those which 
came from an unknown or a false source. And something 
not so very different from this we see going on even now. 
When some Hercules strives to clear away the filth that has 
been dragged into the abode of the Gospel by certain vicious 
idlers, he is said not to approve the Gospel, but to rescue 
it and, like faithful Abraham, to bring it back from captiv- 
ity in the enemy's country, to dig out the wells that had been 
loaded with rubbish by the Philistines \cj. Gen. xxvi., 15]. 
For how could it be that the divine should get its sanction 
from the human? Or how were it not the height of impiety 
to think that which (in the language of proverbs) sprang 
from the mouth not of man but of God, not valid unless it 
had received the approval of human ignorance? So we 
see it in the heathen poets; they make all the promises of 
all the gods invalid to which Jupiter had not nodded ap- 
proval with that terrible brow of his. But Christ himself 
says [John v., 34], "But I receive not testimony from man, " 
and a little later, " But I have greater witness than that of 


Archeteles : Reply to Bishop's Admonition 251 

John" [John v., 36], and again, "I receive not honour from 
men" [John v., 41]. Add to this what your own Canons 
teach [i, q. marcion. '], that the Gospel consists not in the 
words of the Scriptures, but in their sense; not in the outside, 
but in the pith; not in the leaves of the language but in the 
root of its spirit. Again, imagine some one deodidauTov 
[taught of God], as Paul was, who did not learn the Gospel 
from man; imagine some one enlightened in his heart from 
above and feeling comfort that no one can deny that his is a 
Gospel, will it wait to be a Gospel until the fathers have 
stamped it with approval? So learn at last that it is a 
Gospel when God deigns to illuminate a man freely with 
His grace, to draw him to Himself, and comfort him and 
make him at peace and free from all taint of sin. And 
when the poor man perceives it, no wonder he leaps with 
joy and exultation at the new and inspired message, and 
Paul gives his approval to this idea [Rom. i., 16] — The 
Gospel of Christ "is the power of God unto salvation to 
every one that belie veth." Go now and say that the 
Gospel borrows its sanction from an assemblage of men, 
and if you say it, I know not how you will escape 
the brand of blasphemy. See meanwhile, also, how 
hard it is to put out from the hearts of men such 
long accepted opinions, even when false or erroneous. 
See, too, how crude a performance it is to patch together 
words however they have come into your head, as those 
words of yours are patched without any sort of learn- 
ing— "only let it not remove any man from the fold 
and unity of the Church, without which there can be no 
Gospel." 

XXX VH. That Christ is one, that, again, the Church 
founded upon a rock by the voice of the Lord is one, who will 
deny? Yet there are those who differ about the rock, some 
holding that it was a fisherman, others that it was the Crea- 
tor of fishes and of all creatures. And which side judges 
the matter more soundly and correctly, even a slave will 

' Corpus iur. can., canon 64, causa i, questio i. 


252 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

easily decide, to say nothing of CEdipus, ' because the words 
of Christ seem to point to his saying that he is himself the 
rock on which he is going to build the Church. For when he 
had called Peter by this name from "petra, " a rock [Matt, 
xvi., 18], saying "Thou art Peter," if he had meant that 
Peter was the foundation stone of the Church he would not 
have gone back to the primitive word and said, "And upon 
this rock I will build my Church," but would have stopped 
with the name Peter in this way: "Thou art Peter, upon 
whom I will build my Church." As it is, in going back to 
the TtpoDTOTVTtov [primitive word], he makes it apparent that 
he meant himself by the rock upon which he would build his 
Church, as if he had said : " I, O Simon, for this full confession 
of my godhead will give to thee a name conformable to this 
confession, and from me, who am the rock (for Christ was 
the rock [I. Corinth, x., 4]), thou shalt henceforth be called 
Peter. And let not that name seem hard or rough to thee. 
This rock from which thou receivest thy name is the foun- 
dation stone of the Church." Besides, the agreement of the 
men of old to this interpretation is unanimous. Now the 
"seat" which you bring inhere, I am inclined to think is 
nowhere spoken of in connection with this matter in the 
sacred writings, though I know well enough that mention 
is made of seats once or twice in the Gospel, as when Christ 
overthrew "the seats of them that sold doves" [Matt, xxi., 
12], and when he upbraided the scribes and Pharisees for 
sitting unw^orthily in Moses' seats [Matt, xxiii., 2], but 
these passages are very unfavourable to your proposition. 
But if you mean that seat before which we shall all stand to 
give an accounting, I easily grant that as God is one, so is 
the throne one, where Christ is sitting on the right hand of 
God [Col. iii., i], to which the same Apostle urges us to 
hasten with confidence, saying [Hebr. iv., 16], "Let us there- 
fore come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may ob- 
tain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need." If, 

'Allusion to Terence, Andria, i., 2, 23, v. 194. "Davus sum, non 
Oedipus," meaning "I am no riddle solver." 


Archeteles : Reply to Bishop's Admonition 253 

again, you wish to be understood as speaking of the seats 
of men, nothing seems farther from the truth, for there are 
as many seats and chairs as there are banquet halls and courts 
and market-places. Even if I wished to deny that there 
are one altar and one priesthood, Paul would refute me 
[Hebr. xiii., 10], "We have an altar, whereof they have no 
right to eat which serve the tabernacle," and [I. Corinth, 
ix., 13], where he constantly speaks of only one altar. In the 
matter of the priesthood he would also confute me [Hebr. 
vii., 11], where he clearly proves that the old priesthood had 
been handed on to Christ, whom above [ch. iv.] he called the 
great apxieftpa, that is, the highest priest (for the name 
"pontifex, " pontiff, certain idolaters also used, whence 
I should like it better if we had taken the Greek name in its 
place), nay, by many arguments he established that Christ 
would be forever the dp^iepea or High Priest according 
to the order of Melchisedec. 

XXXVIII. Believe me, no prophecy of Orpheus him- 
self is truer than that he that gathereth not unto Christ, 
spreadeth abroad, scattereth, wasteth [Matt, xii., 30]. 

XXXIX. That you should here again have spouted 
with incautious excess, I put up with only so far as to enable 
you to see how many absurdities will rise up against the 
Canonical Law of which you are, I believe, the champions, 
if what you propound in these words shall be accepted as 
valid. "False and impious and sacrilegious is whatever 
is set up by the favour of man to the injury of the order 
of the Church. " Therefore, impious, false, and sacrilegious 
are those who maintain that the Roman Pontiff is the great 
high priest, the universal bishop, because the Church for- 
bade any attempt at that in the African Council Di. 99 
primae sedis.' It is false, impious, and sacrilegious that 
the suburban bishops whom we call suffragans and some call 
imitation bishops, do not distribute the bread of the heavenly 
word to the churches entrusted to them, because that 
is the especial, nay, the only function of a bishop, and one 

' Corpus iur. can., c. 3, Dist. xcix. 


254 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

who neglects to fulfil it is called a shameless dog 2. q. 7. 
He who neither — . ^ I pass by the directions of Christ who, 
in sending his disciples into the harvest, gave them no other 
command than to preach the Gospel to every creature 
[Mark xvi., 15]. I pass by Paul who says that he was sent, 
not to baptise, but to spread the Gospel [I. Cor. i., 17]. 
It will be false and impious and sacrilegious for priests to 
engage in warfare, because they should not mingle in mun- 
dane matters, according to the warning to which the whole 
subject of the third book of Decretals is devoted.^ Yet you 
see even bishops in our days steeping themselves in their 
cups as much as the Leon tines did, following after pleasures 
as much as the Crotonians, and in their tables surpassing 
even the Jews. That bishop will be false and impious and 
sacrilegious, who has rich and ostentatious furniture, such 
as we see them with in our days, even surpassing kings. 
For this was forbidden in the Council of Carthage Di. 41. 
A Bishop — .^ It is false and impious and sacrilegious if 
a bishop acts as umpire in mundane matters, because he 
does differently from what the order of the Church prescribes 
II. q. I. You, now — ."• Yet the money lenders to-day 
get their interest through no judges so successfully as through 
the bishops. It is false and impious and sacrilegious that 
the imitation bishops charge for the blessing of vestments 
and altars and shrines almost bushels of money, because that 
is forbidden in many places in the Canonical Law. Any 
bishops who forbid the priests to marry are false and impious 
and sacrilegious according to that formula of yours, because 
the Church once ordered that a bishop should be husband of 
one wife, according to the deliverance of Paul to Timothy and 
Titus dist. 26, passim, 5 and the Council of Gangra forbids 
one to scorn a wife under pretence of religious scruples 
28. dist. c. If any one, — and If any one decree — . ^ What- 

' Corpus iur. can., c. 32, c. ii., qu. 7. s Jbid., 1-5, Dist. xxvi. 

» Ibid., Decretal. Gregori. IX., Lib. iii., Tit. 50. 

3 Ibid., c. 7, Dist. xli. ' Ibid., c. 14-15, Dist. xxviii. 

*Ibid., 29, Catisa xi., qu. I. 


Archeteles : Reply to Bishop's Admonition 255 

ever bishop exacts more than the two soldi which they call 
"cathedral" money is, by this definition of yours, impious 
and false and sacrilegious, because a decree was passed 
10. q. 3, "This you — ",' and there it was forbidden that 
more than has been mentioned be exacted from the parish 
priests. Time would fail me if I tried to gather together 
all the absurdities that would spring from this doughty 
principle of yours if it be not invalidated. Yet I beg you 
meanwhile to reflect how illusory and feeble those things are 
which are devised by a man however wise, if they be not 
according to the rule of the divine will and Scriptures. 
And this, if you will excuse me for saying so, has come upon 
you often, here and in other parts of this admonitory docu- 
ment. For when a little while before you had brought for- 
ward the words of Christ [Matt, xii., 30], "He that gathereth 
not with me, scattereth abroad," I began to look with 
eager attention to see whether you were getting ready to 
try to urge me, as you ought, to direct all my efforts more 
vigorously and strongly towards Christ. But it proved 
to be far otherwise. For, as I think, you brought the words 
in simply to support this aB,ioo}xa [principle] of yours, and 
how well you did it, I fancy is sufficiently clear from what 
I have said. Yea verily, I beg of you by the gods, what 
do you think is blasphemy, pray, if it does not seem to you 
blasphemy to attribute to a created being that which be- 
longs to God, to argue, or rather to trifle, in this way? — 
Christ said, "He that gathereth not with me, scattereth 
abroad," and then, not so much for the sake of satisfying 
one's desires as of showing them forth, to append "False and 
impious and sacrilegious is whatever is set up by the favour 
of man to the injury of the Church." Who does not see your 
sore point now ? For while in your earlier remarks you always 
coupled the Gospel or the Gospel teaching or Christ or the 
Lord or the mastery of the Gospel with your traditions, here 
at last pain forces you to leave off any such covering. Who 
does not see whence these groans and sighs emanate ? 

' Corpus iur. can., c. 4, c. x., qu. 3. 


256 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

XL. In saying ' ' non deiicere et impugnare dictat ratio, 
etc." for "deiciiendas et impugnandas esse, nature does not 
dictate this sudden casting off with hostile violence, etc.," 
you indulge in a Greek construction, and with such you 
have about as much to do, as a jackdaw with a harp. I 
come back to the subject. The traditions of our prede- 
cessors, as I said a little while ago, we all look upon with the 
more reverence the more they savour of the teaching of the 
Gospel and the Apostles, and the farther they are removed 
therefrom, the less we accept them. But as to myself, I 
have done and shall continue to do unmoved the exact 
opposite of what you accuse me of. For, to speak for the 
sake of illustration, when the sheep entrusted to me heard 
of the ordinance of excommunication established by Christ 
[Matt, xviii., 17], "If thy brother shall trespass against thee, 
etc.," they began presently to argue with me, saying, 
"Then if one does not sin he cannot be excommunicated. 
For a law is not to be understood in any other sense than 
what accords with the intent of the lawgiver." And if I 
had not wrestled with them with the most urgent entreaty 
not to make any ill-considered disturbance, they would have 
cast off the bonds of excommunication on the spot. I am 
speaking of that excommunication by which we are ex- 
communicated for a debt acquired by a loan or contract or 
in any other way. By this illustration you can see how 
fairly or unfairly I am considered a peacemaker or a sower 
of discord, when by pious prayers only I drive into line those 
who know that they are not bound by divine law to stay there, 
who might without harm to their consciences resist, partly be- 
cause they confidently trust the divine promises, partly be- 
cause they rely upon the freedom of their country and fear 
not every wind that blows. Hundreds of times I have said 
openly : " I beseech you by Jesus Christ, by our common faith, 
not to make any change rashly, but to show to all men by 
your endurance, if in no other way, that you are Christians, 
in that, on account of the weak brethren, you bear things 
that by Christ's law you do not need to bear. " 


Archeteles : Reply to Bishop's Admonition 257 

XLI. Here you are caught by your own tracks, O 
Shrewmouse, ' when, changing that number which alone is 
becoming to our Most Reverend Lord and which alone he 
has been in the habit of using, you come down to the singular 
and say, "For I do not admit that those people should here 
be listened to." For you never would have done this, 
unless you had meant to show by this mark that you were 
the author of this hasty ^ effusion, just as the reported maker 
of the shield of Pallas worked in an image of himself so 
cleverly at the top of the shield, that if it were erased or 
removed the shield itself would fall apart. But to draw 
your portrait more distinctly, so that you cannot think 
yourself unknown, I will say, you are he who once talked 
over many things with me privately, ^ and on another oc- 
casion you so far forgot yourself as to say that speech was 
a bodily exercise. For I remember the words still. And 
when all who were there laughed at you, ye gods, with what 
a labyrinth of words you tried to uphold the statement! 
How you contracted your brow and with what an angry look 
you tried to dispel the laughter! Yet to this extent I 
congratulate you that you are so great (in your own estima- 
tion at least) that even the good respect your anger, albeit 
influenced more by politeness than by your frown. I bid 
you, therefore, whoever you are, to refrain from the false 
charges with which you have been soothing your soul, and 
cease struggling so senselessly and obstinately against the 
revival of Christianity, or rr}v Xeovrffv [the lion's skin] will 
be stripped off you rather roughly, and you will repent when 
it is too late. Be it enough to have been pardoned three 
times. No one will be able to endure much longer your 
hiding yourself, like a cuttle-fish, in your own inky blackness. 
The good and also learned will at length seize their brushes 
and paint you in your true colours. But things will be all 

' Reference to the Vicar-General Johannes Faber. 

»0r is it a misprint for "delightful" (which he uses elsewhere) — festinse 
for festivae? — H. P. 

sZwingli writing to Beatus Rhenanus on October 12, 1520, alludes to this 
visit of Faber {Werke, n. e., vii., 354). 

17 


258 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

right, if you return to wisdom, or at least cease making up 
charges and stirring up our most pious bishop. Therefore, 
I urge you to come to yourself. For so far is it from my 
intending to yield to your attacks that I pray that, if I 
ever have to fight, I may have no other foe than you, 
though, on the other hand, I shall set no small value on your 
friendship, if you will take on again a spirit worthy of you. 
Now I will return to the question. 

XLII. Who is so dull as to hold the same opinion in 
regard to the Apostles and to false apostles? From whom 
has this been heard among those who at this time are treating 
the teaching of Christ simply and sincerely? From no one 
surely except those who have set up their own abomination 
in the place of God. These are they who venture to spout 
things like these — "Who, pray, were the Evangelists? 
Who the Apostles? Were they not men? They could slip 
then, and go wrong and be mistaken. The Spirit of God 
is ever the same and can inspire some Thomas ' in the latter 
days as well as the Sauls and Simons in the beginning." 
As if the Evangelists had handed down their own notions to 
us, after the fashion of your crowd, and did not assign to 
Christ alone all that they did, and write only what he did 
and what he taught. As if the Apostles had loaded the 
people with burdens like those of the false apostles. The 
Apostles preached the teachings of Christ in all their purity, 
for they raised the consciences cast down with terror at their 
sins up to good hope through the word of Christ which cannot 
deceive. To-day certain persons preach human ravings 
most wantonly, and try to frighten minds truly free, teach- 
ing that there is sin where there is no sin, and most cruelly 
murdering the soul. The Apostles taught that the Son of 
God out of pure generosity did not so much pardon the sins 
of all as give himself up as an expiatory offering for all. 
The false apostles preach to-day that no sin is so slight that 
it does not need to be washed out by human reparation. 
Peter suffered not that Cornelius should think him anything 

' Aquinas. 


Archeteles : Reply to Bishop's Admonition 259 

more than man, saying "Stand up ; I myself also am a man. " 
[Acts X., 26.] The false apostles demand almost divine 
honours, and like Domitian suffer themselves to be called 
Lord God. The Apostles taught men only to recognise the 
grace of God, and its fulness brought to them through 
Christ. The false apostles cease not to shove upon the 
shoulders of men heavy and unbearable burdens, and com- 
pel them to buy off their wrongdoings for money as if they 
were merchandise, or, if there is no money, with clothing 
and food and drink or even their hearthstones. They spare 
not the orphan nor the widow. They must have money in 
any case, for they say God cannot be appeased without it. 
Go now and declare that the teaching of the Apostles can 
fall into such suspicion as that of the false apostles. As if 
any one were so stupid as not to see plainly what has been 
freely transmitted to us from the divine goodness by the 
Apostles, and what on the other hand has proceeded from 
human greed through hypocrisy. 

XLIII. By general councils I do not know whether you 
wish the four to be understood which certain persons teach 
should be taken on the same footing as the Gospel, or all 
such councils. If the former, I should not want to detract 
at all from their value, though I cannot see how it is right 
to wish them regarded as of equal authority with the Gospel. 
Let those see to this who proclaim the doctrine. If you 
mean all general councils, I will ask you whether you hold 
that all should be held authoritative and kept with scrupulous 
care. If you say "Yes, " I beg you to explain this difficulty, 
whether we must side with those who, according to di. 25, 
26, 28, and 29,^ have decided that a bishop should be hus- 
band of one wife, or with those who at the suggestion of 
evil spirits forbid his marriage. Shall we not have to go 
back to Scripture here? For John bids us not to believe 
every spirit, but to try the spirits, whether they are of God 
[I. John iv., i]. But by what touchstone shall we try them 
other than that which has become the head of the comer 

' Corpus iur. can., Dist. xxv., xxvi., xxviii., xxix. 


26o j The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

[Ps. cxviii., 22; Matt, xxi., 42; Mark xii., 10], which was re- 
jected of men, but chosen of God? He says that chastity 
cannot be required of a man unless it be given him from 
above. Therefore the Scriptures will be above the councils. 
For where the councils are at variance with each other there 
is no other way than by the Holy Scriptures of deciding 
which council comes nearer to the Scripture standard. 
And this method was always adopted by the men of old. 
And those Canons which are in harmony with the Scripture 
(for this alone is free from the possibility of deceit, as your 
own decrees hold di. 9. c. "I — ") ' will, of course, have to be 
accepted, and those not in such harmony will have to be 
rejected. I ask, I say, whether we ought now to obey the 
council which permits marriage to bishops or that which 
refuses it. You will say, no doubt, "That which refuses it, " 
But I oppose to this the Synod of Gangra which pronounces 
anathema against him who holds that it is not lawful for a 
bishop to marry, and if you try it by the touchstone of the 
Gospel, the Gospel confirms this and Paul assents to it. If 
therefore this is to be done away by violent human ordinance, 
is not the divine forced to yield to the human? And what 
more dreadful abomination than this can be found? As if 
we wanted to patch up the divine with the human and 
so make complete what was imperfect before. For this 
is what you maintain, O jueXavovpe [black fish]. I am 
going to direct my remarks solely to you now. You once 
said (you know where yourself) that Christ [John xvi., 12] 
said, " I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye can- 
not bear them now, " for the purpose of reserving some parts 
of his testament to be afterwards spread abroad by Thomases 
and Scotuses. Hear what an impious thing it was to say: 
The Apostles were sad because they had heard that one 
of their own company should betray Christ, and because, 
though they had listened to his divine sayings, many of 
them had not sunk into the depths of their minds, for their 
sorrow prevented, when they heard the list of the evils to 

' Corpus iur. can., C. 5, Dist. ix. 


Archeteles : Reply to Bishop's Admonition 261 

come upon them. Therefore, they heard many things to 
no purpose, and when Christ observed this, he preferred 
to put off the explanation of some things till the coming 
of the Holy Ghost, that he should make more intimately 
known to them the things they had not understood, and 
should refresh their memory of what he had said. For 
he had said [John xiv., 26] ' ' he shall bring all things to your re- 
membrance, whatsoever I have said unto you." So, here 
you have the word "you," that is, the Apostles, of course, 
not Thomases, Scotuses, Bartholuses, Balduses. ' He added 
afterwards those words which you quote from chapter xvi., 
and distort to the detriment of the truth. For having said, 
"I have yet many things to say to you," to you Apostles, 
I say, he added: "Howbeit when he, the spirit of truth, is 
come , he will guide you into all truth ' ' [John xvi .,13]. " You 
he said, not "some," disciples of Aristotle rather than of 
Christ. But if the truth cannot lie, as it cannot, then the 
Holy Ghost guided you into all truth, O Apostles, so that 
you should understand more clearly the things that you 
had not thoroughly taken in before, and should boldly 
enter upon things which otherwise you would never have 
dared to begin, and should foretell under his inspiration 
things which no man knew were to happen. He made clear, 
then, to the Apostles by the guide of the Spirit, as he had 
promised, those things which they had not been able before 
to bear or understand. You see again how unfortunate you 
are when you turn over the Scriptures. I advise you to 
do nothing for some time but study carefully the way the 
learned treat them, and not take them into your hands on 
any point without a guide. Otherwise it may easily come 
about that you fall into some great and fatal bliinder. 

' Bartolus, bom at Sassoferrato, in the Mark Ancona, Central Italy, 1313; 
died in Perugia, 1359, where he has a magnificent tomb in the church of San 
Francesco. He was the most famous of the dialectical school of jurists, and 
taught in Perugia University. 

Baldus de Ubaldis, bom 1319, 1324, or 1327, at Perugia; died at Pavia, 
1400 or 1406. He was the most famous pupil of Bartolus, and taught in 
Bologna, Perugia, Pisa, Padua, and Pavia. 


262 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

But that you may see how thoroughly worthless those things 
are that we fashion with a notion of offering something better 
than the divine, I will put things to you thus: That the 
New Testament is the most excellent that God is ever likely 
to bestow upon the race of man, you do not, I think, deny. 
If you deny it, read chapter viii. of Paul to the Hebrews, or 
rather the whole Epistle, and you will soon be ashamed of 
your denial. Now if Christ gave us that in incomplete 
form, he was evidently far inferior to Moses, who so thor- 
oughly completed the Old that he forbade that anything 
be added or taken away [Deut. iv., and xii.]. Furthermore, if 
what was lacking was not added until the boggy utterances 
of Durandus^ and the dicta of Scotus, the earlier genera- 
tions had it in incomplete form until about the last three 
hundred years. The Apostles transmitted it unfinished, 
Christ, the Son of God, equal and like unto the Father in all 
respects, transmitted it unfinished. And what more blas- 
phemous than that can be said? Yet they say nothing else 
who, under this pretext, as I have said, make human tra- 
ditions equal or superior to the divine law, or maintain that 
they are necessary for salvation. Therefore they are 
blasphemous towards God, towards the Apostles, and to- 
wards the Fathers whom they champion with such zeal. 
But that you may understand me still better, listen. If 
without certain decretals of the councils, or the opinions of 
certain Sophists, one cannot be saved, then the Apostles 
were not saved, and the first fruits of the Christians were 
certainly not saved. For they did not have these decretals, 
they did not have these opinions, which are hardly yet 
clearly set forth. See whither you are taking yourself 
or rather whither truth is pushing you. Hence, in fact, our 
whole battle to-day is nothing but what Christ mentions in 
Luke [xvi., 14 ff.], "And the Pharisees also, who were covetous, 
heard all these things; and they derided him. And he said 

' Bishop of Meaux, twenty-eight miles east of Paris. He was the chief 
representative of the Nominalists. He was bom at St. Pourgain, eighty-five 
miles north-west of Lyons, about 1275; died at Meaux, 1334. 


Archeteles : Reply to Bishop's Admonition 263 

unto them, Ye are they which justify yourselves before men : 
but God knoweth your hearts: for that which is highly 
esteemed among men is abomination in the sight of God. " 
Expound this passage to me, good Brother. You will doubt- 
less find that we worship God in vain with the teachings 
and commandments of men. For a Christian ought to be 
"dead from these rudiments" and ought not to set up 
ordinances, since they are of no value [Colos. ii., 20]. Who, 
therefore, will not look with reverence upon any councils, 
pray, if they are in conformity with the divine law? Yet 
it seems to me that those have the better opinion who say, 
"If the councils are in conformity with the divine law, what 
need is there of crediting them with what they have simply 
worked over, instead of crediting the Holy Scripture itself, 
which, according to Christ's words, has the greater testimony? 
For the testimony of God is greater than the testimony of 
man, so that even the testimony of John the Baptist yields to 
it [John v., 36]. But if the councils contradict the divine 
law, who will not presently bring forward that saying of 
the Apostle, "we ought to obey God rather than men"? 
[Acts v., 29.] Therefore, we. ought to be constantly on our 
guard lest something be set up some time that does not 
exactly square with the heavenly truth, which presents itself 
so simply that it can be easily grasped, and is so transparent 
and clear that it needs not to "receive honour from men" 
[John v., 41]. Therefore this is the one guide and master 
necessary to settle anything that may have come into 
dispute. Let them have done, therefore, who think that in 
these days any disagreement which arises among Christians 
as to the authority of Scripture can be settled by the councils 
of certain blind bishops, without doing all things under the 
lead of Scripture alone, which proceedeth from God and not 
from human desires. And by Scripture I mean not the 
letter which kills but the spirit that giveth life. I greatly 
fear, however, that what follows shortly after the words 
of Christ quoted above can be said of some of these people, 
namely, "But I know you, that ye have not the love of 


264 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

God in yourselves."^ You all, for I now come back to the 
whole group of you advisers, have the greatest reason to fear 
that those words may be justly applied by somebody to the 
Most Reverend Hugo, namely, that under your instigation 
he seems to love his coffers better than Christ, and to be 
looking out for wealth rather than salvation. But he will 
undoubtedly do the latter if you urge him to favour before 
all things the making the divine will and purpose as clear 
as possible to all men by the preaching of the Gospel. For 
in this way you will make his name worthy of heaven and 
immortality. But, wretched me! Why do I waste my 
labour and materials ? ^ As if what pinches you through the 
whole course of your remarks were not clearer than light 
even to the purblind, though you imagine that you conceal 
it so nicely! The Most High God grant that the clouds 
may be scattered at last and that you may see the clear 
light ! Amen. And may you not continue to force our ex- 
cellent bishop to limp with both feet! Amen. But may 
you suffer him to run up rightly and without offence in 
the way and the law of God, untrammelled by the burden 
of human traditions! Amen and Amen. 

XLIV. With regard to those who are commended to 
us as much by their lives as by their teaching, read your 
sacred Canons di. 9. c. "I — . "^ Thus you will find that in 
Augustinus's opinion you ought to have unhesitating con- 
fidence in those only who are the authors of those Scriptures 
which are called Canonical (and these are those which are 
contained in the Bible) ; other writers you should read with 
the feeling that, however pre-eminent they are for learning 
and holiness, what they write is not true because they in 
their holiness and learning believed it, but because by the 
power of the Canonical Scriptures they were able to convince 
their hearers of the truth of what not they themselves but 
the Spirit of God breathing in their words approved. Lo, 
here you have the Scripture as master and teacher and 

'John v., 42. ^Plautus, Pmnulus, 332. 

3 Corpus iur. can., C. 5, Dist. ix. 


Archeteles : Reply to Bishop's Admonition 265 

guide, not the Fathers, not this misunderstood Church 
of certain people; and this you can read still more plainly a 
little farther on in the same di." c. "He who does not 
know" — ^And meantime I want you to bear this in mind, 
that I make use of your Canons simply on your own account ; 
for you seem to have as much confidence in them as in the 
Gospel or the teachings of the Apostles or the entire Scrip- 
tures bestowed upon mankind together by the divine good- 
ness. It is not because I or any one who trusts in the divine 
utterances can accept those Canons as weapons of attack, 
except so far as they are not at variance with the divine 
utterances. But what need will there then be of yielding 
to the Canons and not rather to the Holy Scriptures? 

XLV. Why, pray, do ye cling so tenaciously to cere- 
monials? You yourselves say they are to be kept only for 
a time. To what time do you postpone their abolition? 
Do you think we ought to pay no attention to the divine 
goodness now calling us away from these ceremonials? Do 
you suppose that anybody will have the courage ever to take 
up war against them again, if the present splendid intellects 
fail? Or that those are going to get off unscathed who 
display not so much indifference as hostility to the now 
budding Christianity? Have ye no fear of Him who said 
[Matt, xi., 23]: ''And thou, Capernaum, which art exalted 
unto heaven, shalt be brought down to hell : for if the mighty 
works, which have been done in thee, had been done in 
Sodom, it would have remained until this day. But I say 
unto you. That it shall be more tolerable for the land of 
Sodom in the day of judgment, than for thee"? Have ye 
no fear, I say, that he will sometime threaten the peoples 
of Germany also, if they let the present opportunity pass? — 
And thou, Germany, whose stout and valiant heart I have 
drawn away from the uproars of war unto true piety, and 
have enriched with all manner of learning because thou 
hadst strength great enough for every sort of study, that 
thou mightest with learning and skill cleanse religion of the 

^ Corpus iur. can., C. 8, Dist. ix. 


266 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

foul stains that some have cast upon it, and mightest trumpet 
it forth in all its purity, shall thy glory be exalted unto the 
heavens for this that thou didst, to be sure, make a begin- 
ning, but failed to carry the work through? Nay, verily. 
Thou shalt be brought down to hell, because thou hast 
disregarded the light coming into the world. For there is 
no nation so barbarous that it would have stmk down in such 
inactivity, if such opportunities had been offered it to es- 
tablish true religion upon a sound basis. But the judgment 
that shall fall upon the unbelieving citizens of Sodom shall 
be milder than that which falls upon thee, etc. Here again 
you see how your whole discourse is an attempt to draw 
away to some shadowy good those who have already learned 
to worship the Father in spirit and in truth. If ceremonials 
are to be kept for a time, they are to be done away with 
sometime. What hinders their being abolished now, 
especially as the world is looking for this and all the good and 
learned are moving in this direction? But you will say, 
Wait till the time when no doubt certain rvqiksnianonoi, 
[blind bishops] will suffer them to be done away with. Do 
ye think that those whose life is a drunken spree, whose god 
is their belly [Phil, iii., 19], whose mules and drinking cups, as 
well as their ceilings, are loaded with gold, are ever going to 
return to right feeling so far as to allow a thing to be done 
away with when that will lighten their plates and coffers? 
In that case we shall abolish without any trouble many things 
that contribute nothing to salvation, and though retained 
can never satisfy the insatiable desires of certain persons, 
unless they be lowered. Therefore, do cease crying out, 
"Ceremonials, ceremonials," for ye wiU talk to deaf ears. 

XLVI. Now for the first time we poor mortals learn that 
the Republic of Christ cannot exist without ceremonials, 
though it was never better off than at the time when there 
were the fewest possible ceremonials. We learn finally 
that the state cannot be carried on unless ipevdeTtiaKOTToi, 
[counterfeit bishops] purify the walls of the church with 
water and salt and ashes, grease the altars with holy oil, 


Archeteles: Reply to Bishop's Admonition 267 

and dip the bronze of the bells in holy water. For if these 
things were neglected, all political order would fall to the 
ground, as if before these things were accepted cities had not 
been admirably governed. I do not deny, nay, I assert, that 
the teachings of Christ contribute very greatly to the peace 
of the state, if indeed they are set forth in their purity. But 
now that certain hypocrites have begun to care for their 
chests and not for Christ, I do not know whether anything 
could have happened more fatal to the cities. For how can 
it be that such things as these shall make for peace and 
quiet? — "We are the priests, you are the laymen: we are the 
learned, you are the ignorant: the keys are ours, the empty 
purses yours: it is for us to pass our days in leisure, for you 
to earn your bread by the sweat of your brow : you must be 
kept from adultery, we shall revel freely in every sort of lust : 
you shall pay tribute and taxes, we will soothe our leisure 
with your offerings : you shall keep watch and guard at night, 
we will snore on careless and free to high day: you shall 
keep off the foe from the town, our religion forbids us to free 
our countrymen from danger. ' ' I know what you are going 
to say to this, but pray be silent. Do not all these things 
belong to the ceremonials without which you say cities totter? 
But that Christianity which I advocate is adapted to all 
cities, obeys the laws and the magistrates of the nation, pays 
taxes to whom taxes are due, tribute to whom tribute is due, 
rates to whom rates are due. Under it no one calls any 
possession his own, all things are held to be in common ; every 
one is eager to outdo his neighbour in kindnesses, to exercise 
all gentleness, to share his neighbour's burden, and relieve 
his need. For he regards all men as brothers, abhors blas- 
phemy, embraces piety and helps it to grow among all. But 
why continue? It was an empty rather than a true state- 
ment, nay it was one of jealousy, that without the cere- 
monials cities and states would totter and fall, and it was 
made only for the purpose of rousing among the people 
hatred and resistance to the preaching of the Gospel. See 
how far from your style of speech the words of the false 


268 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

witnesses against Stephen were [Acts vi., 13]. "This man 
ceaseth not to speak blasphemous words against this holy 
place, and the law: For we have heard him say, that this 
Jesus of Nazareth shall destroy this place, and shall change 
the customs which Moses delivered us. ' ' Now I will add 
your words, "For thus all political order would fall to the 
ground.'' What would follow, I leave you to consider. 

XLVII. I do not deny that the things which have been 
decreed by the general consent of all should be observed, 
but by those who decreed them, and only when they have 
received really the consent of all, and how far this seems to 
yourselves true in the present case is made quite clear by 
what follows. 

XLVIII. "Or at least acceded to." From this term 
"acceded to" it appears that you mean things which certain 
people by the persistent use of their power have forced upon 
the simple body of Christians against their will and their 
remonstrances even. For after things came to such a pass 
that the Pontiffs declared themselves to be lords of all 
things, including the right to make laws at their own sweet 
will, and even claimed infallibility for themselves, what did 
they not venture to command? And, on the other hand, who 
was likely to court misfortune so far as to offer resistance, 
especially when the simple-minded crowd whom they 
vigorously oppressed, though not without the desire to 
rebel, yet did not dare to utter a murmur? Yet what is the 
use of refuting these things at length when it is clearer than 
light in these days of ours how that general consent came 
about or how the ceremonials were acceded to (to use your 
word)? For we see the things that you wish to make 
appear decreed by general consent cried out against by the 
crowd, and what you call accepted rejected. There you have 
your " general consent " and your "acceded to." Almost 
the whole business was done by command, and that with a 
wanton persistency not dictated by the spirit of Christ. 
For to bring forward one example out of thousands, no one 
objects to pious prayers in the consecration of churches, 


Archeteles : Reply to Bishop's Admonition 269 

but no one approves of superstitious punctiliousness. 
Every one naturally abhors extortion, abhors your Canons, 
abhors the oaths taken. And now, when such vast sums of 
money are extorted for ceremonials of this kind, you say that 
general consent or acceptance has been accorded, when 
nothing is less true. I will tell you here a thing that hap- 
pened a few days ago, that you may see how truly assent is 
given in the exaction of money for consecrating churches. 
A certain suffragan ' dedicated a certain church ^ and several 
altars in it— I do not wish to mention any names — and 
demanded as the price of the dedication twelve Rhenish gold 
pieces for the church, ten for the churchyard, and five for 
each of the altars. Then a priest ^ of more than usual spirit 
came forward and opposed to the performance Christ's 
words, "Freely ye have received, freely give" [Matt, x., 8], 
and said that the man was guilty of Simon's curse who ven- 
tured to sell the gifts of the Holy Spirit or thought they could 
be sold [Acts viii., 20]. Then that suffragan frowned, and said, 
"For this reason I will not treat with you in many words, 
because I fear running the risk of simony; therefore I will 
not make any bargain with you at all. " For thus the sacri- 
lege would be incurred, to which they have given the name 
of simony from Simon the sorcerer. "But," he continued, 
"I demand this amount of money of you, I do not bargain 
for it. " So these poor people were forced to borrow twenty- 
six gold pieces to pay that counterfeit bishop, in order, 
forsooth, not to fall into the sin of simony with him."* Here 
you see clearly whether these burdens are acceded to or 
ordered. That counterfeit bishop preferred to command 
the money rather than to bargain for it. Go now, and say 
that things are acceded to which certain people have ven- 
tured to command with so much pride and arrogance. I 

' Melchior Fattlin. ' That at Hettlingen in the canton of Zurich. 

5 Jacob AeberH, also called Wagner, pastor of Neftenbach, of which 
church that of Hettlingen was a branch. These names are given by Finsler, 
in loco, p. 310. 

'• The complaint of Faber about a similar matter of non-payment is given 
in EgU, Actensammlung, Nos. 459 (Dec. 15, 1523) and 541 (June 11, 1524). 


270 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

could tell hundreds of other things worthy of a smile about 
that suffragan — things that he has done or said, puffing 
himself up before the simple farmers, but my practice for- 
bids. Everything will sometime be brought out into the 
clear light, if those swindling lovers of darkness do not 
stop darkening the light. 

XLIX. Those who model their teachings upon the 
pattern of the Scriptures cannot be said to teach accord- 
ing to the whims of their own feelings, but those who go to 
work without resting on the authority of the sacred writings, 
contrary to Paul's directions to Timothy. For he gives him 
[II. Timothy iii., 14] the following admonition : "But continue 
thou in the things which thou hast learned and hast been 
assured of, knowing of whom thou hast learned them ; And 
that from a child thou hast known the holy scriptures, which 
are able to make thee wise unto salvation through faith 
which is in Christ Jesus." Timothy had learned from Paul, 
and Paul from Christ, but both had been led by the same 
spirit into the knowledge of holy things. In these Paul 
bids Timothy continue, but they continue not in these, who 
according to what you say carry on this business as suits 
their own sweet will. They continue therein who eimpo- 
alSpcog xai ddiaGndarisjg, that is, constantly and undividedly 
cling to them, in the same Paul's words, knowing that all 
sacred Scripture was inspired by God, and is valuable 
for teaching, arguing, guiding, and for the discipline which 
is founded on righteousness, so that a man of God is per- 
fectly finished and prepared unto every good work [II. Tim. 
iii., 15, etc.]. Those who give assent unto flesh and blood, 
regulate their teachings according to their own sweet will; 
those who give assent unto the spirit of God sweetly breath- 
ing from the Holy Scriptures and ever freshly blooming, 
regulate their teaching according to the thought and purpose 
of God. And He is by no means of recent origin, for the 
prophet called him the Ancient of days [Dan. vii. , 22] . They, 
therefore, who refer all things to His purpose, and examine 
all things by the standard of His thought, do not set up 


Archeteles : Reply to Bishop's Admonition 271 

a new standard, but go back to the old, old one, as Jeremiah 
also urges [vi., 16], "Stand ye in the ways, and see, and ask for 
the old paths, where is the good way, and walk therein, and 
ye shall find rest for your souls. " You see that rest will be 
found in the old standard, not in the new one, to which you 
cUng so obstinately, meanwhile accusing of innovations 
those who for this one thing alone urge war upon you and 
your likes, that they want to abrogate innovations too freely 
introduced and to restore the old by right of recovery, as it 
were. And this is lawful according to your own Canons 
[Dist. 9 "He who does not know — "].' There, to touch but 
briefly upon each point, you have put into the canon that 
ypacpi) deoTtvevffTog, that is, a Scripture inspired of God, is 
to stand forever unshaken, but things written by the bishops 
can be torn out not only by councils but by anybody of any 
learning, provided such writings contain anything at vari- 
ance with the divinely inspired. I have determined, how- 
ever, if God will and if He shall duly inspire me, to write 
a special book upon this subject, to wit, upon the force and 
the use of the Holy Scriptures. ^ For we often use the sacred 
words very perversely. 

L. If every word from the beginning of the Gospel had 
rested upon the voice of the crowd, where, pray, would 
Christianity be now? The Apostles were very few. And 
the Popes, how many nations and kingdoms have they 
converted to Christ, and Christ comforts them and encourages 
them to do it boldly without any hesitation because of their 
small number [Luke xii., 32]. "Fear not, little flock; for 
it is your Father's good pleasure to give you the kingdom." 
I might uncover here the marked foolishness which lies 
hidden under your words. For who of the heathen philoso- 
phers was ever so dull as to prefer the opinion of the crowd 
to the opinion of the few, of the wise few, of course? And 

' Corpus iur. can., C. 8, Dist. ix. 

'Reference to his sermon on "Clearness and Certainty of tJie Word of 
God," as his sermon which appeared on September 6, 1522, was called in the 
German. Gualther, in his Latin translation given in his edition of Zwingli's 
works, calls it De certitudine et claritale verbi dei liber. _ 


272 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

what should we come to, if we rested to-day on the opinion of 
the crowd? Would it not be all up with you and with your 
teachings? Of so little moment ye think it whether ye 
spit out whatever comes into your head! I might treat 
you, I say, vastly less considerately and I have a right to, 
but I prefer to spare you, for I have a great hope that you 
will come back to yourselves and sing a palinode. 

LI. "At least," you add "when they are not incon- 
sistent with the divine law." Here I confess I do not 
understand you. If you are speaking of those midway 
things which in the view of the philosophers are neither 
good nor bad, why do you drag in such trifles here, where 
Christ's work is the matter in hand? Again, what have you, 
who call yourselves the champions of Christianity, to do 
with those people ? He who gathereth not unto this , scattereth 
abroad. But how can you seem to gather unto Christ, 
when you gather unto that "which is at least not inconsistent 
with the divine law"? He that is not with Christ is against 
him. Therefore, if you are with these midway things, 
you are not with Christ. For Christ has nothing to do with 
the world. But if you wish to be understood as referring to 
laws which you admit are not of divine origin nor good, and 
which you yet say are not bad, what have you to do with such 
laws? Has any jurisdiction been entrusted to you over 
boundaries and aqueducts and rain water and neighbourhood 
rights? But even such ordinances I maintain have a sacred 
character when they correspond to the gauge of the divine 
will. Through their means justice can be administered and 
the peace secured which is Christ. Do ye think your real 
thought can still be hidden? Take away the treasure 
chambers and you will have done away with these enig- 
matical utterances. And I do not grant you that the 
treasure chamber is not inconsistent with the divine law, 
for it is contrary to love of one's neighbour. For he is 
deceived by certain counterfeit rites, is plundered and 
stripped, while the hypocrites devour widows' houses, 
and for a pretence make long prayer. Read Matthew xxiii., 


Archeteles : Reply to Bishop's Admonition 273 

14, and you will find what the nature of those things is which 
you declare to be not inconsistent with the divine law. 
But, thank God, you have got so far that the things you 
were a little while ago venturing to palm off as of God, you 
are now satisfied to call by this made up and unintelligible 
middle name — "things which are at least not inconsistent 
with the divine law," Furthermore, not to discuss too 
long with you here, know that the whole law which you have 
undertaken to defend is holy. For, according to Paul's 
authority, it proceeded from God [Rom. vii., 12], "wherefore 
the law is holy, and the commandment holy, and just, and 
good." Thus this fiction of yours about the things which 
are not inconsistent with the divine law amounts to nothing, 
for whatever is good proceedeth from God [James i., 17], 
"Every good gift and every perfect gift is from above, and 
cometh down from the Father of lights." Hence, if these 
things of yours proceeded from God, they are good. If 
they did not proceed from God, as, according to your own 
testimony, they did not, then they are bad. If ye are priests 
of Christ, proclaim the law of Christ, that is good, holy, and 
everlasting. If ye are preachers of vanities, why sit ye in the 
holy place? The things that have not proceeded from God, 
but from man, are bad. For the good is good only through 
one characteristic and source, to wit, that it is from God, 
the fountain of all good. Otherwise we should be obliged 
to admit several fountains of good. For, if anything good 
could come out of man or out of any created thing, then the 
created thing would be a fountain and source of good, and 
it would not be true that every good and excellent gift 
is from God or that all things have been given unto the- Son 
of God by the Father. 

LI I. When I came upon this beautiful comparison with 
the sailors, I wondered greatly where in the world you could 
have got it. And as I was thinking about it a certain 
learned gentleman who was there said that he had read 
much the same words in a collection of letters. There- 
fore, I beg of you, if this is the state of the case, return 

18 


274 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

the thing immediately, before you are branded with the 
mark of theft. But as to the matter itself, I readily agree 
that a difference is unpleasing to you which you see is 
Hkely to fall out to your loss, and that you very greatly 
desire that all your opponents should yield to you, and 
reasonably. For you are held in high esteem by the un- 
tutored rabble both for your titles of honour and the reputa- 
tion for that learning which you have dnmk from the 
swamps of the Scotuses and Thomases. But, ah me, lend 
me your ear a moment. If you see a quarrel going on among 
the shipmasters, in whose number I take it ye are to be 
reckoned, why do you not yourselves yield? Is it because 
you think, as I have said, that all must yield to you and you 
to none? Or is it because you think you alone sail by the 
Pole-star, while everybody else is wandering all about the 
sky? But this would be pretty presumptuous and arrogant. 
For you also are men who can slip and go astray and be 
mistaken. But if you grant this, it were surely unfair to 
want everybody to yield to you unless you shall have first 
learned to yield to the Scriptures, and so the thing comes 
back to the Scriptures for decision, and if any one handles 
them properly he does not have to yield, as I have shown 
over and over again already. Therefore if I have anywhere 
handled the Scriptures improperly, you ought to have 
pointed that out. That you have never done, but all your 
remarks savour of that thing from the satire writer, "Such 
is my will and bidding. Be my pleasure reason enough."^ 
On the other hand, if I have handled the Scriptures according 
to Christ's intentions, it will be your business to yield, and 
to cease from wranglings and strife, as you say, and to lend 
both ear and mind to the advancement of reviving Christ- 
ianity, and to suffer the iron sinews of your neck to be 
softened by receiving the yoke of the Lord. For if with 
brazen brow ye try to charge upon and throw down the 
brazen wall of which Jeremiah speaks [i., i8, and xv., 20], 

' Juvenal, Satires VI., line 223, where the text has hoc instead of the first 


Archeteles : Reply to Bishop's Admonition 275 

ye shall come upon a stone of offence, and if the stone shall 
fall upon you, it shall grind you to powder. Mark these 
things carefully, I beg. On most of them enough has been 
said above. 

LIII. When you desire to reach " some sort of " a harbour, 
what, pray, do you mean by this expression "some sort of" 
except that there are many harbours, not one harbour only? 
Look to it yourselves whether this is a pious remark. I will 
not suggest that by this term of yours you are representing 
certain commonplace and despicable harbours. If you are 
people who may not be contradicted, come, show us a sure 
harbour and goal. But I know what your difficulty is. 
There is a discussion as to whether we ought to obey the 
divine or the human. Here you are between the devil and 
the deep sea, for if you say that the human ought to yield 
to the divine, the treasure chamber falls and vain titles 
fall ; if you say the divine ought to yield to the human, you 
fall yourselves into the depths of impiety. Why prolong 
the discussion? Did Christ come into this world to show 
us some sort of a harbour, and not a sure and safe one? 
Does he not say that man lives by the word of God and 
that he is worshipped in vain by the teachings and com- 
mandments of men? And when the Apostles said, "How 
can we know the way?" did he not reply, "I am the way, 
the truth, and the life"? [John xiv., 6.] If he is the way, 
why do ye not walk in him? If the truth, why do ye not 
trust in him? If the life, why do ye not seek life in him, in- 
stead of getting up "some sort of " a harbour? I might quote 
hundreds of passages from the Gospel writings, to show the 
impiety of that expression, but I will sound the recall. 
The Gospel, those good and glad tidings of the grace of 
God, confers upon poor mortals this blessing above all others, 
that it leads them to a sure harbour of salvation, which 
otherwise is absolutely unknown. So much for that fine and 
modest "some sort of." 

LIV. Who is this one person? Is it Christ? But in 
him "are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge" 


276 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

[Col. ii., 3]. But he "of God is made unto us wisdom and 
righteousness and sanctification and redemption." [I. Cor. 
i., 30.] Is it another such? I know no other God but this 
one only, though many, at the cost of salvation, receive 
Him not. Is it some man? Have no fear. As a little 
while ago, in regard to strife, I argued with you at length, 
to prevent your falling into the mistake of thinking that 
everything must be yielded to yourselves, so now I am 
minded to regard it as very unsafe to swear allegiance to 
any human master, however learned;' For ''cursed be the 
man that trusteth in man, and maketh flesh his arm!" 
Qer. xvii., 5.] 

LV. If counsels are sounder they ought undoubtedly 
to be followed. But I rest not upon the counsels of men, 
but upon the purpose and will of God. For if we neglect 
His will knowingly we shall be beaten with many stripes 
[Luke xii., 47]. 

LVI. You said "councils" here for "counsels," but I 
would not have you put down this criticism to a carping 
spirit. Your whole discourse is so incorrect and so hope- 
lessly misspelled, that unless I had designedly covered over 
certain things, you would have become a laughing stock to 
every one of any sort of education. I am not sure, therefore, 
whether it was a slip or real ignorance that caused you to 
write "councils" for "counsels." If you will examine this 
whole section carefully, you will find it bristling with 
solecisms. 

LVII. Without loss of his soul no man disregards Christ. 
For ' ' he that is not with [Christ] is against [him] : and he that 
gathereth not with [him], scattereth" [Luke xi., 23], as I 
think you have heard by this time to the point of nausea. 
Now, no obstinate attempt is made to drag elsewhere but 
rather to Christ. For they drag elsewhere who call away 
from Christ to created beings. And further, those to whom 
a talent has been entrusted may not snore in idleness, but 
must labour with unremitting activity, that when the Lord 

'Horace, EpisL, [., i, 14. 


Archeteles : Reply to Bishop's Admonition 277 

cometh and demandeth an accounting they may deserve 
to hear ' ' Well done, good and faithful servants, ' ' etc. In sea- 
son and out of season must they be compelled to come in 
to the feast [Luke xiv,, 23], But since we have come to speak 
of this passage, to which certain persons [so Augustine] do 
violence, saying, "Lo, here we have Christ saying 'compel 
them to come in' ; therefore the unyielding must be overcome 
by force and authority," I wish to rescue the passage from 
the continuance of this abuse. First, therefore, we see that 
a single servant was sent to compel them to the f eas . , Now 
how could it have been that one man should compel a vast 
number, if he was to attempt it by force and authority, as 
these people wish ? Secondly, no one tries to drive a person 
to a banquet or supper by violence. That would be ex- 
ceedingly rude. Some people do, however, go so iinduly 
far in urging as unwittingly to tear one's cloak by pulling, 
so that one of the commonest proverbial expressions among 
the Germans is "to rend one's cloak." Still all this is done 
in the name of friendship and not of authority, at least such 
as that with which this crowd hold up their heads. Friend- 
ship, to be sure has an authority of its own. Hence, I 
think, it is clear that in the above mentioned parable from 
Luke xiv., 23, "compel to come in" means nothing more 
than if you say, "Press them very urgently to come to the 
feast." For it is not likely that he who said that his kingdom 
was not of this world, forgot himself here and commanded 
that unbelievers be forced to come to him by the use of 
authority and violence on the part of his servants, to the 
imending hatred of the bidders. It were rather as, in the 
last chapter of Luke, those two disciples whom he joined 
as they were going to Emmaus constrained him, urging 
him after the fashion of friends, and not with the violence 
with which the Jews had dragged him before the judgment 
seat. Now I come back to the path. Those who wander 
in the darkness must be persistently dragged to the light,, 
and compelled to come to the feast by words, not blows.. 
For this even the divine Paul holds [II. Timothy iv., 2j: 


278 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

"Preach the word; be instant in season, out of season; 
reprove, rebuke, exhort with all long-suffering and doctrine. 
For the time will come when they will not endure sound 
doctrine ; but after their own lusts shall they heap to them- 
selves teachers, having itching ears; and they shall turn 
away their ears from the truth, and shall be turned unto 
fables. " Do you hear with whom one must labour in sea- 
son and out of season? Nor can you make the objection 
that there is no need of urging out of season in our day, for 
you see all wickedness standing on the brink, and every- 
thing ready to fall into the depths of impiety. For I call 
it the depth of impiety, when we are turned from God to 
created things, when we accept the human for the divine, 
disregarding or even scorning the divine, and yet I have so 
far seen no one who cried out against this wickedness as it 
deserves. Though ears be so tender that they fear to hear 
a stinging truth, nay, resist and cry out, yet are they not 
on this acount to be forever humoured. And the gainsay ers 
are to be vigorously convinced by the sound doctrine of the 
Gospel truth [Tit. i., 9]. 

LVIII. You think some allowance ought to be made for 
those who err with good intentions, and I think so too, if 
only the intention is good. It is an error with the best of 
intentions to think it unlawful to eat meat during Lent; 
it is an error with the worst of intentions not to point out 
to a Christian people the blessings that have been given unto 
them by God. For it is for this that we have received the 
spirit which is of God, not the spirit of the world [I Corinth, 
ii., 12]. For thus were the grace of God cast away or weak- 
ened [Galat. ii., 21]. Again, it is an error with the worst 
of intentions to say that if the chief Pontiff should bring 
down all souls to hell, yet could he not be deposed or pun- 
ished; no man can even wink at errors like these and at 
the same time have good intentions. But as to the kind of 
errors you are talking about, to wit, the errors of ceremonials, 
hear what Paul says [Rom. xiv., i] : "Him that is weak in the 
faith receive ye," that is, take him in a pious spirit, deal 


Archeteles : Reply to Bishop's Admonition 279 

with him gently, teach him, do not deceive him with enig- 
matical doctrines. You have it here clearly stated that 
those who are weak ought not to be left in their weakness 
by those who are stronger, but ought to be received with 
pious teaching of the faith. Now whose duty do ye think 
this is? That of the more vigorous and more learned, 
no doubt, such as you are certainly thought to be by people 
in general. Therefore understand that it was your duty 
to fashion your discourse in this way: "O happy beings, to 
whom this great blessing is freely offered! For a time we 
were darkness, but now it is given us by the goodness of 
God to become light [cf. Eph. v., 8]. Ye have thought us 
learned, but if we had any learning it was imperfect and 
feeble, and that which was not wholly pure we did not ven- 
ture to put forth for fear of evil results. Now that the 
truth is disclosing itself on all sides, take care not to miss 
it wherever it appears, and embrace it without dissenting 
voice, lest while some delay, and some obstruct, and some 
throw it away, it may be lost altogether, and your last 
state be worse than the first. For a neglected warning from 
God has ever caused great disaster, ' ' or something of this 
sort. As it is, when you cling so tenaciously to ceremonials 
and exert yourselves so in their defence, what do ye but 
hinder the truth? Be it said without malice. For by your 
own words ye weaken the power of ceremonials, and yet 
you champion preserving them till some indefinite time, 
though they might without any risk whatever be abolished 
simply by sound teaching. And they will be abolished all 
the same, though you struggle against it. Therefore, I 
advise you to do as they say Julius Caesar did, when he saw 
that he could not escape death. He took care to gather the 
edge of his garments about him that he might fall in a 
suitable manner. So should you now that you see cere- 
monials tottering and almost ready to fall, strive to cause 
them to fall as fitly as possible — that is, not let them hold on 
so obstinately. You should immediately see to it how light 
can most speedily be let into the place of shadows. So 


28o The Works of Huldreich Zvvingli 

will poor mortals not only feel no grief at the loss of cere- 
monials, but greatly rejoice that they have found the light 
so long denied them. In short, if ye put new wine into 
old bottles, the bottles will break, nor can the garment 
of Christ, which hath no seam, receive a patch of fresh cloth 
[Matt, ix., 17]. 

LIX. That a universal error has the force of right I am 
not inclined to allow even to unbelievers, much less to Christ- 
ians. For Christ could not bear that men should wander 
in error [Matt, ix., 36], and Peter congratulates us because 
a little while ago we "were as sheep going astray, but are 
now returned unto the Shepherd and Bishop of [our] souls" 
[I. Pet. ii., 25]. And do you venture to take up again the 
defence of error, when even your own Canons cry out 
against it [di. 83']? — "The error which is not objected to is 
approved, and the truth when not vigorously championed 
is crushed." See whither your blind malice leads you, 
namely, to forgetting yourselves and your own teachings, 
and to embracing certain empty trifles that nobody of any 
intelligence can stand. But I do not want to brandish 
my pen at you here, however much you deserve it. For 
I think it is clear enough and to spare to everybody how 
feebly, not so say treacherously, you are defending your 
side and your doctrines. 

LX, But what are these new doctrines? The Gospel? 
Why, that is 1522 years old. The teachings of the Apostles? 
Why, they are almost as old as the Gospel. Those of the 
patriarchs and the prophets? Why, these are even older than 
the Sibyl's. Therefore, I beg of you to call things by their 
right names, so that we can be on our guard against these 
things that are so dangerous. But we shall do that in any 
case by this procedure. We shall try everything by the 
touchstone of the Gospel and by the fire of Paul. And 
when we find things in harmony with the Gospel, we shall 
keep them, when we find things not thus in harmony, we 
shall throw them out. Those who are thus deprived of 

' Corpus iur. can., C. 3, Dist. Ixxxiii. 


Archeteles : Reply to Bishop's Admonition 281 

some of their ill-gotten gains may shriek as much as they like. 
We shall not listen to these Stentors, and shall pass with 
deaf ear by the Sirens. For "we ought to obey God rather 
than men" [Acts v., 29]. But what am I doing, as if it were 
not clear what doctrines you hold to be new? 

LXI. How this word "to rule" the Church of God 
pleases you! In Acts xx., whence you quoted it, some com- 
mentators put it in for "to feed, " with damage to the sense. 
For Paul speaks thus to the bishops of the Ephesians, "Take 
heed, therefore, unto yourselves and to all the flock, over the 
which the Holy Ghost hath made you overseers, to feed the 
Church of God, which he hath purchased with his own blood " 
[Acts XX., 28]. Here you have the flock, the overseers, 
the congregation to be fed, not ruled, the congregation, not 
of man, but of God, because he won it by his blood. Why 
do ye use such an arrogant word? Shepherds, or feeders, 
feed, not rule. 

LXn. Now since the Church was won for God by the 
blood of Christ ("For we were bought with the precious 
blood of the lamb without blemish," that is, Christ [I. Pet. i., 
19]), what reason is there why certain persons should scorn 
us who are of the flock of Christ, and not only not regard us 
as Christians but not even as men? They are not satisfied, 
if through our kindness they are allowed to devote themselves 
to the care of their bodies at their leisure, unless they reduce 
us to slavery. But this is in violent opposition to the words 
of Paul when he. says [I. Corinth, vii., 23], "Ye are bought 
with a price; be not ye the servants of men." What is the 
reason, I say, why this favour is never proclaimed, namely, 
that we are bought with the precious blood of Christ ? Why 
are all things filled with false promises to squeeze out money? 
That were the way in which we could best be kindled to the 
love of God and a state of grace. We boast, indeed, of the 
blood of Christ that has been shed for us, but if any one, 
relying upon that, confidently believes that God will forgive 
his sins forever for Christ's sake, we straightway proclaim 
him a heretic! Stick closely to this expression which has 


282 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

fallen from you by design or accident, gentlemen, that 
Christ won the Church by his own blood. For it is the 
formula of salvation. Whoever, therefore, confidently 
believes it, belongs to that Church of Christ which he 
won by his blood. For faith alone is the ground of salva- 
tion. He who believes shall not see death forevermore 
[John viii., 51]. Strive to be reckoned in that Church which 
is sprinkled with the blood of Christ, that ye may hold 
in hatred the Church of the wicked. What have ye to do 
with the Church that rests on flesh and blood? 

LXIII. If nothing is to be altered or changed, why has 
the communion been altered that used to be given under 
both forms, according to the institution of Christ and the 
usage of the Apostles? Or rather why has it been mutilated? 
Why has the fiinction of bishop been changed into that of 
prince ? Why is marriage forbidden [to the clergy] ? Why are 
hundreds of other things altered? Christ and the Apostles 
and the general opinion are all opposed thereto. Are ye 
mightier than God, that ye have ventured to forbid what 
Christ left free? Or wiser than God, that ye complete what 
God inadvertently left unfinished? Or so stupid, that you 
think you are going to persuade consciences free in Christ 
not to regard as lawful what they know is lawful by the 
divine law, even though you shout till you are hoarse? 

LXIV. Yet you modify your remarks a little later 
after this fashion, "until those whom it concerns come 
together for the business of the Church, " etc. This I 
fancy, is likely to come about when "the Parthian drinks 
the Saone and Germany the Tigris. " ' For I want you to be 
convinced that in these days of ours there are going to be 
men who will rage against the champions of a purer Christian- 
ity as violently as in the days of old the Jews raged against 
Christ himself. For how can it be that those whose ceilings 
gleam with gold and their mules with gems and their at- 
tendants with silk, should voluntarily accept any limitation 
or reform in all these things? They would easily come to an 

' Vergil, Eclogues, i., 62. 


Archeteles : Reply to Bishop's Admonition 283 

agreement if they might order everything according to their 
own purposes and not according to the intent of Scripture, but 
this will certainly not be accepted by the world which is al- 
ready well instructed in the Gospel everywhere (I had almost 
said better instructed than those same high priests) , and can- 
not in any way be torn away from it. When they see some- 
thing proclaimed that does not square with the Gospel, they 
simply make a laughing stock of them that sit in Moses' seat, 
and lay heavy burdens upon men's shoulders but will not 
themselves touch them with so much as the tips of their fin- 
gers [Matt, xxiii., 4]. This is the reason, I say, why I have no 
hope that the councils will ever be compelled to obey the 
Scriptures, unless the unanimous agreement of princes 
brings that about. But it is wonderful how well certain 
sly dogs ^ know how to prevent this by dazzling the eye with 
the delusions of functions and honours and priesthoods and 
deceiving with empty hopes. In vain therefore shall we 
expect any modification of view from them. 

LXV. The Scriptures can be compared together not 
only by those whose concern you say it is but also by those 
who trust in God and in His word and who are pining with 
longing for Him. For it can happen that if the bishops 
betake themselves to the study of the Scriptures in their 
usual manner, without regarding the general and common 
consent, they may prove to be all or in great part unversed 
in the sacred writings. How, then, shall they make any 
sound decision in regard to the less transparent parts of 
Scripture? But even if they be ever so learned, may it not 
happen that all of them have some illusion, while some lay- 
man may show a clear vision in the matter? (I do not 
want you to snap at me with that silly statement, ''The 
councils cannot be wrong." For even your own people 
have not maintained that unreservedly, but have modified 
it thus: "The council cannot be wrong in matters which 
are of the faith.") Would not violence be done the Scrip- 

' This looks like a pun upon catulus, "puppy," and a catulus as diminutive 
of catus, "shrewd, crafty," though I do not find such a word. — H. P. 


284 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

tures, and the man whose view was sound be not left free 
to hold sound views, and those who were eager for the light 
of truth be forced to dwell in darkness? And this the divine 
Paul also warned us against [I. Corin. xiv., 29], saying, 
"Let the prophets speak by two or three, and let the others 
discern. If anything be revealed to another that sitteth by, 
let the first hold his peace. For ye may all," he says, 
"prophesy one by one, that all may learn, and all may be 
comforted" [I. Corin. xiv., 29-31]. The passage, I think, is 
clear enough to you. You see, therefore, that any one may 
prophesy, though in a certain order, that all may learn the 
truth of the Scriptures, and all may be comforted by the 
Word of God, which alone can give repose unto human 
longing. I want to leave you here for reflection from time 
to time the shameless statement of a certain smatterer, who 
ventured to proclaim in a public assembly that it was not 
lawful for laymen to know or to read the Gospel, but only 
for those to whom that function had been entrusted, namely 
for our little priests and masters. Would that some Apollo 
would give him ass's ears because he does not remember or 
does not know that Christ said [Matt, x., 2y], "What I tell 
you in darkness, that speak ye in light: and what ye hear 
in the ear, that preach ye upon the housetops. " And again, 
"Preach the Gospel to every creature" [Mark xvi., 15]. 
But they confront me presently with the Gordian knot: 
If it is not lawful for any persons to make some definite 
proclamation in regard to the truth of Scripture, there will 
arise countless errors. For every one will maltreat the Sa- 
cred Writings at his own sweet will. Country bumpkins! 
Do ye not see that the spirit of God is everywhere like unto 
itself and ever the same? The more unskilled a man is 
in human devices and at the same time devoted to the 
divine, the more clearly that spirit informs him, as is shown 
by the Apostles and by the foolish things of this world which 
God hath chosen. And as it is a spirit of unity and harmony 
and peace, not of strife and dissension, it will inspire even the 
most ignorant, sobeit that they are pious, in such manner 


Archeteles : Reply to Bishop's Admonition 285 

that they will understand the Scriptures in the plainest way 
according to God's purpose. This the prophet Joel fore- 
told [ch. ii., 28]: "I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh" 
(he does not say, upon courtiers and bishops only); "and 
your sons and your daughters shall prophesy," etc. And the 
same thing is plainly set forth in Acts [ch. x.], because 
while Peter yet spake, the Holy Ghost fell on the untaught 
household of Cornelius and upon Cornelius himself, and 
Peter, seeing this, perceived that the Holy Ghost had not 
limited himself to the Jews only or to the Apostles [Acts x., 
44-48] (for he is no respecter of persons), and he bade that 
they be baptised. And when other Apostles, still having 
something of the Jewish arrogance left and thinking that 
that which had been wrought upon them should not be 
distributed among the crowd, demanded an explanation of 
Peter's action, he answered at length and finally said, 
"For as much then as God gave them the like gift as he did 
unto us, who believed on the Lord Jesus Christ; what was I, 
that I could withstand God?" [Acts xi., 17.] And the same 
sort of thing certain persons are doing to-day. As soon as 
some pious and learned man has set forth something from 
Scripture rather rriore simply and clearly than usual, they 
break out with, "Who gave thee authority to teach thus? 
It belongs to the Fathers only." You would think they 
expected with their authority to frighten God from daring 
to inspire any one to teach sound doctrine. In short, the 
disagreement which is rife to-day seems to me to come 
from nothing else than that you do not concede that we 
have a full share in the spirit of him who has numbered all 
the hairs of our heads, and [cf. Matt, x., 30, etc.] in whose 
sight we are of more value than the fowls of the air. We 
turn to our own decrees and imagine that not we receive 
honour from the Scripture, but it from us, and that the 
source of the wisdom of God is so hemmed in by our author- 
ity that it cannot inform any one except through us, though 
he bids his own to be of good cheer in regard to knowledge 
and the adornment of speech ; for that at the critical moment 


286 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

the Spirit will be at hand and will remind us of all that Christ 
has said unto us. And certain Brothers and Fathers, living 
in ill-employed leisure, were not satisfied with his teaching 
and believed it not. So they ventured to try to give a better 
one, and that has resulted most disastrously. For in place of 
the teachings of Christ, the worship of Aristotle has spnmg 
up, and instead of men of Apostolic character, apostates 
have arisen; instead of men of thrift, men greedy of gain; 
instead of piety, superstition; and instead of simplicity, 
madness and hypocrisy. Finally it has come to such a 
pass that nor law nor right nor heaven nor God's words 
can bring these goats over from the left to the right side. 
For they have drunk in other teachings than those of the 
Spirit, though if they had ever been properly imbued with 
the teachings of the Spirit, things never could have come to 
such a pass that none should be more densely ignorant of 
the heavenly teachings than those who venture to subor- 
dinate them to their own opinions, and to claim for themselves 
alone the right of expounding them. Therefore, to come to 
an end at last, it is not the function of one or two to expound 
passages of Scripture, but of all who believe in Christ. 
"For he whom God hath sent speaketh the words of God: 
for God giveth not the Spirit by measure unto him" [John 
iii-, 34]- 

LXVI. You bid us pour forth prayers by which God 
may be appeased by the restitution that is due him, as if 
prayers were a sort of money by which the punishments due 
our sins could be bought off, and not a means of beseeching 
the mercy of God, that he may not enter into judgment 
with us, but may take pity upon us according to his great 
mercy. For as to a price for the doing away with punish- 
ment, you know, I think, that Christ was made a sacrifice 
for us to take away the sins of the people [Hebr, ix., 12], 
and that "he hath made him to be sin for us, who knew no 
sin; that we might be made the righteousness of God in 
him" [II. Cor. v., 21]. But the testimony of Paul would not 
be so strong, if Christ had not very clearly said the same 


Archeteles : Reply to Bishop's Admonition 287 

thing in Luke, xxii., 19, "This is my body which is given 
for you, " and a little later, "This cup is the new testament in 
my blood, which is shed for you" [Luke xxii., 20]. Hence I 
do not see how those can be acquitted of blasphemy who 
attribute to their own prayers and the works that they sell 
that which belongs to Christ alone. The Heavenly Father 
willed that he should make restitution for us, and by this 
free sacrifice draw to him those that could not yield to the 
works of laws and ceremonials. And this Paul again shows 
more clearly than daylight [Eph. i., 7], saying of Christ, 
"In whom we have redemption through his blood, the for- 
giveness of sins, according to the riches of his grace ; wherein 
he hath abounded toward us in all wisdom and prudence ; 
having made known unto us the mystery of his will, ac- 
cording to his good pleasure," etc. But this market of pray- 
ers makes them npog ra akqura [very like barley groats], 
and we set out merchandise for sale, as it were, we who have 
filled our coffers with this sort of hypocrisy and Persian 
trifles, so that all the granaries are full, the sheep fat, the 
walls solid, and all would go well, if only he were dumb who 
is going to say some day, "Fools, this night shall your souls 
be required of you, and then whose will these things be 
that ye have laid up?" \Cj. Luke xii., 20.] Kaq)d\aiov 
[the sum of the matter is], it is fiarroXoyia [silly talk], if any 
one expects after the fashion of the heathen to propitiate 
God by his much speaking [Matt, vi., 7]. We ought, never- 
theless, to pray without ceasing, and to imitate the impor- 
tunate widow [cj. Luke xviii., 3], but not to advertise our 
prayers, that is, offer them for sale with a price attached, in 
this fashion, "These are worth so much or so much, " as that 
word "restitution " which you add seems to hint. We ought 
rather to trust ourselves wholly to the divine goodness. 

LXVIL Would that ye had the same feelings towards 
us that he has whom you have made the sponsor of your 
designs. You know, I think, how the proceedings recently 
in the Council of Zurich came out, namely that your charge 
was met in a Christian spirit, and that this pained one of the 


288 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

delegates so much that he could not assuage his grief in 
any other way than by sending this delicious admonitory 
document to the Chapter, so as to make me blush again, 
as he hoped would be the case when the larger part of the 
assembly turned their gaze upon me as the person at whom 
this little tale was pointed. It was this fatherly affection, 
I fear, that influenced you to draw our most pious bishop 
into that scheme. For there is no other explanation of the 
proceeding, since the gist of the whole admonition seems to be 
all of a piece with the earlier course of action. Fatherly 
affection admonishes in a fatherly spirit, calls home, warns 
privately, listens with gentleness to the son who makes 
reparation, does not get together a meeting secretly by night, 
nor drag the offender before the body of priests and coun- 
sellors, but urges him once and again to turn from his sin 
according to the teaching of Christ [Matt, xviii., 15 foil.], 
and finally, if he still persists, turns him away in sorrow. 
And that you may do, when, by the instrumentality of Holy 
Writ, you have shown me guilty of any error in regard to 
Christ's doctrine. For you cannot win in any other way, 
unless, perhaps, you choose to have recourse to force. Then 
I shall be as defenceless before you as sheep before a wolf; 
for Christ sent out his disciples like sheep into the midst of 
wolves. [Matt, x., 16.] You can kill, I admit, so can a 
highwayman; you can hold one a prisoner, so can a fever, 
but in bed; you can torture with various punishments, so 
can the plague, the cholera, and other diseases. Therefore 
I say and proclaim unto you, that if you wish to maintain 
that I have not taught the Gospel doctrine truly, try it 
not by threats nor flattery, not by snares and secret devices, 
but by the open warfare of Holy Writ and by public meeting, 
following the Scripture as your guide and master, and not 
human inventions. For otherwise ye will not accomplish 
anything more than Xerxes accomplished when he forced the 
sea, as he fancied, to endure blows and shackles. 

LXVni. That we may abide in the unity of Holy 
Mother Church, we beseech thee to hear us. That we may 


Archeteles : Reply to Bishop's Admonition 289 

abide in obedience to those set over us, that is, to our good 
magistrates, we beseech thee to hear us. That thou wilt 
teach the counterfeit bishops so much humiHty that they 
will regard themselves not as rulers and men set over us, but, 
according to Peter's words [I. Pet. v., i], as Gv^xTtpea^vrepovg 
[fellow elders], we beseech thee. That thou wilt illumine 
them with thy light that they may know the true Church 
which is thy bride, we beseech thee to hear us. That thou 
wilt open to them the fountain of living water, we beseech 
thee to hear us [cf. Jer. ii., 13]. From the worn-out wells 
that they have dug and that have not the living water, 
save us, O Lord. From the unbearable burdens that they 
lay upon men's shoulders, save us, O Lord [Luke xi., 46, 
and Matt, xxiii., 4]. Bid them bear them and practise what 
they preach. If they cannot in any other way be persuaded 
to suffer thy yoke to be easy and thy burden light, force 
them to do it, O Lord [Matt, xi., 30]. 

LXIX. For thus it will come to pass that thy Church 
shall enjoy the deepest peace and tranquillity. For thou 
seest. Most Holy Jesus, that their ears have been shut up 
by worthless whisperers and sycophants and gain-seekers, in 
consequence of whose noise, even though they hear thy 
voice, they cannot recognise it nor obey it, for these men 
block their way and impose upon their singleness of heart. 
For where in all the diocese of Constance have thy teachings 
been received with such universal acceptance as at Zurich? 
Is deeper peace to be seen (alas, for these times of ours!) 
in any canton of Switzerland? Yet have they dared, under 
pretence of bringing about peace where there was no dis- 
sension, to strain every nerve in order to sow tares among 
the good seed. Thou knowest there was no need of that 
splendid delegation of three scholars recently, which yet 
they ventured to suborn, having dragged in Hugo, whose 
natural sentiments in regard to thy teachings are not un- 
sound. But they could not make out that my teachings 
were one whit against thy law. And now thou knowest 
also in what spirit they have written to me. As for myself, 


2go The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

there is no need to call thee to witness in what spirit I do all 
that I do. Thou knowest how far aloof from all strife and 
uproar I have kept myself from early youth, yet thou hast 
not ceased to call me to this duty of battle in spite of my 
unwilling protests. Therefore I may now rightly appeal to 
thee to finish unto the day of the Lord the good work which 
thou hast begun, and if I ever build anything less worthily 
than I ought, cast it down; if I lay any other foundation 
than thee, destroy it, that thy flock, led and inspired by 
thy spirit, may come to the knowledge that it shall lack 
nothing, if it be led and fed by thee as bishop and shepherd. 
For thou, O Son of God, art the defender and advocate of all 
who put their hope in thee. If then thou failest them, thy 
name will be a weariness and mark of scorn to all mankind. 
They will mock thee as the Jews mocked thee as thou wast 
hanging from the cross, for they will say: "Lo, this fellow 
began to build and could not finish." O then, sweet vine, 
whose vintner is the Father, and of whom we are the branches, 
abandon not thy planting and thy building. Thou hast 
promised to be near us to the fulness of the ages, and hast 
bidden us to be of good cheer when brought before kings 
and potentates, for that the spirit would protect us at the 
critical moment, and inspire us with words whereby they 
should be compelled even against their will to hear testimony 
of thee. Put, therefore, fit words into the mouths of all 
who seek thy glory and sanctify thy name, that they may 
speak before the princes of this world things acceptable 
unto thee and profitable for unhappy mankind. For so it 
shall come to pass that we, who are members one of another 
and one body in thee our one and everlasting head, shall 
form thy one and only bride whom Paul betrothed to thee 
without spot or blemish [Eph. v., 2"^], and that Church shall 
be abandoned which is naught but stains and defilement, 
since the name of God is through it made of ill repute. 
Thou livest and reignest as God with the Father and the 
Holy Ghost world without end. Amen. I foresee that I 
shall seem to you unduly to have made all things worse, 


Archeteles : Reply to Bishop's Admonition 291 

for the minds of most theologians nowadays have this 
in common with courtiers, that they think nothing pious or 
holy or right except what they have themselves done. If 
they make proclamation, it must be held as law; if they con- 
demn, the condemnation must be accepted; if they make 
untrue accusation, they must not be answered. And we 
see, too, that nature has somehow ordained that those who 
are most prone to attack others are most averse to seeming 
to have done it. And if ye are so minded, I have no ground 
for good hope of you, for ye will continue to wail that an 
unworthy thing is done in that a pastor has ventured to 
resist his bishop, and ye will not take in good part this 
little admonition with which I have tried to dissuade you 
from stirring up our bishop. But that will not frighten me 
a bit. Nor will the fact that you turn to abuse and call me 
promiscuously a quarrelsome bird and villain and sycophant 
have any more effect than rain has upon the donkey, for I 
have so toughened my skin that I simply scorn these weapons. 
And as to the matter itself, so far am I from yielding to 
you that unless you leave me and mine — that is, the sheep 
of Christ — in peace and quiet, I shall proceed to deal with 
you far more roughly, without fear of your words or your 
frowns. You must deal with me by means of the Holy 
Scriptures bestowed upon us by God (and do not forget 
that point), and they must not be twisted. You must not 
use things devised by the vanity of man, and you must 
come to close quarters and not fight by laying mines. As 
soon as I perceive any tricks, I shall expose them. Be it 
enough to have been pardoned this time for having ventured 
to disturb the peace under pretence of restoring peace. If 
you persist, as I hope you will not, in the plan you have 
begun, of not speaking the name of Zwingli, while yet 
attempting to make it known by all sorts of side thrusts 
and to hold it up to disapproval, I shall certainly not spare 
your names but shall challenge you by name to single combat 
as Menelaus challenged Paris, and if you scorn me so far as 
to refuse to come forth, I will proclaim your reluctance to 


292 The Works of Huldreich Zwingli 

the whole world. But heaven forbid ! I hope, now that you 
have learned that your darts have been fittingly blunted, 
you will not renew the battle, but will surrender yourselves 
soul and body to God. For you see how unsuccessfully 
so far those who champion human traditions and visions 
and ovSey vyik [what is wholly unsoiuid], have engaged 
with the pious defenders of the Gospel. But if it shall be 
given to you from above to return to reason, know that I 
shall be so wholly yours that none shall more strenuously 
canvass for your friendship, none more boldly come forward 
to champion your cause. The Most High God cause all 
the hearts of all nations to be so illuminated by the divine 
ray that they may become one in one faith and forever 
possess him who is one, Amen. Farewell. 
Zurich, Aug. 23, 1522. 

Wrath and jealousy burst in bits all bishops 
Who in spite of their name are wolves voracious ! 
Now once more, as in days of old, refulgent 
Shines the light of the Gospel's truth upon us, 
Notwithstanding the doughty three-tongued Satan 
Sent to quench it ; for God remaineth master 
Yea (and verily speak I truth as prophet), 
Their authority, all their sway of tyrants. 
Sins of simony, keys and canons human. 
Cruel murderers of the people's conscience. 
Rows on rows of the wares those men call sacred, 
Bulls, anathemas, and dark superstition — 
These, all conquered, the message of the Gospel 
Leads, and ever shall lead, in hard-won triumph. 
Who in spite of their name are wolves voracious, 
Wrath and jealousy burst in bits all bishops ! 

Conrad Grebel^ 
In gratitude for the restoration of the Gospel. 

' Grebel was bom in Zurich, 1489, and died of the plague in Maienfeld, 
Canton Graubunden, 1526. He became a leader of the Anabaptists in Zurich 
and so was opposed by Zwingli, who eariier had admired and aided him; in- 
deed was the means of his conversion from a licentious life. 


Pnticfion Theoloqical Semioary-Speef Library 


1 1012 01099 5886 


DATE DUE 


HIGHSMITH #45115 


nil!' 


